KUALA LUMPUR -- Despite slowing growth at home, Southeast Asia will remain an investment priority for China and a core target for its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), as Beijing views the region as geopolitically important to counter U.S. influence, economists say.

Southeast Asia is also an important source of critical minerals, including nickel, for China's green technology and electric vehicle ambitions.

Investment and construction contracts under the BRI to ASEAN countries averaged around $27.9 billion from 2015 to 2019, before falling to $10.8 billion in 2021. Last year, they rebounded 72% to $18.6 billion, according to a July report by Maybank Singapore.

"BRI investments will slow in the next five years," Guonan Ma, a senior fellow at the Asia Society Policy Institute's Center for China Analysis, told Nikkei Asia. However, "Southeast Asia will still be a priority area for China for geopolitical and investment purposes in terms of its green transition. Given this constellation, Southeast Asia will still be a core part of China's BRI projects."

Wu Alfred Muluan, an associate professor at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore (NUS), said that because China's current ties with the West are "not good," Beijing will focus on Southeast Asia and the Middle East, as the two regions are considered "powerful."

Wu pointed to Chinese officials' frequent visits to Southeast Asia as an indication of the region's importance to Beijing, as well as to counter U.S. influence: "Look at how many times Foreign Minister Wang Yi has come to Southeast Asia."

Wang traveled to Singapore, Malaysia and Cambodia in August on his first overseas trip after his reappointment as foreign minister in July.

Strategically, ASEAN sits astride critical sea lanes in the Strait of Malacca and South China Sea through which a large proportion of China's oil, gas and goods are transported, Lye Liang Fook, a senior fellow at the Singapore-based ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, wrote in a note last week.

Furthermore, Southeast Asia is at the confluence of big-power competition and its strategic importance to China has grown as U.S.-China tensions continue to rise, Lye noted.

At the same time, China's private sector investments to secure raw materials and intermediate inputs, as well as to strengthen supply chains and foreign partnerships, are expected to continue in line with the country's global trade and investment drive, said Yeah Kim Leng, economics professor at Malaysia's Sunway University.

However, NUS's Wu cautioned that private Chinese companies now face difficulties in getting funds out of the country due to capital controls.

Economists, meanwhile, expressed concerns over a spillover effect of a slowing Chinese economy into the region.

"China's slowdown is a key risk for the world economy, commodities and energy markets as well as the semiconductor industry," said Lee Heng Guie, executive director of the Kuala Lumpur-based Socio-Economic Research Centre.

Prior to the COVID pandemic, China was the world's most important source of international travelers, spending $255 billion overseas and accounting for 20% of total spending in international tourism, said Lee.

However, China's sluggish domestic economy could cut growth in the ASEAN region as trade with its biggest regional trading partner drops and strict capital controls reduce the flow of funds from the Chinese private sector.

"China's slowdown will make overall ASEAN growth slower and less resilient due to declining trade with its major trading partner," said Fajar Hirawan, a senior researcher in Jakarta for the Centre for Strategic and International Studies. "Overall foreign investor sentiment for the Southeast Asian market will also deteriorate, which may affect FDI (foreign direct investment) levels and currency exchange rates."

Indonesia, ASEAN's biggest economy, is viewed by Beijing as the region's most influential country. Chinese companies dominate Indonesia's nickel-mining industries, and Indonesia is the only ASEAN country to build a high-speed railway under the BRI.

CSIS's Fajar Hirawan said the negative effects of China's slowdown may be mitigated by Indonesia's domestic consumption and commodity exports.

Given China's slowing economy, Fajar believes Beijing will take a tougher stance on the terms for debt repayments, including for the high-speed train.

"I believe during this time, China needs some capital injection due to its slowing growth [following the lifting of its] zero-COVID policy. Thus, negotiations for debt interest rate might be quite tough," said Fajar.