NANNING, China -- China has pledged to increase purchases from Southeast Asian neighbors as overall trade growth slows due to weakened demand globally and domestically.

"China is ready to import more competitive and distinctive products from ASEAN countries," Chinese Premier Li Qiang said on Sunday at a business forum attended by counterparts from the region.

The 10-member bloc has been China's largest trading partner since 2020, around the time tensions with the U.S. and other developed economies began to more seriously chafe.

In the first eight months of 2023, China's outbound shipments decreased by 5.6%, hit by declining trade with major trading partners the U.S. and EU. Imports during the same period weakened 7.6%, following a 27% drop in orders for both LCD panels and steel products.

The decline was cushioned by shipments to ASEAN, which has increasingly turned to China in lieu of Japan and other developed countries for inexpensive electrical goods and machinery.

Li's speech kicked off the four-day China-ASEAN expo that runs through Tuesday in the southern city of Nanning. Li called on regional countries to improve their connectivity and industrial supply chains.

Trade between China and the regional bloc has been lopsided, with China shipping higher value-added products to ASEAN while importing raw materials and agricultural products. ASEAN's trade deficit with China widened by 69% in the five years through 2022.

The imbalance was on display at the Sunday expo, with large numbers of Southeast Asian traders peddling durian and teak furniture. Chinese companies, on the other hand, displayed heavy machinery, electric vehicles and other high-tech items.

"We hope to trade more with Southeast Asian countries as the domestic market is sluggish," an executive of aluminum producer Guangxi Pinglu Group said at the expo. The executive added that "doing business with our major customers in the U.S. and Europe is getting tougher due to geopolitics."


China has been promoting trade with Southeast Asian countries by holding an annual expo in Nanning City. (Photo by CK Tan)
While China's total exports have slumped, one bright spot has emerged in the form of automobiles. The country overtook Japan in the first quarter of this year to become the world's largest automobile exporter.

In the first seven months of 2023, Thailand and the Philippines were among the top 10 buyers of Chinese vehicles, sales of which grew by 74% to 2.7 million units, according to the China Association of Automobile Manufacturers.

"Rising exports are directly linked to domestic weakness as manufacturers seek a safety valve to relieve capacity overhang," said Bill Russo, chief executive of Shanghai-based consultancy Automobility.

In his speech, Li also called on ASEAN to oppose "protectionism," an apparent reference to the de-risking campaign led by the U.S. and other developed economies.

"We get a lot of inquiries daily from Chinese businesses," said Safwan Nizar Johari, an official at the Malaysian consulate in Guangzhou. "These businesses say they are keen to invest in Malaysia."

Malaysia and many ASEAN members have worked to avoid being dragged into the U.S.-China conflict while capitalizing on the economic fallout. China's trade with the U.S. expanded by a modest 6% from 2017 through 2022, according to Boston Consulting Group. Over the same period, ASEAN's trade with the U.S. surged by 98%, while trade with China grew by 95%.

Hailing ASEAN's productive ties with China, Indonesian Vice President Ma'ruf Amin said on Sunday in a speech at the expo, "the integration of the regional economy is expected to overcome barriers to achieving the true potential of ASEAN-China trade."

Even as trade has expanded, China's bilateral ties are shadowed by maritime disputes. Beijing's publication of a new map last month that laid claim to most of the South China Sea drew diplomatic protests from neighbors including Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam.

"Indonesia -- like many other countries in the region -- is hedging, taking advantage, maximizing benefits, but mitigating risks in the face of China's rise," Dewi Fortuna Anwar, a former adviser to the Indonesian president, said last week on a podcast hosted by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.