JAKARTA -- Leaders from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations met Chinese Premier Li Qiang in Jakarta on Wednesday as Beijing's new territorial map adds to tensions over the South China Sea.

Speaking at the opening of the meeting, Indonesian President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo, this year's ASEAN chair, stressed the need to realize "concrete cooperation that is mutually beneficial" to Southeast Asia and China.

"This can only be done," he added, "if we have trust in each other, which, of course, must be built and maintained by all parties."

Li likewise danced around the controversy created by China's new map. "As long as we both keep to the right path, no matter what storm may come, China-ASEAN cooperation will be as firm as ever and press ahead against all odds."

He also stressed the parties' deepening economic cooperation in areas such as trade and infrastructure development.

"We seek common ground while setting aside differences," he said, adding that disagreements should be properly handled "through dialogue and consultation."

He also spoke of "consistently deepening practical cooperation in traditional and nontraditional fields."

Despite their economic ties to China, ASEAN members face a number of security challenges with the world's second-largest economy, most notably in the South China Sea. China has overlapping claims with several Southeast Asian countries in the waters, which hold rich fishing grounds and have become a crucial trade route.


Li, right, attends the ASEAN summit in Jakarta on Sept. 6. (Photo by Nana Shibata) 
These challenges grew more tense recently when Beijing revealed a new territorial map that includes the controversial "nine-dash line," a border claim that encompasses almost the entire South China Sea.

So far, Malaysia, the Philippines and Vietnam have protested China's new map, and Wednesday's summit could put the issue under greater scrutiny.

Another key topic at the ASEAN-China meeting was prolonged negotiations over a Code of Conduct for the body of water. At a meeting of ASEAN foreign ministers in February, ministers reaffirmed the bloc's commitment to wrapping up talks with China "as soon as possible" to deal with territorial disputes in the area.

After Wednesday's summit meeting, Indonesian Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi told reporters that China and ASEAN had adopted guidelines for accelerating the early conclusion of an effective and substantive code of conduct.

On the economic front, China and the bloc agreed to strengthen ties with new cooperation in the fields of digital and green economies and supply chains, according to Marsudi.

Increasingly complicated relations with the U.S. and Europe only add impetus for China to show the world that Beijing is strengthening ties with ASEAN. While U.S. President Joe Biden is skipping the meeting in Jakarta, China is growing its influence with ASEAN as a major investor in infrastructure projects.