SINGAPORE -- Differences between the U.S. and Japan over tariff reductions and the reluctance of Southeast Asian nations to eliminate advantages their state-owned companies have over private rivals have hampered negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade pact. Singaporean Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong has called on these countries to exercise a "significant amount of political will" to help wrap up the talks by the end of the year.

     A TPP deal is all the more important for its political implications in a region where China's influence is growing. "(The TPP) brings together both sides of the Pacific, developed countries as well as developing countries," Lee said in a recent interview with The Nikkei. "It has strategic significance, not just economic significance."

     The Singaporean leader also maintained that it is vital, diplomatically and economically, for Japan to mend its frayed ties with its key neighbors. "If Japan can manage good, stable relations with South Korea and China, then I think (it will) have the external preconditions both to proceed with restructuring and the revitalization of (its) domestic economy and to play an active role in the region," he said.

Q: What is your outlook for Asia's economies? Can the Association of Southeast Asian Nations maintain its growth momentum over the next few years?

A: The Asean economies are not in a bad state. Malaysia and Indonesia have been making steady growth, and so have the Philippines and Vietnam. Thailand, of course, has political troubles that have affected confidence and growth. In Singapore, the annual economic growth is at 3%-plus. If we can sustain that, we will be doing well.

Q: How would you rate the TPP talks so far? What issues still need to be addressed?

A: They have made a lot of progress, but they have not quite completed the talks. One of the issues is between America and Japan. We know the most difficult issues on the table, and they include things like rice, automobiles, government procurement and state-owned enterprises.

     I hope we will be able to wrap it up this year; otherwise, we will miss the U.S. timetable and may be into a new president. I think a lot of work and a significant amount of political will have to go into that.

Q: What can Japan do toward achieving that goal?

A: In Japan, when you talk about agriculture, particularly rice, sugar, dairy products or beef, these are very sensitive matters for any government and especially for a Liberal Democratic Party government. From a long-term point of view, it is very desirable for Japan to liberalize these markets.

     If you want Japan to play a full role in the global economy and to revitalize its own economy, this is a reform that cannot be avoided. You can put it off for some time but ultimately, if Japan does not change its rules and become closer to the arrangements in other countries, it is not good for Japan.

Q: Singapore was one of the first countries to initiate the multilateral framework that led to the TPP talks. What is the economic and political significance of the trade pact?

A: I think it is vital. We talk about free trade in the Asia-Pacific region as the long-term ideal, but a major step toward the ideal is in the TPP. It brings together both sides of the Pacific, developed countries as well as developing countries. It has strategic significance, not just economic significance.

     For Japan not to be part of the TPP, it is a loss to the TPP but is also a disadvantage for Japan. It will be an additional link which will strengthen its ties with America, and an additional way in which Japan can play an active role in contributing to the stability and prosperity of the region, which is one of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's important objectives.

Q: In Asean, there are many frameworks for economic integration, such as the TPP, the Asean Economic Community and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. How can they coexist?

A: It is like the North American Free Trade Agreement. The U.S. is in Nafta together with Mexico and Canada, but they are also in the TPP. So similarly, in Asean, we have a regional agreement amongst our own countries.

     At the same time, we have links outside with America and many partners to the TPP. We also have links with China, India and some of the same partners under the RCEP. Japan has many trade agreements with different partners, so Asean must be able to do the same.

Q: What is the timeline for completing the AEC and what are the remaining issues?

A: Our target is to complete it by the end of 2015 -- that is about a year and a half from now. We have more than 70% done on the items.

     In terms of nontariff barriers, we also need to bridge some (gaps in) understanding. It is not easy to tell whether they have legitimate policy reasons, or whether they are really hidden barriers to trade. We need to make progress to limit and roll back, if possible, the nontariff barriers. I hope we will be able to make more progress in the next 18 months.

Q: How will Asean address the tension between its members and China over territorial disputes in the South China Sea?

A: It is an issue between China and Asean in the sense that Asean has an interest in the stability of the region and Asean is discussing a code of conduct with China. We hope we will have a set of rules that all countries can abide by, which will minimize the chance of an incident at sea, a misunderstanding or an escalation.

     It is one aspect of the relations between Asean and China. There are many other aspects, and many of them are very positive -- cooperation, financial assistance, human resource development and trade. So Asean-China relations are multifaceted, and the South China Sea is one (aspect of them). We will have to try our best to make sure it does not color the whole relationship.

Q: What is your take on China's positions over the South China Sea?

A: I understand the Chinese in a way because they have made it quite clear that they want to discuss territorial and maritime disputes on a bilateral basis with Vietnam, with the Philippines, with Malaysia and so on. What exactly is the legal basis for their claim, what exactly they are claiming, in very precise terms, they have not made clear. And some of their experts have said that it is not in their interest to make this very clear. That part is ambiguous.

Q: Is the balance of power changing as China's economic presence grows and America's influence declines in Asia?

A: I do not think that the U.S. presence is decreasing. In fact, the Americans have talked about rebalancing toward Asia. President Barack Obama has just been in several Asean countries recently, as well as Japan. I think the U.S. fully understands the importance of the region and has every intention of staying here over the long term.

     The Chinese presence is growing, there is no doubt. There will have to be a shift and adjustment in the balance and in the relationship between China and the U.S., but also involving the other countries, Japan, Asean, getting used to this new arrangement and finding a new role to play in this new balance. It is most important for both the U.S. and China to be positively engaged in the region, and to have a certain balance in their influence, in their interests, in the way in which they interact with one another.

Q: What roles should Asean and Japan play in creating this new balance?

A: Asean is not a superpower; Asean is a group of countries. We hope we can play a role in the regional architecture. We hope Asean can be in a central position and all the other powers find it useful to have Asean as a host in the forum for this cooperation and for this dialogue and exchange. But to do that, Asean has to be effective, cohesive and must have substantial cooperation, which is why we are working on the Asean community.

     For Japan, the first role is to establish relations of trust and confidence with its neighbors, especially those (with which there has not been full reconciliation) after World War II. If Japan can manage good, stable relations with South Korea and China, then I think (it will) have the external preconditions both to proceed with the restructuring and the revitalization of (its) domestic economy and to play an active role in the region.

Q: How would you evaluate Prime Minister Abe's economic reforms?

A: I think he has pursued them with complete single-mindedness, and it has changed the mood in Japan. The first arrow and the second arrow (bold monetary policy and flexible fiscal policy) are an immediate stimulus to confidence.

     The third arrow is very important because that is what makes it sustainable, but (it) takes longer to arrive. This work requires a tremendous amount of political resolve in order to change mindsets in the Japanese economy. There are also issues to do with liberalizing your labor markets, your employment practices and the business environment so that big and small companies will be able to operate in a more flexible and open way. These are not easy issues, but (they are) crucial.

Q: Singapore is moving toward bigger government spending in areas such as health care. Will the city-state become a "big government" by, say, raising taxes?

A: I do not think we can be a big government like the Europeans. In Europe, the government takes up about half of gross domestic product quite commonly. In Singapore, government spending was 14% of GDP in 2013.

     If we go forward with greater social burdens, the government's share may go up to 20% of GDP, but I do not think you can reach 40% or 45%. And whatever it is we spend, we have to earn. And that means at some point, we will have to look to our revenues and decide whether we have enough, and if not, where we will be able to raise new revenues. It is unavoidable. Over the next five to 10 years, we will have to look at this very seriously.

Q: Japan and Singapore share some common issues, such as an aging population. How can the two countries cooperate in these areas?

A: We can learn from Japan in terms of aging, because Japan has a lot of experience making arrangements for the elderly, such as arrangements for nursing and keeping in touch with old folks living on their own.

     In terms of population overall, Singapore has been grappling with the issue of immigration of foreign workers. Japan has been very, very tight on immigration for foreign workers. But if Japan, at some point, can consider (easing immigration rules) as a politically feasible option, then our experience may be interesting to look at.