VIENTIANE -- Leaders from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member countries kicked off a summit on Wednesday in the Laotian capital city of Vientiane, with the aim of enhancing the region's economic and security cooperation and reaching out to other dialogue partners in East Asia and Oceania.

Newly appointed leaders, Japan's Shigeru Ishiba and Thailand's Paetongtarn Shinawatra, will be among those joining the summit.

Apart from the discussion among ASEAN leaders on the region's economic cooperation to maintain growth, they were also expected to touch upon further steps toward bringing peace to Myanmar and how to apply the ASEAN Five-Point Consensus.

This calls for the immediate cessation of violence, the creation of constructive dialogue among all parties concerned, the sending of an ASEAN special envoy to facilitate peace talks, the provision of humanitarian aid and the sending of a special envoy to meet all parties concerned in Myanmar.

At the opening of the ASEAN summit, Laotian Prime Minister Sonexay Siphandone took note of several developments within ASEAN, including East Timor's pending full membership and the current geopolitical landscape undergoing "rapid and complex changes."

"In this context, ASEAN must remain resolute in taking ownership of efforts to strengthen cooperation, enabling it to effectively and promptly address these challenges while seizing opportunities as they arise," he said.

The summit will also touch on moving forward with discussions on a code of conduct for the South China Sea, which has been languishing for some two decades. China continues to provoke tensions with its neighbor, the Philippines, in its bid to aggressively assert its control over the entirety of the disputed waterway. However, the Philippines' Department of Foreign Affairs said ASEAN countries have a "thrust to conclude [code of conduct to mitigate the risk of conflicts against China] negotiations within three years."


Two new leaders in Asia, Japan's Shigeru Ishiba, right, and Thailand's Paetongtarn Shinawatra, will join the ASEAN summit meetings in Laos. (Source photos by Reuters and Uichiro Kasai) 
However, Julio Amador, CEO of Amador Research Services in the Philippines, believes this summit will likely put greater emphasis on economic issues and resiliency, citing the region's openness for foreign investments, especially from China, with key defense and security issues falling in line. In his view, discussions of serious matters such as Myanmar and the South China Sea tensions will be more visible next year. "Laos, I think, knows that it is not a strong country, knows that its agenda-setting powers are very limited, and doesn't really want to be caught between China and the rest of the ASEAN," he told Nikkei Asia.

"So this is where it tries to balance and avoid it as much as it can, and later try to pass it on to Malaysia next year," Amador added, referring to Laos handing over the ASEAN chairmanship to Malaysia in 2025.

That said, bloc also reached out to East Asian countries as ASEAN leaders were due to meet other dialogue partners, including Japan, South Korea, China, Australia, India, the U.S. and Canada.

"At the ASEAN-East Asia meeting (ASEAN plus Japan, China and South Korea), leaders were expected to touch upon some cooperation, ranging from the situation in the South China Sea and geopolitical conflict in the Middle East that also affected ASEAN and its dialogue partners," said Nikorndej Balankura, the spokesman of Thailand's Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

He added that Thailand also planned to have bilateral talks with some ASEAN nations, particularly member countries along the Mekong River in order to tighten their cooperation (specifically on the Mekong-Lancang Cooperation) to manage water resources along the waterway effectively and appropriately.

Climate change has worsened weather patterns in Southeast Asia this year with several monsoon storms hitting the region since late August, bringing in heavy rains that caused flash floods in Vietnam, Laos, Thailand and Myanmar.

In Thailand alone, the floods caused landslides that have killed 49 people so far and caused major rivers, particularly the Mekong, to break their banks and push flash floods higher into cities not only in Thailand but also in Laos and Myanmar. That has encouraged Thailand to revive Mekong-related cooperation to manage the rivers it shares to mitigate natural disasters.

U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken is expected to attend, while China will send Premier Li Qiang to the summit.