BANGKOK -- Increasingly frequent confrontations between China and the Philippines in the South China Sea this year should impress upon Southeast Asian countries the urgency of a long-delayed code of conduct in the contested waters, Philippine Foreign Secretary Enrique Manalo said on Friday.

"We very much want to find ways where we can at least manage or de-escalate the situation," Manalo said, in an interview with Nikkei Asia. "Unfortunately, of course ... we have been victims of water cannoning, ramming, collision, side-swiping. We don't want to be in a situation where, one day, that will spiral into something else."

At a meeting last week between leaders of the 10-strong Association of Southeast Asian Nations and China, the bloc's largest trading partner, Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. raised maritime disputes as a risk to the region's economic prosperity, pressing the two sides to expedite negotiations on a code of conduct in the South China Sea that have been stalled for years.

Aside from the Philippines, ASEAN members Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia and Vietnam have overlapping claims in the sea, a vital channel for shipping and commerce with large potential natural gas reserves.

"I'm not saying that we should speed them up at the expense of the substance, because our position still remains that we should have an effective and substantive code of conduct," Manalo said. "[But] we can't afford to wait another three or four years."

Incidents between China and the Philippines in contested waters have increased this year, with the Chinese coast guard using ramming and water cannons against Filipino vessels and injuring Filipino servicemen. In May, Marcos said the death of a Filipino national would be a red line, "very close to what we define as an act of war."

Manalo spoke with Nikkei Asia while in Bangkok to meet his Thai counterpart, Foreign Minister Maris Sangiampongsa, marking 75 years of bilateral relations. Both countries pursued their most urgent interests last week at the ASEAN leaders' annual summit.

The Philippines' claim to its exclusive economic zone, an area up to 200 nautical miles from its coast that it calls the West Philippine Sea, was upheld by a U.N. tribunal in 2016. Still, Chinese vessels have attempted to intimidate Filipino fishing boats and intercept supply missions to the BRP Sierra Madre, a rapidly deteriorating navy ship that the Philippines grounded on a reef in the 1990s to stake its claim.

The two countries reached a provisional understanding in July for Manila to supply Sierra Madre personnel with living necessities if it informs Beijing in advance, with on-site verification of the transferred goods.


The BRP Sierra Madre, a transport ship grounded in a disputed part of the South China Sea. Philippine military personnel live on the crumbling vessel as a way for Manila to stake its claim to the contested waters.   © Reuters
"So far, there hasn't been any incident in that area," Manalo said. "We have lived up to the terms, and we expect China to live up to the terms also."

If the peace holds, it may be followed by another meeting of the bilateral consultation mechanism on the South China Sea, which would be the third this year. Manalo said negotiations between Beijing and Manila on joint natural gas exploration in the South China Sea had not progressed beyond brief talks early in the year.

"There are really, fairly serious legal differences if we were to embark on joint development or joint exploration," Manalo said. Manila has imposed a moratorium on Philippine firms exploring for gas in its exclusive economic zone since 2014.

On the economic front, Manalo said Manila had resumed talks with the European Union this week on a broad-based trade agreement as part of its strategy to deepen ties beyond the region as China's economic growth slows. "While China is, of course, our number one trading partner, it's not as if our economy is completely reliant on China. Our approach is to see how we can diversify and increase partnerships," he said, mentioning the likes of Japan, Australia, the U.S., Canada and the EU.

"We're expanding our base of cooperation because we don't want to be reliant on any single market for our economic growth. And I think our growth figures show that," Manalo said.

China's economy grew 4.6% on an annualized basis last quarter, the lowest in more than a year, and is projected to expand by only 4.8% in 2024. The Philippines, meanwhile, is set to grow 6%.

Manalo also said the Philippines would take a more active role in resolving the nearly four-year civil conflict in Myanmar, as part of the troika of past, present and future ASEAN chairs. The Philippines will take over as chair in 2026 from Malaysia, which took over last week from Laos.

But Thailand, which has the longest border with Myanmar, has taken the lead in engaging the warring parties, sometimes outside of the ASEAN process. Thai Prime Minister Paetongtarn Shinawatra last week called for an informal ASEAN meeting, to be hosted by Bangkok in December, to discuss the bloc's ostracized member.

"We support Thailand's humanitarian assistance approach, but I think now, ASEAN is realizing that, of course, any solution must be Myanmar-led," Manalo said.

On Friday, in reference to the South China Sea tensions, Maris reaffirmed Thailand's support for "peaceful resolution through dialogue and diplomacy," adding that Thailand was ready to "work with all relevant parties to maintain peace and stability in the South China Sea and promote win-win cooperation in accordance with international law."