VIENTIANE -- Leaders of the 10 Southeast Asian nations are taking home many concerns with tensions in the South China Sea taking center stage, even though talk of deeper economic cooperation made some headway during a weeklong summit in the Laotian capital that closed on Friday.

On the last day of the ASEAN Leaders' Summit, Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. used the international stage it afforded to condemn China's maritime aggression. Marcos told world leaders attending the East Asia Summit that Beijing continues to stoke grave tensions in the South China Sea.

"These kinds of behavior cannot be ignored, and demand of us concerted and serious efforts to truly manage our disputes in the South China Sea," he said. The East Asia Summit, a related yearly forum, includes China and the U.S.

The Philippine president cited China's recent harassment of coast guard vessels and aircraft patrolling Escoda Shoal, a major flashpoint in the disputed waterway. Marcos said it was "regrettable" that tensions remain in the area.

Marcos told Filipino reporters on Friday that "more than half" of ASEAN's members are interested in mounting joint exercises, sending vessels to the disputed waterway or participating in discussions with claimant countries. Suggesting that the Philippines is indeed attracting more support, Vietnam, Singapore and Thailand raised maritime concerns on Thursday in an ASEAN forum with China.

The president's remarks come at a fraught time in relations between China and the Philippines, exacerbated by Beijing's naked aggression on the open water. After he was elected in 2022, Marcos moved Manila closer to Washington. That dismayed Beijing, which had enjoyed close relations with the Philippines during President Rodrigo Duterte's six-year term.


Philippines' President Ferdinand "Bongbong" Marcos Jr. attends the 12th ASEAN-U.S. Summit at the National Convention Centre, in Vientiane, Laos, October 11, 2024.   © Reuters
The Philippines and the U.S. are allies as signatories to the 1951 Mutual Defense Treaty that ensures American assistance in the event of an armed attack.

The U.S. also raised similar concerns at the summit. U.S. State Secretary Antony Blinken slammed China, noting that its "increasingly dangerous and unlawful actions" in the South China and East China Seas have "injured people, harmed vessels from ASEAN nations and contradict commitments to peaceful resolution of disputes."

There may have been some progress regarding the Myanmar crisis, however. Thailand proposed to hold an "informal" ASEAN consultation in Bangkok in December on bringing peace to war-torn Myanmar, and all member nations agreed to attend.

"ASEAN should send a unified message to all parties in Myanmar that there is no military solution -- it is time to start talking," said Paetongtarn Shinawatra, Thailand's new prime minister who was attending her first ASEAN summit.

Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim said ASEAN countries are committed to achieving regional peace. He said that while ASEAN is "taking a lead in facilitating a lasting and peaceful resolution to the Myanmar issue," the international community should "go beyond rhetoric and play a more proactive role in supporting ASEAN's efforts." That includes providing humanitarian assistance.

ASEAN and its dialogue partners did make progress in deepening economic cooperation, notably in concluding the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) 3.0. The deal will enhance trade in goods, customs procedures, trade facilitation, economic cooperation and investment.

The ACFTA 3.0 Upgrade Negotiation was rolled out in November 2022 with a view to developing a more comprehensive, inclusive and mutually beneficial agreement between the two parties.

Over the past two decades, ACFTA has significantly boosted trade and investment between ASEAN and China. The overall value of trade increased 15% in 2022, the first year of effective implementation of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) that confirmed the Southeast Asian bloc as China's largest trading partner.

Leaders also agreed to continue projects to support emerging economic pillars, such as the digital economy, green economy, circular economy and green energy.

ASEAN and East Asian leaders also mentioned several initiatives to promote food and energy security, a diplomat who participated in the meeting noted. Even so, East Asian leaders were unable to issue a joint closing statement due to the number of widely diverging viewpoints and geopolitical conflicts at present.