MANILA/HANOI -- Vietnam reportedly plans to fortify its military presence on the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, where it is locked in territorial disputes with China and the Philippines.

The project, led by Vietnam's Defense Ministry and navy, involves constructing and expanding military and other facilities on Pearson Reef and Pigeon Reef, over which Hanoi holds effective control, the Manila Times reports.

A Vietnamese document, cited by the Philippine newspaper, reportedly says that potential risks for maritime conflicts in the South China Sea and Spratly Islands increase regional uncertainties.

By building up Hanoi's presence in the Spratlys, "military pressure to neighbor countries can be increased," the document reportedly says.

The plan, with an estimated budget of 6.4 trillion dong ($270 million), reportedly includes dredging and landfill work to create land for a massive dock, as well as upgrades to missile and anti-aircraft installations.

Hanoi reportedly intends to build housing for not only military personnel, but also civilians, along with transportation, energy systems, and facilities for wastewater treatment and waste disposal.

In response to an inquiry by Nikkei, Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Pham Thu Hang said she did not have information about the Manila Times article.


Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Pham Thu Hang. (Photo by Yuji Nitta)
"Thousands of trees will be planted on those islands to hide its fortifications and blindages," a person familiar with the situation told Nikkei, adding the militarization of islands by Vietnam poses great threat to the nearby Philippines.

According to a December report by the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies, Vietnamese landfill work in the Spratlys accelerated in the latter half of 2022, and about 220 hectares of new land had been created over the course of a decade.

China and the Philippines have their own conflicting claims in the island group.

"This new round of dredging from Vietnam may also give other claimants such as China or the Philippines an excuse to conduct additional dredging of their own in response," said Harrison Pretat, associate director with the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative at CSIS.

China already has numerous ships deployed in the South China Sea, where it has been building its own militarized artificial islands.

A 2016 ruling by an arbitration tribunal in The Hague rejected Chinese territorial claims in the South China Sea. Beijing has maintained effective control over Scarborough Shoal even after the decision. Manila says China has interfered with Philippine ships in the Spratlys. This month, the Philippine Coast Guard accused China of firing water cannons at its vessels.

Manila has effective control over Pag-asa Island, which is part of the Spratly group.

The South China Sea plays an important role in international shipping, and there are concerns that exclusionary territorial claims and escalating military buildups could pose security risks to sea lanes.

China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations agreed last month on guidelines for negotiating a code of conduct in the South China Sea. But not all ASEAN members see eye to eye on the maritime situation.