SINGAPORE -- This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II. Asia has gone through huge changes over the past seven decades, with many nations gaining independence and experiencing phenomenal economic growth. Geopolitically, however, tensions remain, as seen in the territorial disputes in the South and East China seas. Also raising concerns is the tug of war between China and the U.S. for influence in Southeast Asia.


Bilahari Kausikan
     Bilahari Kausikan, former permanent secretary of Singapore's foreign ministry, recently told the Nikkei Asian Review that a new Asian order has not been set yet. He said the U.S., China and Japan need to work out rules to prevent tensions from escalating, and that in the interim, member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations will maintain their traditional stance of not siding with any of the big powers.

     The former diplomat also said that unlike China and South Korea, Southeast Asian nations are forward-looking in how they view relations with Japan, despite the suffering caused by its military aggression during the war. But he also stressed that Japan needs to come to terms with certain historical issues.

     Bilahari hinted that Japan should be more strategic in dealing with its neighbors for its own good to realize the "proactive pacifism" brand of diplomacy espoused by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.

Q: Seventy years have passed since the end of the war. Has Asia embraced a new international order?

A: During the Cold War, there was a clear line to define the international structure. When the Cold War ended, the pieces started moving in various directions, and they are still moving. In Asia, what replaces the Cold War order is yet to be determined. Building the new order is going to take a long time. Hopefully, the process goes peacefully, although there may be conflicts.

     The main risk is not a war by somebody's design, but conflicts by accidents. We need mechanisms to minimize the risk of accidents, and if accidents happen, to contain them as quickly as possible.

Q: What do Southeast Asian nations hope to see in a new Asian order?

A: Southeast Asian countries would like to have best possible relationships with all major powers -- Japan, China, the U.S., Australia, India, [South] Korea, and even with Russia. ASEAN is in an intersection of interests of these major powers. It is not in our interest to choose sides. Why must we choose?

     The U.S. is still very fundamental and irreplaceable for stability in East Asia. While it is still a necessary condition for stability, it is no longer a sufficient condition. The U.S. and China have to find equilibrium. The relationship between these two major powers is unique, characterized both by profound interdependence of a new type and strategic distrust.

     In today's world, the level of economic interdependence is so profound that the U.S. and China can't disentangle from one another, much more so than what it was like between the British and Germans before World War I. The U.S. and China have begun, now with increasing intensity, searching for the equilibrium. But it will take a long time because, in order to accommodate each other, they have to make psychological, political and strategic adjustments.

     It is similar to [the relationship between] China and Japan, to a lesser degree. My personal point of view is that the territorial issues between China and Japan can never be solved; they can only be managed. The urgent need is to agree on some rules of engagement that will minimize the risk of accidents. Because when an accident happens, it can get out of hand. Some tentative discussions have begun, but they are at an even more rudimentary stage than the talks between the U.S. and China.

     Frankly, the rest of us in Southeast Asia don't have a choice. When major powers reach a new accommodation ... we will just have to adjust to it.

Q: How are Southeast Asian countries adjusting to China's rise?

A: Big countries will always evoke some anxiety in small nations. This have been enhanced by some of the actions China has taken. But China is not a threat to us. The economies are so entangled, and while China may be a huge challenge, it is [also] a huge opportunity.

     China wants its interests to be reflected in the international order. It is natural for major powers, and China is now a major power. It is understandable that China wants to change some of the international rules, but the important thing is how they do it. They have to follow the existing rules and frameworks about how to change the rules. If you just see South China Sea issues, [China's] record is mixed -- sometimes China does not work within the rules. That causes concerns among us.

Q: For Japan, history issues have been a major thorn in relations with China and South Korea. What is Southeast Asia's stance?

A: China is trying to use the history issue to turn ASEAN countries against Japan. It will not work. The attitudes of several members of ASEAN toward the Japanese occupation are not entirely unfavorable. Singapore, the Philippines and some other countries suffered badly during the war, we made the decision long ago to look forward in our relationship with Japan. Japan played an important role in Southeast Asia's economic development. Even though Japan's political influence declined during its "lost 20 years," the influence of Japanese business, trade, investment and technology did not change.

     China's criticism of Japan also causes anxiety among ASEAN countries, because today China targets Japan for its own domestic political needs, but tomorrow when the needs change, the target may shift.

     Nonetheless, if there is a controversy between China and Japan, most Southeast Asian countries don't want to get involved and stay away. So it undermines the more active diplomatic role that Prime Minister [Shinzo] Abe wants Japan to play in Southeast Asia, as elsewhere. In order for Japan to play this role, the history issue has to be reconciled.

     The argument by Japan's right-wing nationalists about the number of civilians killed in the Nanjing Massacre, or whether comfort women were volunteers, cannot be accepted by anybody. It does not matter to us because either way, a large number of civilians were killed and suffered. Don't make this argument, because you can't win.

     The Yasukuni Shrine issue is [similar]. The issue isn't whether a prime minister visits the shrine, where class-A war criminals are enshrined, or not. But [it] is that it creates a controversy. I don't even see it as a sign of lack of Japan's repentance; I just see it as an unnecessary distraction from the more important diplomatic and political role that Japan wants to play. Of course, it is something leaders have to decide -- whether it is worth it or not.

Q: All ASEAN countries were founding members of the new China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, while the U.S. and its allies, including Japan, have not joined. What was behind the decision to join? 

A: There is demand for the AIIB. Firstly, if your existing institutions do not reflect changing realities, you should not be surprised to see new institutions created. Secondly the capital need in Asia is so enormous that there is room for one more institution other than the Asian Development Bank.

     There are governance issues yet to be resolved. I don't think it has been sufficiently discussed. But it is better to be in and try to do something with it, [rather] than standing outside to grumble. The U.S. made a great mistake in asking its allies, Japan, [South] Korea and Australia not to join the AIIB. It is better to have your friends in and try to reshape the evolution of the institution.

Interviewed by Nikkei staff writer Mayuko Tani