Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

ISSN: 1948-0881 (Print) 1948-108X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rior20

ASEAN and interconnecting regional spheres:
lessons for the Indian Ocean Region
Shaun Lin & Carl Grundy-Warr
To cite this article: Shaun Lin & Carl Grundy-Warr (2012) ASEAN and interconnecting regional
spheres: lessons for the Indian Ocean Region, Journal of the Indian Ocean Region, 8:1, 54-70,
DOI: 10.1080/19480881.2012.683628
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/19480881.2012.683628

Published online: 13 Jun 2012.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 419

View related articles

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rior20

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region
Vol. 8, No. 1, June 2012, 5470

ASEAN and interconnecting regional spheres: lessons for the Indian
Ocean Region
Shaun Lina* and Carl Grundy-Warrb
a
Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security, University of Wollongong,
Wollongong, Australia; bDepartment of Geography, National University of Singapore, Singapore

(Received 31 January 2012; final version received 10 March 2012)
In an era of shifting global geopolitical, geostrategic and geo-economic power,
ASEAN’s resilience as a regional grouping and its relative success in keeping
internal conflicts at bay through various forms of quiet diplomacy and adherence
to certain norms and binding principles mean that it may become a force helping
to foster peaceful and stronger regional linkages within the eastern frontiers of
the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). In this article we focus on ASEAN’s growing
roles and relations within three key ‘spheres’ of adjoining regionalextra-regional
reach, which we identify as the mostly landward Greater Mekong Sphere (GMS),
the South China Sea Sphere and the Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea Sphere.
The Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea straddle between the Indian Ocean
Region and ASEAN, so this offers a joint issue of cooperation and proximate
regionalism. As for the GMS and South China Sea, the common Chinese factor
holds important geo-economic and geopolitical references that IOR could
incorporate into its foreign policy portfolio. Despite ASEAN’s at times belowpar performances and contradictions in terms of regional and internal security,
its direct and adjacent interconnectedness with the IOR suggests that it is perhaps
one of the best institutions to learn from in terms of strengthening the IOR’s
future regionalism aspirations.
Keywords: ASEAN; regional groupings; regional spheres; security

1. Introduction
In an era of shifting global geopolitical, geostrategic and geo-economic power,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations’ (ASEAN) resilience as a regional
grouping and its relative success in keeping internal conflicts at bay through
various forms of quiet diplomacy and adherence to certain norms and binding
principles mean that ASEAN may well become a force helping to foster peaceful
and stronger regional linkage within the eastern frontiers of the Indian Ocean
Region (IOR). Furthermore, ASEAN’s significant geo-economic and geostrategic
position contingent to other key regions benefitting from global power shifts
(see Figure 1) means that it is a vital part of the Indian Ocean Region’s political,
economic and security matrix. Finally, ASEAN’s role as a long-established
grouping with strategic partners through fora such as the ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) since 1994 helps the regional body to play a vital role in developing
dialogue and cooperative relations with major powers within and beyond the IOR.
*Corresponding author. Email: zsl@uowmail.edu.au
ISSN 1948-0881 print/1948-108X online
# 2012 Indian Ocean Research Group
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19480881.2012.683628
http://www.tandfonline.com

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

Figure 1.

55

Three frontier spheres of ASEAN.

In this article we shall focus upon ASEAN’s growing roles and relations within
three key ‘spheres’ of adjoining regional-extra-regional reach. In Figure 1 we have
identified these as the mostly landward Greater Mekong Sphere, the South China
Sea Sphere, and the Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sphere. These spheres are the
zones where ASEAN shares significant inter-state relations, inter-territoriality with
neighbouring regions, with overlapping geo-economic, militarygeostrategic, traditional and non-traditional security, environmental and human security interrelationships between neighbouring regions and states, as well as multiple public,
private and civil society concerns.

2. IOR and ASEAN
Since the end of the Cold War, and particularly in the last decade, global shifts
helped turn the IOR from being a relatively ‘neglected’ part of ‘world geopolitics’
and ‘global geostrategy’ into one that is very central, albeit with still a relatively
high proportion of violent conflicts falling within the IOR as a whole (Bouchard
and Crumplin 2010, p. 27). Significant global and regional geopolitical and economic structural adjustments are transforming the IOR into a dynamic global
and regional security arena (Chaturvedi 2009; Mohan 2011; Rumley and Chaturvedi
2004). Various shifts in political economic and geostrategic power are making
the IOR one of the most dynamic interlocking regions of the world, and the
Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC) has become
‘an extremely important regional grouping for the construction of a cooperative
security region’ (Editorial Essay 2010). That said, the IOR should be considered
‘as a complex puzzle of actors, each with their own vested interest or stakes,
interacting in a multilayered time and space framework’ (Bouchard and Crumplin
2010, p. 42). Keen observers have argued that the IOR-ARC has still failed to live
up to expectations (Bateman and Chan 2011, p. 11). Beyond the IOR-ARC the

56

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

Indian Ocean has a plethora or ‘alphabet soup’ (Bateman and Chan 2011, p. 14)
of intra- and sub-regional organisations, such as the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC), none of which can address the multi-pronged
issues of comprehensive security for the region as a whole, and there remains little
‘tradition of collective security’ (Mohan 2011, p. 21). All of this suggests that there
is a lack of resilience and coherence in terms of regionalisation within the greater
IOR. Thus, it may be constructive to consider what lessons may be derived from
the ASEAN case that might enable peaceful coexistence and greater regional
integrity within the IOR.
Why ASEAN? First, historically there were extremely strong ties across time
and space in the IOR, which for centuries was a ‘porous zone and passageway’ for
a considerable mobility of people, ideas and goods, for pilgrimages and for crosscultural linkage (Chew 2011; McPherson 1993; Wolters 1999). Second, it is clear
that Southeast Asia is a crossroads and maritime space between South, Central,
East Asia, Australia and the Pacific, and it also straddles the overlapping interests
of India and China. Third, ASEAN has durability in terms of being a relatively
peaceful regional association that was created in August 1967 at a time of enormous
geopolitical and ideological schisms in the region, and raging war in Indochina.
Fourth, ASEAN managed to expand to incorporate former foes and strangers
(Vietnam, 1995; Laos, 1997; Myanmar, 1997; and Cambodia, 1999). All of this suggests that the founding ASEAN principles, plus the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC) adopted by members in 1976, are flexible enough to help bring
into the ‘ASEAN Family’, and accommodate, fundamentally different political states
and political economies. Given the huge range of political states within the IOR,
the Southeast Asian example of regional association may hold valuable lessons for
forging stronger linkages in spite of past cross-border conflicts and varying degrees
of geopolitical paranoia. Finally, ‘the ASEAN Way’ holds promise for maintaining
regional peace and security in other parts of the world (Goh 2003), albeit the specific
historical circumstances and political cultural context cannot be so easily replicated
outside of the region (Acharya 2001; Roberts 2012). Thus, it is worth considering some of the ASEAN norms, principles and mechanisms that may help to
foster stronger political relations, and functional and practical cooperation with
the broader IOR (Emmers and Bateman 2011).
Some caution is required, for, although the above points hold considerable
promise for regional cooperation, ASEAN remains at best a nascent ‘security
community’ (Acharya 2001), since it is also characterised by multiple stubborn
internal bilateral disputes, disparate political systems and varying degrees of
democratisation, and ‘very little integration between the ASEAN states in the
political-security sphere’ (Roberts 2012, p. 184). That said, the low levels of complex
integration are perhaps reasons for its durability and appeal in a region formerly
divided by violence and warfare. Acharya (2001, p. 161) asked whether ASEAN’s
‘own norms’ and ‘way of life’ were applicable to wider regional alignments in the
Asia-Pacific. In fact, ASEAN has been described by Rüland (2011, p. 103) as a ‘norm
entrepreneur’ in terms of developing and disseminating ideas such as non-use of
force, non-interference, progress by consultation and consensus, the eschewing of
legalisms, and in spreading ASEAN principles via multilateral security forums,
such as the ARF. According to Acharya (2001, p. 173): ‘Through the ARF,
ASEAN sought to create a regional order based not only on its norms, but also on

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

57

the relatively new norm of inclusiveness, which is central to the idea of cooperative
security’. Several aspects of the so-called ‘ASEAN Way’ crept into the ARF,
including ‘the cautious and incremental approach to security cooperation’ (Acharya
2001, p. 174).
Central to the ‘norm brewery’ as Katsumata (2009, p. 5) puts it, is ASEAN’s
TAC, including various ‘informal codes of conduct’ influencing regional inter-state
relations, such as respecting territorial sovereignty, national identity, national
existence, non-interference in the internal affairs of one another and the peaceful
settlement of disputes (Emmers and Bateman 2011, p. 23). As Rüland (2011,
p. 103) observes: ‘ASEAN has acquired substantial prestige and credibility as a
multilaterally minded actor, a fact that is corroborated by the accession of twentysix countries’ to the TAC. However, it is worthwhile citing Rüland (2011, p. 104)
further:
The point is that ASEAN has indefatigably advocated these pacific norms in a region
that forty years ago was by all standards one of the most conflict-prone in the world.
What justifies the ‘brewery’ analogy is the fact that ASEAN socialized them in the
region by successfully framing them in local political culture.

The political socialisation theme has been discussed in detail elsewhere (Acharya
2000, 2001, 2009) in relation to the cultural politics of forging ASEAN norms and
its regional identity. According to Leifer (1996) the ARF was viewed as a means
to influence and socialise Beijing into good international behaviour, whilst helping
to maintain Washington’s security interests in the region. Emmers and Bateman
(2011) suggest that the ARF is still ‘ill-equipped’ to tackle a host of security issues
in the Asia-Pacific, although it has helped to spread the security agenda to more
comprehensive issues, including non-traditional areas such as maritime security,
disaster relief and humanitarian assistance.
In relation to the Indian Ocean Region, it seems that ASEAN’s flexi-forms
of cooperation may hold certain advantages in that ASEAN has a proven trackrecord as a productive norm maker and institution creator, yet it has achieved this
in ways that require relatively little binding legislation, contractual relationships
and institutional cost to member states. ASEAN has relied greatly on forms of
multilateralism that are more ‘personalistic, informal and non-contractual’ (Goh
2003, p. 115). Rüland (2011, p. 107) has theorised ASEAN as a ‘hedging utility’ that
‘prefers a rather shallow multilateralism characterized by contingent, flexible, lowcost, thematically broad and only moderately accountable institutions’. Such a
notion fits very well with ASEAN’s stubborn ‘sovereignty-centred’ approaches
to multilateral cooperation, while its ‘norm brewery’ keeps churning out a nonthreatening palatable brew conducive to ASEAN, the ARF and probably most
members of the IOR. The concept of ‘hedging’ also fits well with ASEAN’s
preference for ‘soft’ consensus-based approaches to disputes and disagreements,
which may well help to smooth over some of the cracks and fissures created by
bilateral tensions over space, boundaries and resources, of which there are many
within the IOR. In the arena of maritime security, ASEAN’s involvement alongside
other IOR agents may help to foster ‘a more cooperative mindset’ that is lacking
(Bateman 2011).

58

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

3. Security dilemmas, threats and contradictions
Hitherto, we have argued that ASEAN has proven to be relatively successful as a
regional organisation that has maintained a mostly peaceful inter-state coexistence
and developed forms of multilateral cooperation that have been highly suitable to the
states in the region. It is also argued that ASEAN’s political culture, guiding norms
and softer mechanisms may be highly appropriate in the greater IOR context.
However, it is vital to highlight that ASEAN tends to support types of cooperation
that are state-centred, developmental and technocratic in nature, encouraging geoeconomic collaborations, investments (particularly by transnational corporations
(TNCs) and foreign direct investment (FDI)) and trade, as well as encouraging
economic globalisation within and beyond the region through various initiatives
(such as the Greater Mekong Sub-region or GMS, discussed below). ASEAN tends
towards projects that forge cooperative ties without denting national sovereignties,
whilst consensus is required to tackle any potential adverse externalities, particularly
of the transnational kind.
When it comes to considerations of regional inter-governmental and inter-state
security cooperation, traditional military and strategic concerns combine strongly
with issues of economic and energy security (Berlin 2010; Rumley and Chaturvedi
2004, 2005). At the same time, cooperation over, say, matters of energy security may
generate potential ‘threats’ and ‘security dilemmas’ (Rumley 2008). These dilemmas
may be defined as ‘the production of a security threatening situation for one state
or region that arises as a result of the perceived consequences of another state’s
or region’s behaviour in attempting to guarantee its own security’ (also see Rumley
1999). There are security dilemmas that may arise from ‘benign intent’, ‘uncertainty
of intent’ and ‘paradoxical outcome’ (Rumley 2008, p. 35). Actually, in each of the
three frontier sphere zones of ASEAN (Figure 1) there are likely to be simultaneous
and overlapping security dilemmas owing to the large numbers of states involved,
divergent geopolitical codes and imaginaries, and false perceptions of threats or
even reasons for cooperation. Thus, we need to be cautious when applying the
term ‘cooperation’ and ‘security’ because usually differentiated risks, benefits and
dilemmas are often present.
Until now, we have been totally preoccupied with regional inter-state cooperation
and the possibility of ASEAN helping to foster more cohesive inter-regional links
within the IOR. However, there are forms of security that necessitate thinking beyond
national, state-centred and inter-state regional mindsets. In an Editorial Essay setting
out ‘Research agendas’, the notion of ‘a multidimensional post-realist concept of
security’ incorporating ideas of environmental and human security was raised
(Editorial Essay 2010). Later, the contributors go on to mention the need for ‘more
innovative interpretations’ of the concept of ‘environmental security’, ‘with the
potential to secure access for all people to fulfil their basic needs for survival’ (ibid., p.
16). This raises a different form of security dilemma from that discussed above, for it
may be that environmental, livelihood, food and other forms of human security are on
the ‘comprehensive security’ agenda of regional organisations, but in practice come in
second or third place to other forms of security considered to be of a higher priority.
An example is the extremely high priority often afforded to energy security,
generally without linkage to energy-related issues of environmental sustainability or
the potential threats that may be created by accidental or unintended outcomes of

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

59

energy resource exploitation. As Devare (2008, pp. 34) argued, ‘the importance
of energy in foreign policy calculations’ is becoming extremely important in interand extra-regional relations. As we will illustrate, these forms of security are critical
to understanding multiple developments, security threats and forms of cooperation
in each of the three spheres where ASEAN members have direct stakes. For every
form of security there are often trade-offs and contradictions, particularly if in
securing one resource or place or protecting some people, another resource, place or
group of people is made less secure. In the following sections, we shall consider
particular aspects of energy, maritime and environmental geopolitics in relation to
issues of regional development and ASEAN’s role within those processes.

4. Frontiers of ASEAN regional cooperation: geopolitical and geo-economic spheres
of interest
We suggest that lessons may be derived from closer examination of three broad
maritime and land spheres that interconnect with the ASEAN membership
territorial space. Like the broader IOR, these spheres represent ‘fuzzy and open’
geo-economic and geopolitical systems (Bouchard and Crumplin, 2010, p. 42),
and there are substantial trans-regional and transnational, and a whole plethora
of traditional and non-traditional security interests at stake. Within each of the
three area spheres (two essentially maritime-dominated and one land-configured,
see Figure 1), ASEAN member states and the regional body and various forums
influenced or part of ASEAN frameworks are vitally involved. We argue that
these connections involve overlapping political, economic and security interests
that frequently place ASEAN in a position as facilitator and moderator in
developing cross-regional and sub-regional forms of cooperation. Nevertheless,
cross-sub-regional harmony continues to be complicated by obdurate national
interests, boundary questions, stubborn sovereignty issues and state rivalries within
and across sub-regions.

Sphere 1: ASEAN and the Greater Mekong Sub-region
The Mekong River does not just flow through six countries (China, Laos, Myanmar,
Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam), it is also a basin that has spawned a new geoeconomic regional imaginary, the Greater Mekong Sub-region, advanced vigorously
by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and essentially supported by ASEAN,
discursively and materially moulding the six Mekong riparian states into a so-called
‘natural economic area’. According to Hensengerth (2009, p. 338), ‘the GMS is the
product of the second wave of regionalism that swept through East and Southeast
Asia after the Cold War’ and should be ‘set in the context of post-Cold War efforts
of nation-building and regional integration and the dual processes of globalization
and regionalization’. In a critical examination of the GMS, Glassman (2010)
conceptualises the whole project as being an aspect of ‘actually existing globalization’
benefitting various large private and public sector concerns from distant GMS
capitals and provincial centres, as well as transnational capitalist forces, which
generate cross-regional linkages mostly for resource access, exploitation and various
‘scale-jumping’ projects of accumulation (Glassman 2010, p. 2).

60

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

The GMS and the ADB have had considerable support from ASEAN and
ASEAN’s mainland Southeast Asian governments. Projects include major eastwest
and northsouth road corridors, various cross-border bridges, and the development
of a regional energy grid, which has been increasingly based upon expanding
hydropower within the Mekong Basin. In this section we shall focus primarily on just
two issues: ChinaASEAN relations in the Mekong, particularly in relation to
China’s unilateral development of a cascade of hydropower dams along the Lancang
Jiang (China’s portion of the Mekong River), and on hydropower developments to
enhance energy security in the Lower Mekong Basin.
China has enormous exploitable hydropower resources, and many are found in
mountainous western and southwestern China. In a sense, China became a dragon of
absolute sovereignty when she decided to go ahead with dam construction on the
upper Mekong. To Beijing, such dams are viewed as necessary to help meet rising
energy demands through the domestic supply of non-fossil fuel-based energy, as well
as to have enough energy to ‘export’ it into mainland Southeast Asia’s developing
power grid (Yu 2003). Indeed, Chinese power companies are dominant players in
the Southeast Asian hydropower industry (Middleton, Garcia and Foran 2009).
Upper mainstream dams have created much anxiety in downstream areas of the
river, where there are fears of upstream control over water supplies by China. In this
context, ASEAN has avoided confrontation with China over unilateral developments
within Chinese national space, in accordance with notions of territorial integrity
and political sovereignty. Thus, ASEAN has at once been an active exponent of
regionalisation in the GMS and side-stepped some of the more politically sensitive
issues in relation to China. Indeed, China has played a very active part in the GMS
project, which is part of the State-sponsored ‘Go West’ (for resources) as well as
benefitting Chinese capital, some of which comes from Sino hydropower companies.
Downstream China has fully engaged with ASEAN neighbours in terms of aid and
FDI, and has been an active partner in ASEAN’s Mekong Basin Development
program, based primarily on the regional energy grid and infrastructure projects.
ASEAN is one of the organisations that has uncritically supported such forms of
‘integration’.
One lesson from this is that mainland ASEAN states tend to espouse particular
ideas of development based upon ADBGMS geo-economic imaginaries, cooperation over hydropower supply, demand and distribution networks, and energy security
obsessions (Yong and Grundy-Warr 2012). Another lesson concerns ASEAN’s
acquiescence in relation to China’s unilateral state-centred approach with potentially
profound upstreamdownstream consequences. This is not to say that ASEAN is
toothless in relation to China, but rather that the dominant notions of GMS and a
hydropower-driven regional energy grid tend to obfuscate other important security
issues, such as biodiversity, livelihoods, fisheries, food and environmental security
(Molle, Foran and Käkören 2009). As Goh (2004, p. 14) argues, the ASEAN states
are less willing to address or to ‘securitize’ more ambiguous environmental security
issues, which tend to be uneven, cumulative over time, abstract and unpredictable.
Thus, ASEAN’s effectiveness in regional security, and extra-regional relations,
is often tempered by industry and issue-based alliances, as illustrated by the power
grid and hydropower debates.
In the Mekong there are strong oppositional voices and networked alliances of
civil society groups, community organisations, concerned professionals and scientists

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

61

who raise vital issues of environmental and human security. In recent years,
there have been effective campaigns causing the postponement of proposed lower
Mekong mainstream dams, particularly at Don Sahong and Xayaburi in Laos PDR
(Yong and Grundy-Warr 2012) There is much debate about the issue of mainstream hydropower dams on the mainstream of the lower Mekong River. The 1260
megawatts Xayaburi Dam, located in Northern Lao, is the lower mainstream dam
at the most advanced stage of planning. The US$3.5 billion project is proposed
by a predominantly Thai private-sector consortium, backed by Thai financiers,
and would export 95% of its electricity to Thailand. In September 2010, the Laos
government initiated a regional decision-making process under the Mekong River
Commission (MRC) called the ‘Procedures for Notification, Prior Consultation and
Agreement’ (PNPCA). The Xayaburi Dam and the PNPCA have been heavily
contested; project proponents have argued for economic benefits and energy security,
whilst opponents have pointed out environmental, social and cultural costs
(Middleton, Grundy-Warr and Yong 2012).
Environmental politics include numerous trans-border alliances. Within ASEAN,
regional history, norms and founding principles have shaped diverse interests both
within and outside of the official PNPCA decision-making process. For example,
each country has strongly defended its respective ‘national interests’, as represented
by governments within the PNPCA process, and a country such as Laos PDR insists
on its rights to go ahead with Xayaburi partly on the grounds of sovereignty. A big
factor in shaping regional politics is ASEAN’s principle of political ‘noninterference’, counter-balancing commitments to cooperation through the Mekong
River Commission. It is also the case that the Xayaburi Dam’s Thai private-sector
consortium has built nexuses with Laos and Thai state agencies to facilitate
the project, and a trans-national private sector is able to operate with flexibility
beyond the ‘national interest’ and notions of political ‘non-interference’, and beneath
the scrutiny of civil society, with implications for region-wide water governance
and environmental justice (Middleton 2012). Thus, ASEAN norms and values
may not necessarily be conducive to developing regional environmental security
within the IOR.
At the regional and national scales, regional energy and economic integration
are paramount in the security calculus above multiple less easily-quantified
calculations about adverse transnational externalities and long-term environmental
effects. Thus, ASEAN’s role is primarily to foster non-confrontational geo-economic
ties with China, whilst remaining mostly uncritical at the Association level of China’s
unilateral development of a trans-boundary resource. ASEAN’s influence on the
Mekong system is primarily in supporting ongoing GMS projects and supporting the
emergence of a more efficient regional energy grid, while remaining aloof from the
non-governmental and network alliances opposed to particular hydropower developments.
What the foregoing analysis suggests is that ASEAN and regional norms may
well be exportable to the wider IOR, but the complex and critical issues of energy,
environmental and human security throw up numerous problems that require
thinking at multiple scales, beyond national sovereignty interests, and involve
participation of numerous non-state parties. Whilst the ASEAN framework is
indeed helpful for fostering certain types of economic linkage, there are numerous
transnational challenges at sub-regional and cross-regional levels that may require

62

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

alternative mechanisms and processes to state-centred regional ones. Mekong
hydropolitics reveals certain limitations to the ‘ASEAN model’ requiring more
critical analysis.
Sphere 2: ASEAN and South China Sea
In the maritime arena, the Indian Ocean has been described and argued as an
imperative centre stage for energy geopolitics, a place that cannot be overlooked in
global geoplitics and strategy (Berlin 2002; Cordner 2010; Kaplan 2009; Bouchard
and Crumplin 2010). This is a largely valid statement considering how many
countries in the world have their oil imports transported via this oceanic space.
However, the Indian Ocean lacks a distinctive regional identity linked to a political
association. Having said this, we examine another maritime space, the South China
Sea, which sees ASEAN as an active regional player. In particular, we will reflect on
how ASEAN’s involvement in the ‘troubled’ South China Sea lends itself as a useful
learning experience for South Asian countries seeking a cohesive regional order in
the Indian Ocean. The relevance for this regionalism cross-reference is not just
because of proximity over at the eastern frontier of Indian Ocean, but also how these
two salt-water bodies share a common issue in dealing with Chinese interests.
Over recent decades, the South China Sea has developed into a hotly disputed
area between ASEAN and China. The main contentious issue at hand are the Spratly
Islands and Paracel Islands territorial disputes. While the Paracel Islands involve
only China and Vietnam, the Spratly Islands see China, Vietnam, Malaysia,
Philippines and Brunei claiming all or some of the offshore features. All of them,
with the exception of Brunei, exercise their territoriality by occupying and
garrisoning specific islets. These tiny specks of islands and rocks spur nationalist
fervour because of the sovereignty at stake, and attract greater interest owing to the
perception on the part of governments of promising resources in the surrounding
waters and vital economic interests (Schofield 2011). Clashes out at sea are thus not
surprising. Non-claimant states of the South China Sea within ASEAN (such as
Singapore and Indonesia) are also monitoring the situation closely as they seek
freedom of navigation and a peaceful marine environment in Southeast Asia.
An attempt to reduce tensions in the region was signalled by ASEAN and China
by signing the Declaration on the Conduct of the Parties in the South China Sea
in 2002. A decade has since passed and yet tensions and conflicts still persist.
Ian Storey, in an interview, attributes it to faults on both sides: China has obstructed
the process, but there are also divisions within ASEAN as to the best way to proceed
(Cook 2011).
Although the Declaration on Conduct is of limited success and the South China
Sea remains a thorny problem within ASEAN and beyond the organisation with
China, there is still much for the Indian Ocean Region (especially for those South
Asian states) to learn from ASEAN’s regionalism approach. There are two reasons
for this. First, ASEAN has a relatively good record of contributing to conflict
avoidance and management in its own backyard (Emmers and Bateman 2011).
Within the maritime ambit, the clashes between Southeast Asian countries never
escalated into a regional crisis for ASEAN. In the highly contested South China Sea,
the non-claimant states of the South China Sea and along with ASEAN as a group,
do not support or oppose the claims of the four ASEAN claimant states, and have

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

63

always urged peaceful talks to ease the tensions. ASEAN as a regional organisation
has a fairly good record in shaping collective security measures within Southeast
Asia. The collective defence diplomacy effort comes at formal and informal
ministerial levels as well, such as the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (formal),
the ASEAN Chief of Defence Forces Informal Meeting and Shangri-La Dialogue,
and is initiated by both ASEAN and extra-regional powers such as China, Japan
and the USA (Laksmana 2011). Therefore, ASEAN has an applicable lesson for the
Indian Ocean Region to reflect upon, considering how countries like India and
Bangladesh have an enduring maritime dispute over their Exclusive Economic Zones.
This is not to make an indirect claim that India and Bangladesh resort to military
approaches to resolve their differences, but we wish to highlight how a political body
like ASEAN could give ideas to the Indian Ocean Region in terms of having a
regional organisation capable of managing bilateral and even multilateral maritime
disputes in a diplomatic manner.
The second explanation is crucial to illuminating the learning curves that the
IOR could acquire in ASEAN’s regionalism efforts. As mentioned earlier, the
Chinese presence in both sea spaces gives a similar scenario for the Indian Ocean
littoral states to study ASEAN’s context of engaging China in the maritime domain.
While it is a matter of territorial sovereignty and marine resources that justifies
China’s overtures in the South China Sea, it is another equation of geopolitics
and geo-economics that vindicates China’s venture into the Indian Ocean. As noted
by Holmes and Yoshihara (2008, p. 369), China’s insatiable appetite for energy
resources has brought tremendous domestic pressure on Beijing to ensure an
uninterrupted flow of energy, which has compelled Beijing to cast anxious eyes
on the sea lines of communication in the Indian Ocean. This translates into a foreign
policy of building port facilities in Sri Lanka (Hambantota) and Pakistan (Gwadar),
creating a ‘string of pearls’ that could eventually undermine India’s pre-eminence
(Berlin 2010; Holmes and Yoshihara 2008). Indeed, China’s foray into the Indian
Ocean cannot be underestimated. It could potentially reshape the political landand seascapes of the Indian sub-continent, where the Chinese-invested ports
encircle India.
India’s responses to the ‘string of pearls’ are not surprising. India has plans
to construct a transhipment port at South Bay on Great Nicobar Island to counter
Hambantota (Velloor 2010), and has been steadily increasing its military forays
near the South China Sea by conducting naval exercises with Vietnam (a traditional
‘foe’ of China; Garver 2002; Khurana 2008). This individual effort by India may
not be the best way to tackle the Chinese presence and even may distance her
from the rest of her South Asian neighbours. A preferred method would be to
turn to regionalism for security and political stability, such as encouraging the
United States, a countering balance factor, to be more involved eastwards in the
Indian Ocean rather than just dealing with piracy off the Horn of Africa. Since
the regionalism of the Indian Ocean Region is primarily economic (Editorial Essay
2010), referring to ASEAN for political and strategic regionalism directions is
highly relevant.
ASEAN’s extra-regionalism reach does not solely lie in being a diplomatic player
of some relevance in the Asia-Pacific. Notably, it is capable of obtaining continuous
US commitment to the security seascape of the South China Sea, such as offering its
ports to American warships and conducting joint military exercises to act as a

64

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

counterweight to China. The need to straddle the interests of both Washington and
Beijing is seen in Ambassador-at-Large Professor Tommy Koh’s recent interview,
where he explained the ASEAN strategy as to ‘[bring] the major powers (particularly
the United States and China) together and embed them in a cooperative framework . . . thereby [reducing] the deficit of trust’ (cited in Ho 2011, p. 2). This is
also important in the context of the South China Sea, as the People’s Liberation
Army Navy is clearly better equipped than Southeast Asian navies. Similarly,
in relation to the Indian Ocean, a US presence may help balance the increasing
Chinese capital ventures of seaports, and prevent a further divide between India
and her neighbours. Regionalism in this sense will be more fruitful, and countries
such as Sri Lanka could welcome another source of foreign investment and
engagement from the United States to reduce its reliance on China. This is not
to argue for skewing military and geostrategic security interests in favour of the
United States, but it is a recognition of big power interests and the need for a careful
consideration of how to balance these geopolitical interests via regional forums
and a collective promotion of preventive diplomacy. Further, it may simply be that
the relative decline of the US naval power in the region is chronic, for as Mohan
(2011, p. 20) puts it: ‘the overall size of the US Navy is on the decline and the costs
of deployment in the Pacific and Indian Ocean can only rise’. Nevertheless,
ASEAN’s vision and practice of having not just one superpower in its maritime
territory is a worthy lesson to be learnt for the IOR, and one increasingly seen with
the Indian naval engagements with various external powers, including the navies of
United States, France, Britain and Russia, as well as regional powers, including
Australia. If the IOR wants to strive for effective regionalism, it is not merely
an internal concern of having a common identity, but more importantly it is a
question of having a right equilibrium of foreign interests, something that ASEAN
manages relatively well.
Sphere 3: ASEAN, Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea
There are several reasons why this sphere represents a complex and important
geostrategic, geopolitical and geo-economic context implicating ASEAN with
other IOR countries in profound ways. As Figure 2 illustrates, the Bay is a transSouth-Southeast Asia maritime zone linking India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh to the
IOR ASEAN countries of Myanmar, Thailand and Malaysia. Each state may have
its own complex array of geopolitical imaginaries of the sea-space, which may
generate security dilemmas if policies or unilateral actions generate trans-border
externalities. Further, there has historically been intense naval and maritime rivalry
between India and China (Ahmad 2008; Mehta 2007; Mohan 2011). As a semienclosed sea,1 meaning that much of the waters lie within the territorial seas and the
200 nautical mile Exclusive Economic Zones of the littoral states, there are issues of
overlapping claims and contested extended continental shelf submissions to the UN’s
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, as well as problems for maritime
boundary delimitation (Bateman 2010; Bissinger 2010). Thus, Bateman (2010)
dubbed the Bay ‘a new sea of troubles’ and Bissinger (2010) discussed the need for
states such as Bangladesh and Myanmar to attempt to settle their boundary dispute
through negotiations and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. Add
to this troubled sea considerable gas finds and highly complex energy geopolitics

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

Figure 2.

65

Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea Sphere.

(Basrur 2011; Devare 2008; Lall 2009), and it is clear that the Bay of Bengal
offers numerous interrelated security challenges at the inter-state, intra-South,
intra-Southeast Asia, and essential inter-regional levels. Each state in the Bay faces
a challenging array of security issues, but numerous issues overspill state boundaries,
which makes the building of collective security within the Bay area an urgent
problem.
In many respects, Myanmar has become a focal point in discussions about
sub-regional IOR security. Essentially, Myanmar as an ASEAN member is in a
front-line inter-regional position, caught not only between South and Southeast
Asia, but also between Central and East Asia in the northern borderlands. It is no
wonder that the northern frontier with India and China was incorporated into
van Schendel’s notion of a mountainous ‘Zomia’, which challenges dominant
notions of area studies and state-centred scholarly thinking (van Schendel 2005).
Nevertheless, exactly similar arguments can be made for the sea-space of the Bay
of Bengal in that geopolitical divisions and purely national claims to space make
a nonsense of historical flows, interactions, mobility and interaction spanning
centuries (Chew 2011).
Quite apart from the Bay of Bengal, Myanmar as a political state with a
dominant and often repressive military regime has long represented a security
conundrum for neighbouring states, particularly since the country’s membership of
ASEAN in 1997. Indeed, ASEAN states have often had distinct views on how to
deal effectively with Myanmar, involving differing interpretations of ‘constructive
engagement’ (Bunyanunda 2002; Haacke 2008; Roberts 2006). Protracted conflict,
complex ceasefires and ethnic politics within all the land border zones of the
country have generated massive problems of human displacement and gross
insecurity, both within and across international boundaries, for the last four

66

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

decades (Callahan 2004; Grundy-Warr and Dean 2011; South 2008). Thus,
discussing ASEAN’s relative successes as a regional body with a peaceful record
is not without significant caveats, particularly for the hundreds of thousands of
Burmese exiles, irregular migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons who
have often slipped out of the human security radar. Even as Myanmar has become
less of an international ‘pariah state’ with the latest release of Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi and that of many political prisoners, there remain great uncertainties about the
country’s future internal politics and direction (Lintner 2012). Thus, Myanmar as a
pivotal state in the practical geopolitics and geo-economics of at least three Asian
regions represents a high-order security conundrum, not just for ASEAN but for
the IOR.
Undoubtedly within the Bay of Bengal area, resource and energy geopolitics have
become paramount concerns of states. Much of the focus is on Myanmar’s offshore
oil and natural gas deposits, several blocks in the Gulf of Martaban (Yadana and
Yetagun) being opened in the 1990s.2 This has only served to intensify Sino-Indian
and Indian-Bangladeshi rivalry and cooperation for precious energy resources
(Basrur 2011; Islam 2009). The geostrategic and economic significance of resources
in the Gulf has served to increase China’s presence in attempting to secure gas
deals and develop pipelines from the Bay of Bengal across Myanmar to Yunnan,
Southwest China. On the other hand, India’s ‘Look East’ policy (Lall 2008) has been
partly geared towards developing better trade relations with ASEAN partners, and
partly towards countering China’s strong presence in mainland Southeast Asia and
its military and economic ties with Myanmar. The history of Sino-Indian rivalry in
the IOR is long, and it is Myanmar that is about ‘to play its gas cards profitably’
(Basrur 2011). One illustration of this is in the Shwe field off the Rakhine coast,
blocks A1A3 being exploited by a consortium led by South Korean’s DaeWoo
(60%), the Korea Gas Corporation (10%) and two Indian companies (ONGC
Videsh, a subsidiary of Oil and Gas Corporation, 20%, and GAIL, the Gas
Authority of India, 10%). In spite of the proximity of the gas fields to India, the
Myanmar authorities were able to turn to China when tri-national negotiations in
2005 between Myanmar, India and Bangladesh stalled owing to the latter country
adding conditions to natural gas output going across her territory. This enabled
PetroChina to sign a gas export Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and
complete survey work on a 2389 km pipeline from Kyahphu in Myanmar to Yunnan
Province. ‘India was caught unaware when Myanmar had agreed to sell . . . gas from
Block-1 to PetroChina over 30 years’ (Sinha 2009). Subsequently, the pipeline deal
through Bangladesh was approved and India has secured further concessions from
Myanmar for gas (BBC 2010, 2011).
Greater engagement with ASEAN has also enabled India to improve bilateral
economic ties with various individual countries, including an ASEAN Free Trade
Agreement (Strachan, Kang and Sinha 2009). Geostrategic economic ties are as
significant as purely military forms of cooperation. In such a competitive arena
where gas geopolitics and the maritime security of oil and gas sea-trade routes
are critical to the security of states within and beyond the IOR, ASEAN and the
SAARC can help to act as regional watchdogs to monitor and attempt to encourage regional energy cooperation agreements. Through ASEAN there is greater
dialogue potential between rival parties and regional powers (Devare 2008). As
noted in the GMS, there is an intense focus on ‘energy security’ almost to the

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

67

exclusion of other pressing non-traditional and transnational security concerns. As
there is likely to be major investment and change in several coastal areas of the Bay
of Bengal in the coming decade, it is imperative that other issues  non-traditional
security, environmental and human security  are not left off the regional agenda.
Bateman, Chan and Graham (2011) have provided a detailed list of pertinent ways
in which ASEAN may seek to enhance maritime security in the IOR through formal
agreements, institution-building, developing a host of cooperative arrangements
in fields of maritime policing, information sharing, building upon existing regional
bodies involved in tackling natural hazards and various non-traditional security
areas.

5. Conclusion
The IOR has already been elevated to global geopolitical attention. What it needs
to address is the need to build on the reach of its regionalism to maintain
its relevance. ASEAN, a credible and highly pertinent organisation in the east of the
IOR, provides some valuable lessons. In our article, we have carefully examined the
various lessons that IOR could ‘import’ from ASEAN. The Bay of Bengal and
Andaman Sea straddle the Indian Ocean Region and ASEAN, so this offers a joint
issue of cooperation and proximate regionalism. As for the GMS and South China
Sea, the common Chinese factor holds important geo-economic and geopolitical
references that the IOR could incorporate in its foreign policy portfolio. Despite
ASEAN’s below-par performances and contradictions in terms of regional and
internal security at times, its direct and adjacent interconnectedness with the IOR
suggests that it is perhaps one of the best institutions to learn from in strengthening
IOR’s future regionalism aspirations. Finally, there are questions over the reliance
on ‘sovereignty-centred’ forms of regional governance. As the discussion of each of
the spheres suggests, there is a need to fundamentally address issues that go beyond
ASEAN’s current norms and practices. Indeed, while ASEAN’s Charter encourages
a ‘people-oriented’ regional governance (Rüland 2011, p. 105), major decisions are
at either state or inter-state level, which when dealing with complex issues of integrated ecology, natural resource management, resource-based livelihoods, river
basins, coastal zones and seas, invariably raises problems and issues requiring
more imaginative, multi-scalar and flexible forms of regional governance than
are currently available.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Lee Li Kheng for the preparation of the maps.

Notes
1. Under UNCLOS Part IX, a semi-enclosed sea consists ‘entirely or primarily of the
territorial seas and exclusive economic zones of two or more coastal States’.
2. Myanmar’s offshore area is divided into 25 blocks covering an area of 270,000 square
kilometres. To the west of the Rakhine coast along the Bay of Bengal, there are seven
blocks, A1A7. Eleven blocks (M1M11) are located in the Gulf of Martaban, in the
northern sector of the Andaman Sea, and seven blocks (M12M18) were located by the
Tanintharyi coastline, in the southwest of the Mergui Archipelago. See Ahmad (2008).

68

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

References
Acharya, A. (2000), The Quest for Identity: International Relations of Southeast Asia. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Acharya, A. (2001), Constructing a Security Community in Southeast Asia: ASEAN and the
Problem of Regional Order. London: Routledge.
Acharya, A. (2009), Constructing a Security Community in Southeast Asia. ASEAN and the
Problem of Regional Order, 2nd ed. London: Routledge.
Ahmad, T. (2008), ‘Gas potential at the Bay of Bengal and implications for India’s energy
security’, in S.T. Devare, ed., A New Energy Frontier. The Bay of Bengal Region. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 3660.
Basrur, R. (2011), ‘Energy and geopolitics in the Indian Ocean Region’, in S. Bateman, J. Chan
and E. Graham, eds., ASEAN and the Indian Ocean: The Key Maritime Links. RSIS Policy
Paper, November 2011. Singapore: S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang
Technological University, pp. 3235.
Bateman, S. (2010), ‘Bay of Bengal: a new sea of troubles?’ RSIS Commentaries no. 50,
Nanyang Technological University.
Bateman, S. (2011), ‘Solving the ‘‘wicked problems’’ of maritime security: are regional forums
up to the task?’, Contemporary Southeast Asia: a Journal of International and Strategic
Affairs, Vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 128.
Bateman, S. and Chan, J. (2011), ‘Introduction’, in S. Bateman, J. Chan and E. Graham, eds.,
ASEAN and the Indian Ocean: The Key Maritime Links. RSIS Policy Paper, November
2011. Singapore: S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang Technological
University, pp. 714.
Bateman, S., Chan, J. and Graham, E. eds., (2011), ASEAN and the Indian Ocean: The Key
Maritime Links. RSIS Policy Paper, November 2011. Singapore: S. Rajaratnam School of
International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, pp. 714.
BBC (2010), ‘Bangladesh approves IndiaMyanmar gas pipeline through its territory’,
2 March 2010.
BBC (2011), ‘India and Burma expand trade ties and sign gas deals’, 14 October. Available at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-15304791, accessed 20 February 2012.
Berlin, D.L. (2002), ‘Neglected no longer: strategic rivalry in the Indian Ocean’, Harvard
International Review, Vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2631.
Berlin, D.L. (2010), ‘Sea power, land power and the Indian Ocean’, Journal of the Indian Ocean
Region, Vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 5266.
Bissinger, J. (2010), ‘The maritime boundary dispute between Bangladesh and Myanmar:
motivations, potential solutions and implications’, Asia Policy, no. 10, pp. 103142.
Bouchard, C. and Cumplin, W. (2010), ‘Neglected no longer: the Indian Ocean at the forefront
of world geopolitics and global geostrategy’, Journal of the Indian Ocean Region, Vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 2651.
Bunyanunda, M. (2002), ‘Burma, ASEAN, and human rights: the decade of constructive
engagement, 19912001’, Stanford Journal of East Asian Affairs, Vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 118135.
Callahan, M.P. (2004), Making Enemies: War and State Building in Burma. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Chaturvedi, S. (2009), ‘Indian Ocean’, in R. Kitchen and N. Thrift, eds., International
Encyclopedia of Human Geography. Oxford: Elsevier, Vol. 5, pp. 344351.
Chew, E. (2011), ‘Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean: maritime connections across time and
space’, in S. Bateman, J. Chan and E. Graham, eds., ASEAN and the Indian Ocean: The Key
Maritime Links. RSIS Policy Paper, November 2011. Singapore: S. Rajaratnam School of
International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, pp. 1518.
Cook, T. (2011), ‘Rising tensions in the South China Sea  an interview with Ian Storey’.
The National Bureau of Asian Research.
Cordner, L. (2010), ‘Rethinking maritime security in the Indian Ocean Region’, Journal of the
Indian Ocean Region, Vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 6785.
Devare, S.T. ed., (2008), A New Energy Frontier. The Bay of Bengal Region. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Editorial Essay (2010), ‘Research agendas for the Indian Ocean Region’, Journal of the Indian
Ocean Region, Vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 125.

Journal of the Indian Ocean Region

69

Emmers, R. and Bateman, S. (2011), ‘ASEAN’s model of conflict management’, in S. Bateman,
J. Chan and E. Graham, eds., ASEAN and the Indian Ocean: The Key Maritime Links. RSIS
Policy Paper, November 2011, Singapore: S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies,
Nanyang Technological University, pp. 2427.
Garver, J.W. (2002), ‘The gestalt of Sino-India relationship’, in C. Wilson Pumphrey, ed., The
Rise of China in Asia: Security Implications. Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, US
Army War College, pp. 273291.
Glassman, J. (2010), Bounding the Mekong: The Asian Development Bank, China, and
Thailand. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i Press.
Goh, E. (2004), ‘China in the Mekong river basin: the regional security implications of
resource development on the Lancang Jiang’. Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies
Working Paper, no. 69. Nanyang Technological University.
Goh, G. (2003), ‘The ‘‘ASEAN Way’’. Non-intervention and ASEAN’s role in conflict
management’, Stanford Journal of East Asian Affairs, Vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 113118.
Grundy-Warr, C. and Dean, K. (2011), ‘Not peace, not war: the myriad spaces of sovereignty,
peace and conflict in Myanmar/Burma’, in S. Kirsch and C. Flint, eds., Reconstructing
Conflict: Integrating War and Post-War Geographies. Farnham: Ashgate, pp. 91114.
Haacke, J. (2008), ‘ASEAN and political change in Myanmar: towards a regional initiative?’,
Contemporary Southeast Asia: a Journal of International and Strategic Affairs, Vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 351378.
Hesengerth, O. (2009), ‘Transboundary river cooperation and the regional public good: the
case of the Mekong river’, Contemporary Southeast Asia: a Journal of International and
Strategic Affairs, Vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 326349.
Ho, B. (2011), ‘ASEAN centrality: year of big power transitions’. RSIS Commentaries no. 28,
Nanyang Technological University.
Holmes, J.R. and Yoshihara, T. (2008), ‘China’s naval ambition in the Indian Ocean’, Journal
of Strategic Studies, Vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 367394.
Islam, M.S. (2009), ‘Energy cooperation between India and Bangladesh: Economics and
geopolitics’, in M. Lall, ed., The Geopolitics of Energy in South Asia. Singapore: Institute of
South Asian Studies and Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 123151.
Kaplan, R.D. (2009), ‘Centre stage for the twenty-first century’, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 88, no. 2,
pp. 1632.
Kasutama, H. (2009), ‘ASEAN and human rights: resisting Western pressure or emulating the
West?’, The Pacific Review, Vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 619637.
Khurana, G.S. (2008), ‘ChinaIndia maritime rivalry’, Indian Defence Review, Vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 16.
Laksmana, E.A. (2011), ‘Defence diplomacy in Southeast Asia: trends, prospects and
challenges’, in B. Singh and S.S. Tan, eds., From ‘Boots’ to ‘Brogues’: the Rise of Defence
Diplomacy in Southeast Asia. RSIS/IDSS Monograph Series, pp. 7189.
Lall, M. (2008), ‘IndiaMyanmar relations  geopolitics and energy in the light of the
new balance of power in Asia’. Singapore: Institute of South Asian Studies Working Paper
no. 29, National University of Singapore.
Lall, M. ed., (2009), The Geopolitics of Energy in South Asia. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies.
Leifer, M. (1996), The ASEAN Regional Forum. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lintner, B. (2012), ‘The limits of reform in Myanmar’, Asia Times Online, 18 January.
McPherson, K. (1993), The Indian Ocean: a History of People and the Sea. New Delhi: South
Asian Publishers.
Mehta, S. and Admiral, (2007), Freedom to Use the Seas: India’s Maritime Military Security.
New Delhi: Integrated Headquarters, Ministry of Defence (Navy).
Middleton, C. (2012), ‘Thai foreign direct investment in the Xayaburi Dam in Lao
PDR and its implications for human security and international cooperation’, Asian Survey,
forthcoming.
Middleton, C., Garcia, J. and Foran, T. (2009), ‘Old and new hydropower players in the
Mekong region: agendas and strategies’, in F. Molle, T. Foran and M. Käkören, eds.,
Contested Waterscapes in the Mekong Region: Hydropower, Livelihoods and Governance.
London: Earthscan, pp. 2345.

70

S. Lin and C. Grundy-Warr

Middleton, C., Grundy-Warr, C. and Yong, M. (2012) ‘Carving up the commons: the
hydropolitics of mainstream dams on the Mekong River’. Presented talk, Environmental
Cluster, National University of Singapore, 8 March 2012.
Mohan, C.R. (2011), ‘Contemporary strategic environment of the Indian Ocean Region: an
overview’, in S. Bateman, J. Chan and E. Graham, eds., ASEAN and the Indian Ocean: The
Key Maritime Links. RSIS Policy Paper, November 2011. Singapore: S. Rajaratnam School
of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, pp. 1923.
Molle, F., Foran, T. and Käkören, M. eds., (2009), Contested Waterscapes in the Mekong
Region: Hydropower, Livelihoods and Governance. London: Earthscan.
Roberts, C.B. (2006), ‘Myanmar and the argument for engagement: a clash of contending
moralities?’ Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies Working Paper, no. 108, Nanyang
Technological University.
Roberts, C.B. (2012), ASEAN Regionalism: Cooperation, Values and Institutionalization.
London: Routledge.
Rüland, J. (2011), ‘Southeast Asian regionalism and global governance: ‘‘Multilateral utility’’
or ‘‘hedging utility’’?’, Contemporary Southeast Asia: a Journal of International and
Strategic Affairs, Vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 83112.
Rumley, D. (1999), ‘Geopolitical change and the Asia-Pacific: the future of new regionalism’,
Geopolitics, Vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 8397.
Rumley, D. (2008), ‘Securitizing the Indian Ocean Region: concrete entity and geopolitical
imaginations’, in T. Doyle and M. Risely, eds., Crucible for Survival: Environmental Security
and Justice in the Indian Ocean Region. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
pp. 2543.
Rumley, D. and Chaturvedi, S. eds., (2004), Geopolitical Orientations, Regionalism and Security
in the Indian Ocean. New Delhi: South Asian Publishers.
Rumley, D. and Chaturvedi, S. eds., (2005), Energy Security and the Indian Ocean Region.
New Delhi: South Asian Publishers.
Schofield, C. (2011), ‘The delimitation of maritime boundaries: an incomplete mosaic’, in
D. Wastl-Walter, ed., The Ashgate Research Companion to Border Studies. Farnham:
Ashgate, pp. 665681.
Sinha, T. (2009), ‘ChinaMyanmar energy engagements: challenges and opportunities for
India’, Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies Issue Brief no. 134. New Delhi: Southeast
Asia Research Programme.
South, A. (2008), Ethnic Politics in Burma: States of Conflict. London: Routledge.
Strachan, A.L., Kang, K.K. and Sinha, T. (2009), ‘India’s look East policy: a critical
assessment. Interview with Ambassador Rajiv Sikri’. New Delhi: Southeast Asian Research
Programme, Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies.
van Schendel, W. (2005), ‘Geographies of knowing, geographies of ignorance: jumping scale in
Southeast Asia’, in P.H. Kratoska, R. Raben and H.S. Nordholt, eds., Locating Southeast
Asia: Geographies of Knowledge and Politics of Space. Singapore: Singapore University
Press, pp. 275308.
Velloor, R. (2010), ‘Next big port of call: Nicobar’, The Straits Times, 8 September, p. A14.
Wolters, O.W. (1999), History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives, rev. ed.
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Yong, M.L. and Grundy-Warr, C. (2012), ‘Tangled nets of discourse and turbines
of development: Lower Mekong mainstream dam debates’, Third World Quarterly,
forthcoming.
Yu, X. (2003), ‘Regional cooperation and energy development in the Greater Mekong Subregion’, Energy Policy, Vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 12211234.

