International Journal of China Studies

ISSN:

2180-3250

Publisher: Institute of China Studies, University of Malaya
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
The International Journal of China Studies is a triannual academic journal
focusing on contemporary China in issues pertaining to the fields of political,
social and economic development, trade and commerce, foreign relations,
regional security and other domains of the social sciences in the context of,
more specifically, today’s Mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong or Macau.
The journal is abstracted/indexed in Scopus, International Political Science
Abstracts, International Bibliography of the Social Sciences, Bibliography
of Asian Studies, EconLit, eJEL, JEL on CD, Ulrich’s Periodicals Directory,
Ulrichsweb Global Serials Directory, Reference Corporation’s Asia-Pacific
Database, ProQuest Political Science and Research Library, ABI/INFORM
Complete, ABI/INFORM Global, PAIS (Public Affairs Information Service)
International, CSA (formerly Cambridge Scientific Abstracts) Worldwide
Political Science Abstracts and NLB’s ISI (Index to Singapore Information).

International Journal of China Studies

Title:

Website: http://ics.um.edu.my/?modul=IJCS

For further information, please write to ijchinastudies@gmail.com

IJCS 8-3 cover.indd 1

Volume 8, Number 3, December 2017

Manuscripts for consideration and editorial communication should be sent to:
The Editorial Manager
International Journal of China Studies
Institute of China Studies
University of Malaya
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Tel: +(603) 79565663
Fax: +(603) 79565114

International Journal of
China Studies
Volume 8

Number 3

December 2017

ISSN 2180-3250

Research Articles
Brothers in Trouble: China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes
and Their Bilateral Approach to Conflict Management
Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

287

“Sea of Cooperation” or “Sea of Conflict”?:
The South China Sea in the Context of
China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation
Lai Yew Meng

321

The 12 July 2016 Permanent Court of Arbitration’s (PCA)
Award: The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik
in the South China Sea Dispute
Renato Cruz De Castro

347

The South China Sea Conundrum: China’s Strategic Culture
and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches
Benny Teh Cheng Guan

373

Geopolitics, Real and Imagined Spaces: China and
Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia
Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

397

Book Review
Ghulam Ali, China-Pakistan Relations: A Historical Analysis
Reviewed by Pervaiz Ali Mahesar

425

29/12/2017 9:29:48 PM

International Journal of China Studies
Notes for Contributors
Submission Notes
1.

Manuscripts submitted for publication in the International Journal of China Studies
should focus on contemporary China and her relations with other countries and regions,
in the context of regional and global development, and more specifically, issues related
to the political, social and economic development, trade and commerce, foreign
relations, regional security and science, medical and technological development of
contemporary Mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau.
2. A manuscript submitted should be an original, unpublished work not under consideration
for publication elsewhere.
3. All manuscripts under consideration for publication will be refereed via a double blind
reviewing process.
4. The contents of a published article in the International Journal of China Studies reflect
the view of the author or authors and not that of the editors of the journal or the Institute
of China Studies, University of Malaya.
5. The editors of the journal do not accept responsibility for damage or loss of manuscripts
submitted.
6. Manuscripts submitted should be written in English with Microsoft Word in Times New
Roman font, size 12 and with 1.5 line spacing, and should not exceed forty pages (or
in the case of a book review, not exceeding three pages) inclusive of tables, charts and
diagrams, notes, list of references, and appendices. A short note on the author, including
name, academic title and highest qualification (e.g., professor, senior lecturer, PhD,
MSc, etc.), institutional affiliation, full postal address and institutional e-mail address,
and telephone and facsimile numbers should be included. In the multi-author case, the
corresponding author should be identified. An abstract of 100 to 250 words and a list
of three to five keywords should also be given.
7. Copyrights of accepted manuscripts will be transferred to the International Journal of
China Studies.
8. Authors must obtain permission to reproduce all materials of which the copyright is
owned by others, including tables, charts, diagrams and maps, and extensive quoting
should be avoided.
9. Book review submitted should focus on new or recent publications, and the book title,
author, city/publisher, year of publication and total number of pages should be shown
above the review.
10. Manuscripts and book reviews should be sent by e-mail to chinastudies@um.edu.my and
ijchinastudies@gmail.com, addressed to the Editorial Manager, International Journal of
China Studies, Institute of China Studies, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

Stylesheet
1.
2.
3.

Check carefully grammar and spelling before submitting the article.
Use British English, but alternate –ize spelling is permissible. Also note that a billion
= 1,000,000,000 and a trillion = 1,000,000,000,000.
Make headings and subheadings identifiable, and try to avoid sub-subheadings.
(continued inside back cover …)

IJCS 8-3 cover.indd 2

(… continued from inside front cover)
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

A list of references should be compiled, and notes should be placed under a “Notes”
heading. Notes and the list of references should be placed at the end of the article.
Use full point for decimal and commas for numbers 1,000 and above. A zero must
always precede decimals less than 1.
Use “per cent”, not “%”, except in tables and charts.
For dates, use day-month-year format (e.g., 1st January 2010), and spell out the months
to avoid ambiguity.
Do not use apostrophes for decades (e.g., 1990s, not 1990’s or ’90).
For short phrasal quotations, full points and commas fall outside a closing quotation
mark. However, where the quote is a complete sentence, the full point falls inside the
closing quotation mark.
Long quotations, if unavoidable, should be indented, using no quotation marks. The
author should take note of the copyright implications of long quotations.
Use unspaced hyphens, not dashes, in pages and year spans, and write all page numbers
and years in full (e.g., 245-246; 1997-1998).
Use British “open” style for abbreviations, with no full points in the following: Dr, PhD,
Ltd, Mr, Mrs, US, EU, m, km, kg, ft, eds, vols, nos, but retain full points in ed., vol.,
no., p., pp., i.e., viz., e.g., etc., ff., et al., ibid., op. cit..
Use full capitals only for abbreviated names: UN, EU, USA. Only capitalize the first
word and important words (verbs, nouns, pronouns, adjectives and adverbs, but not
definite and indefinite articles, prepositions and conjunctions) in headings and book
titles. Use “State” (except in quotations if the original is not so capitalized) to refer to
the central body politic of a civil government and “state” to refer to other senses of the
term, including a country or a political territory forming part of a country (except when
the term begins a sentence).
A non-English term or word should be italicized but the s-ending (if added) in its
anglicized plural form should not be italicized, but note that names of institutions,
organizations and movements, local or foreign, and names of currencies, local or
foreign, should not be italicized. Quotations from books or direct speech in a nonEnglish language and set in quotation marks (followed by an English translation in
square brackets) should not be italicized. Quotations translated by the author of the
manuscript into English should be so indicated.
Use the APA/ACS style for in-text citation with list of references at end of text, with
commas, e.g., (Lin, 1998: 24), for in-text citation, and in list of references: Shleifer, A
and R. Vishny (1994), “Politicians and Firms”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
109, pp. 995-1025; Steiner, Jürg (1974), Amicable Agreement versus Majority Rule:
Conflict Resolution in Switzerland, rev. ed., Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press; Moscovici, Serge (1985), “Innovation and Minority Influence”, in Serge Moscovici, Gabriel Mugny and Eddy van Avermaet (eds), Perspectives on Minority Influence,
Paris: Maison des Sciences de l’Homme and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 9-51. The title of a book or article etc. in a non-English language should be shown
in the original language or its Roman transliteration and followed by a translation into
English in square brackets. Note that the title of a book or journal which is in italics in
the original language or its Roman transliteration should not be italicized in the English
translation unless an English translation of the book or journal has been published.
Typeset by Ivan Foo Ah Hiang
Printed by University of Malaya Press
University of Malaya, Lembah Pantai
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

29/12/2017 9:29:48 PM

International Journal of China Studies

Chairman
Danny WONG Tze Ken, Universiti Malaya
Editor-in-Chief
NGEOW Chow Bing, Universiti Malaya
Editors
KUIK Cheng Chwee, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
LING Tek Soon, Universiti Malaya
ZHANG Miao, Universiti Malaya
LI Ran, Universiti Malaya		
FAN Pik Shy, Universiti Malaya
CHANG Thiam Chai, Peter, Universiti Malaya
Editorial Board
Gerald CHAN, University of Auckland
Brantly WOMACK, University of Virginia
Evelyn DEVADASON, Universiti Malaya
Gregor BENTON, Cardiff University
Mark HAYLLAR, City University of Hong Kong
Carlyle THAYER, University of New South Wales
Jonathan BENNEY, Monash University
Michael JAKOBSEN, Copenhagen Business School
David MCMULLEN, Cambridge University
Samuel C.Y. KU, National Sun Yat-Sen University
Shiping HUA, University of Louisville
Suzanne OGDEN, Northeastern University
Wing Thye WOO, University of California-Davis / Jeffrey Cheah Institute
YAN Jirong, Peking University
BO Zhiyue, Victoria University of Wellington
Joseph Y.S. CHENG, City University of Hong Kong
Lowell DITTMER, University of California-Berkeley
THAM Siew Yean, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 1

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

International Journal of China Studies, Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017
© Institute of China Studies
First published in 2017
COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, copied or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher. Under the
Copyright Act 1987, any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this
publication shall be liable to prosecution and claims for damages.
Typeset by Ivan Foo Ah Hiang
Printed by University of Malaya Press
University of Malaya, Lembah Pantai,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

The International Journal of China Studies is a triannual academic journal of
the Institute of China Studies, University of Malaya, Malaysia. The journal is
abstracted/indexed in Scopus, International Political Science Abstracts, International
Bibliography of the Social Sciences, Bibliography of Asian Studies, EconLit, e-JEL,
JEL on CD, Ulrich’s Periodicals Directory, Ulrichsweb Global Serials Directory,
Reference Corporation’s Asia-Pacific Database, ProQuest Political Science and
Research Library, ABI/INFORM Complete, ABI/INFORM Global, PAIS (Public
Affairs Information Service) International, CSA (formerly Cambridge Scientific
Abstracts) Worldwide Political Science Abstracts and NLB’s ISI (Index to Singapore
Information).
Website: http://ics.um.edu.my
Manuscripts for consideration and editorial communication should be sent to:
The Editor, International Journal of China Studies
Institute of China Studies, University of Malaya
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Tel:
+(603) 79565663
Fax:
+(603) 79565114
E-mail: chinastudies@um.edu.my, ijchinastudies@gmail.com
Further editorial communication and acquisition, subscription and other enquiries
could also be sent to:
Miss Susie Ling, IJCS Editorial Manager (E-mail: susielyp@um.edu.my)

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 2

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

International Journal of China Studies
Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017

Contents
Research Articles
Brothers in Trouble: China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes and
Their Bilateral Approach to Conflict Management
Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

287

“Sea of Cooperation” or “Sea of Conflict”?: The South China Sea
in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation
Lai Yew Meng

321

The 12 July 2016 Permanent Court of Arbitration’s (PCA) Award:
The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the
South China Sea Dispute
Renato Cruz De Castro

347

The South China Sea Conundrum: China’s Strategic Culture and
Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches
Benny Teh Cheng Guan

373

Geopolitics, Real and Imagined Spaces: China and Foreign Policy
in the Context of East Asia
Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

397

Book Review
Ghulam Ali, China-Pakistan Relations: A Historical Analysis
Reviewed by Pervaiz Ali Mahesar

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 3

425

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 4

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

Research Articles

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 5

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 6

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

International Journal of China Studies China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes
Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017, pp. 287-319

287

Brothers in Trouble: China-Vietnam Territorial
Disputes and Their Bilateral Approach to
Conflict Management
Mikio Oishi* and Nguyen Minh Quang**
Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Malaysia
Can Tho University, Vietnam

Abstract
In the post-World War II period, China and Vietnam have engaged in a
number of territorial disputes between themselves. They can be categorized
into two groups. The first group consists of disputes over Sino-Vietnamese
borderlands and the Gulf of Tonkin and the second one is concerned with
disputes in the South China Sea (SCS). While the former came to an amicable
end by December 2000, the latter has continued to date with occasional hikes
of tensions and stand-offs. Despite different trajectories that the respective
categories have taken, their management appears to reflect what can be termed
as the “Sino-Vietnamese Way of conflict management”. This paper aims
to identify the basic features of this type of conflict management from the
standpoint of incompatibility management and, through comparison between
the two categories of disputes, find reasons for the different outcomes between
them. Major findings of this study are: First, the mutual trust that had been
forged through fraternity between the two ruling communist parties and
their readiness for mutual accommodation as a result played a crucial role
in the successful settlement of the first category of disputes. Second, three
issues prevent the full functioning of the Sino-Vietnamese Way of conflict
management in the second category of disputes, which are: the exposure
of the management process to nationalistic sentiments of the public; the
existence of several complicating factors; and the division between the proChina and pro-U.S. factions within the Vietnamese leadership. Third, several
mechanisms to manoeuvre around incompatibilities, prevent crisis and reduce
tension have been developed to compensate for the detrimental factors and
appear to have been working fairly well.
Keywords: incompatibility management, mutual trust and accommodation,
inter-party fraternity

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 287

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

288

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

1. Introduction
Since establishing themselves as independent sovereign states in the wake
of World War II, China and Vietnam have been plagued with a number of
territorial disputes against each other due to long and commonly shared
land borders, contested islets and other maritime features, undetermined
sea boundaries, and historical baggage in their own bilateral relations.
These disputes can be grouped into two categories: (1) disputes over SinoVietnamese borderlands and the Gulf of Tonkin; and (2) disputes in the South
China Sea (SCS).
The first category of disputes was brought to an end after the two states
reached the Agreement on Gulf of Tonkin Maritime Boundary Delimitation
in 2000 and completed a joint land border demarcation in December 2008.
These significant achievements of dispute settlement were the results of the
willingness and effort of the two ruling communist parties, whose brotherly
mutual relationship can be considered to have provided stability in the
management of the bilateral disputes. During the long-standing management
processes, the two states actively promoted what may be called a “SinoVietnamese Way of conflict management”, characterized by mutual respect
and accommodation. Its significance lay in jointly taking measures to avoid
escalating tensions while also maintaining and deepening their well-known
“comradely and brotherly friendship”. In doing so, the conflicts were
effectively resolved without resorting to force or third party involvement.
However, recently raised frictions in SCS disputes, where China and
Vietnam claim by far the largest overlapping waters of the sea among the
claiming countries, show that the second category of disputes is much more
complicated and intractable than the first one, rendering itself to be one of
the flashpoints in the Asian-Pacific region. Early tensions spiked in the SCS
when the two countries waged short battles against each other in 1974 and
1988, resulting in China’s control over the whole Paracel Islands and several
strategically important maritime features in the Spratly Islands. Since then,
the bilateral naval tensions had eased for almost two decades (1990–2007).
In recent years, however, the tensions have been on the rise again, especially
since 2010 when the U.S. began to intervene into the affairs of the SCS. The
recent maritime flare-ups between China and Vietnam have damaged the
bilateral ties of the two communist neighbours to a considerable degree. Thus,
two significant questions can be asked: Why was the Sino-Vietnamese joint
approach able to reduce tensions and contribute to resolving the disputes in
the first category, but not sufficiently in the second? How has this difference
in outcomes arisen?
What is interesting about the management of the second category
in particular is the fact that despite stand-offs, protests and incompatible

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 288

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

289

positions between China and Vietnam, their inter-party relations have
remained unbroken, marked among others by Secretary-General of the
Communist Party and President of the People’s Republic of China Xi
Jinping’s state visit to Hanoi in August 2015. This was an occasion when the
two state leaders reached a wide consensus on reinforcing their traditional
“lips and teeth” relations, and reiterated that the futures of the two countries
were highly intertwined under the socialist cause (Xinhua News, 2015). On
the other hand, recent developments such as the deepening U.S.–Vietnam
relationship (Vuving, 2015), the 2014 Haiyang Shiyou 981 incident,1 China’s
land reclamation activities in the waters of the Spratly Islands since early
2014, and alleged militarization of the SCS (Gady, 2016) reflect that relations
between Beijing and Hanoi have become more complicated and ambiguous
these days. In this respect, a few more specific questions about the second
category of the bilateral disputes are due: How have China and Vietnam been
responding to the on-going disputes in the SCS, which are fraught with the
above-mentioned tensions and challenges? To what degree have their efforts
to manage the SCS disputes been successful or unsuccessful and why? Does
the traditional fraternal relationship between the two ruling communist parties
play a part in the management efforts?
This paper aims to identify and assess the Sino-Vietnamese joint approach
to manage territorial disputes between the two countries. It first sets up an
analytical framework, which enables us to look at the management of the
two categories of the bilateral disputes from the standpoint of incompatibility
management and to assess the effectiveness of management efforts. The
paper then investigates the management of the first category with a view
to clarifying the Sino-Vietnamese Way of conflict management. Lastly, it
assesses the bilateral management of the SCS disputes in comparison with
that of the first category disputes.
2. Analytical Framework: Incompatibility Management
Incompatibilities appear typically in a clash between positions or goals
that conflicting parties take or pursue, and constitute the core of conflict.
Therefore, in the field of conflict management, it is essential to identify
incompatibilities in the conflict concerned and examine and assess the
different ways in which they are addressed. Theoretically, incompatibilities
can be handled in one of the following manners or in their combination.
2.1. Eliminating a Conflict Party as the Carrier of Contradictions
Incompatibilities may be dissolved by eliminating a conflict party as their
carrier. The positions or the goals of the eliminated party disappear together

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 289

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

290

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

with the party. As a result, the remaining party is free to impose its own
terms on the “disarmed” or “disbanded” constituency of the defunct one
(Oishi, 2011: 101). This strategy is adopted typically by the state actors such
as security forces against the non-state opposition or insurgent movements.
However, to the degree to which the root causes of the incompatibilities are
not addressed and remain, new conflict parties may emerge.
2.2. Imposing One Party’s Position on the Other
Incompatibilities may be dissolved by a conflict party imposing its own terms
on the other through open or subtle coercion, manipulation or deception.
Coercion can be peaceful or non-peaceful. The latter type is easier to
identify than the former, as can be observed when a conflict party resorts to
physical force to impose its own will on the other. The same result may be
acquired through the use of threat. On the other hand, economic sanctions
can be regarded as a peaceful coercion, as it usually involves non-physical
means. There is a moral coercion when a sense of guilty or moral burden is
invoked in the opponents, who are hereby forced to behave contrary to their
own will, as was successfully effected by the civil disobedience movement
led by Mahatma Gandhi in pre-independent India (Bennis et al., 1984:
40-41). Coercion in any form aims to dissolve incompatibility by forcing
parties to give up their original positions or goals. Therefore, the resultant
status quo is fundamentally unstable. This is also the case about imposition
through manipulation or deception. Related to this is what may be called
“incompatibility absorption”, where incompatibilities are internalized within
a party or individuals who constitute it. In this case, a potential conflict may
be absorbed by the target party and not manifest itself as such. However, there
is always the risk that the imposed or manipulated party realize these tactics
to the rejection of such a game.
2.3. Deciding Who Has the Right to Their Position
Incompatibilities may be handled by legal consideration, which may help the
parties to determine who has the right to their position and to what degree. In
international dispute, international law, such as the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and international treaties or agreements
may provide conflict parties with legal basis on which they can proceed in
negotiation. When they cannot settle conflict in this way on their own, they
may seek the decision of an authoritative third party on their behalf, i.e.,
arbitration. Institutions of arbitration such as the International Court of Justice,
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the High Council of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) are available to the state

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 290

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

291

parties, although the last one has never been invoked in ASEAN’s history.
Countries in East Asia, including Southeast Asia, have shown reluctance in
going for international arbitration on the issues of sovereignty. However,
if the conflict concerned does not pose any existential threat to the parties,
they may feel less inhibited to use this measure, as were the cases of Pedra
Branca/Pulau Batu Puteh between Singapore and Malaysia and Sipadan and
Ligitan between Malaysia and Indonesia (Caballero-Anthony, 2005: 271).2
In arbitration, incompatibilities are dissolved or suppressed depending on
whether the losing party accepts the verdict sincerely or with reluctance. The
stronger the reluctance, the more likely they are suppressed, resulting in an
unstable status-quo.
2.4. Turning Clashing Positions into New Ones that are Mutually 		
Compatible or are More Manageable while Incompatibilities Remain
Incompatibilities may be dissolved by turning mutually clashing positions
of the parties into ones that are compatible to each other. This result can be
achieved at least in two ways. Firstly, positions may be adjusted through
bargaining so that no clash may take place between the parties any longer.
In this case, some portion of each party’s position is given up voluntarily
through mutual concession or accommodation. Or the parties may concede
to their counterparts, “sometimes with compensations by linkage to other
issues” (Ramsbotham et al., 2005: 175). In this way, incompatibilities may be
dissolved but, depending on the extent to which the new positions fail to fully
satisfy the interests of the parties, the incompatibilities may be suppressed,
making the resulting status quo less stable. Secondly, original positions of the
parties may be adjusted in such a way that their underlying interests can be
fulfilled to a large extent. This is possible theoretically, as there can be more
than one way to meet the interests of the parties (Fisher and Ury, 1981: 41).
For example, the security of a state party may increase by conceding certain
maritime claims to the other party due to enhanced prospects of economic aid
or investment from the latter as a result.3 What makes the second way distinct
from the first is that the parties delve deeper than their respective positions to
reach and understand other parties’ underlying interests, which are then taken
into account in their interaction. Here, incompatibilities are dissolved through
integration (Ramsbotham et al., 2005: 174-175).
Moreover, it is also possible that clashing positions are changed into new
ones in which incompatibilities still remain or new ones arise although they
may be easier to handle than before or the original ones. This approach may
be realistic from the standpoint of “conflict transformation” (Miall, 2004:
9-10), which regard conflict not as something negative to be shunned or
brought to an end soonest, but as an opportunity for social change through

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 291

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

292

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

transformation at the personal, group, issue, actor, structural and contextual
levels (Ramsbotham et al., 2005: 163-164). In a best case scenario, conflict
may be turned into a “social learning” process (Fiorino, 2001: 328-330)
through incompatibility management.
2.5. Manoeuvring around Incompatibilities or Setting Them Aside and 		
Waiting for Their Change
Incompatibilities may be manoeuvred around or simply set aside by the
parties, who may expect them to change or, better still, disappear in due
time. This approach to incompatibility management is viable if there exists
the capacity in conflict situation to absorb tensions or shocks arising from
the incompatibilities, hereby forestalling a potential crisis. Such a capacity
may serve as a buffer between incompatible positions and can be found
functioning, among others, within ASEAN as a mechanism of conflict
management. When its member states respond differently to external impacts
or shocks, exemplified by China’s unilateral land reclamation activities or the
U.S. Freedom of Navigation Operations both in the waters of the Spratlys in
recent years, these impacts and shocks tend to dissipate in ASEAN’s imagined
buffer space (Oishi, 2016: 170, 175).
3. First Category of Sino-Vietnamese Disputes and Their Settlement
With an analytical framework having been established, the paper investigates
the Sino-Vietnamese bilateral disputes and their management. The first to be
looked at is the first category of the disputes, i.e., the borderland dispute and
the Gulf of Tonkin dispute, which came to an end with full settlement. These
case studies aim to reveal the fundamental characteristics of what may be
called the “Sino-Vietnamese Way of conflict management”.
3.1. Borderland Dispute and Management
Prior to the full normalization between China and Vietnam in November
1991, territorial issues had been significant sources of tension in their bilateral
relations. During the 1980s, several armed clashes occurred in the contested
areas while bilateral negotiations repeatedly failed to find any solution
to address the conflict (BBC/Vietnamese, 2013; Amer, 2002: 6). Major
incompatibilities that contributed to their land-border disputes were:
(1)		 Overlapping territorial claims;
(2)		 A contention for the right to control strategically important areas; and
(3)		The problem of local communities, Chinese or Vietnamese, across the
borderline.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 292

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

293

These issues and incompatibilities are elaborated and the manners they were
addressed are discussed below.
3.1.1. Overlapping Territorial Claims
During the French colonial time in Vietnam, the French colonial government
and the Chinese government of the Qing Dynasty signed Conventions in 1887
and 1895 respectively, delimitating the Sino-Vietnamese land borderline.
However, during the de-colonisation period and later in the Vietnam War,
accidents and developments coupled with natural disasters led to altering the
status quo since most of the land markers were either removed or destroyed.
As a result, many areas along the borders were subject to dispute. These
disputes continued unabated and became more problematic when China
launched a border war with Vietnam in February-March 1979, which left
some strategic locations of the Vietnamese territory under China’s control
(Truc, 2015; Amer, 2002: 2-3). To justify their own respective claims, both
Beijing and Hanoi mostly resorted to historical evidence, including interpretations of legal documents produced during the pre-colonial era, which
tended to contradict with each other. Furthermore, this type of incompatibility
was highly charged with national pride and ethnic hostility, making it quite
difficult and complicated for the disputants to deal with.
However, after many years of a negotiation process without any agreement in the 1970s and 1980s, the Sino-Vietnamese approach to managing the
dispute had been changed altogether since the renormalization of 1991. For
a start, Beijing and Hanoi established joint working groups to discuss their
border dispute. Despite unexpected tensions and stand-offs that sporadically
occurred in the SCS, bilateral talks at both expert level and highest political
level were regularly held in Hanoi and Beijing respectively.4 In August 1993,
at the third round of bilateral talks and also the first government-level talk in
Beijing the two states reached a “general understanding and consensus” on
fundamental principles for handling their existing territorial dispute, except
for the ones in the SCS. Following this significant achievement, an Agreement
on Basic Principles for the Settlement of Border Territory Issues between
the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the People’s Republic of China was
signed in October 1993, emphasizing the necessity to settle the issues through
peaceful negotiations, moderate manners and avoidance of using force and
coercion (BBC/Vietnamese, 2013; Amer, 2002: 9-11). Also, it paved the way
for the following rounds of talks (both expert- and governmental-levels) and
created a major legal basis for negotiation. That is, the two states unanimously
recognized the legal effects of the two Conventions of 1887 and 1895, agreed
to rely upon them and adopted additional legal and technical documents to redefine their land borderline (BBC/Vietnamese, 2013; Truc, 2015). This meant

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 293

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

294

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

that any documents related to Sino-Vietnamese borderland published prior to
year 1993 would be “invalid” as a basis for settling the dispute unless they
were integral parts of the Conventions. Obviously, these arrangements in the
negotiation process were practically necessary and did matter in addressing
the existing dispute, as they enabled China and Vietnam to eliminate
sources of incompatibility which had the potential to further complicate the
situation. This is because each side might have easily produced historical and
geographical evidence to justify its own claims over the disputed areas. Thus,
as long as the claimants could not reach a consensus on limiting historical
and legal bases and eliminating unnecessary sources of incompatibility, their
dispute certainly would have remained intractable.
Another important factor that contributed to settling the overlapping
territorial claims was the agreement in July 1997 between Secretaries-General
of the Communist Party of China and the Communist Party of Vietnam
to fully settle the land border dispute and the Gulf of Tonkin dispute not
later than 2000.5 This agreement significantly boosted the commitment of
negotiators from both sides to completing the delimitation by the deadline
with a sense of urgency (Phung, 2016; Truc, 2016). As such, the post-1997
negotiation processes resulted in the signing of the Treaty of Land Border
between China and Vietnam in December 1999 in Hanoi. This treaty
accelerated the demarcation process, as it laid down the practical principles
to determine border lines that would be planted with border markers. Also,
as prescribed in the treaty, they established a Joint Commission on Land
Border Demarcation right after the treaty took effect in June 2000. Adhering
to the articles of the treaty and its attendant map and protocols,6 in December
2001, the joint commission proceeded to work out the border demarcation
and land markers plantation, which were completed in August 2008. Thus,
China and Vietnam successfully determined a new borderline through mutual
accommodation by narrowing the gap between their conflicting claims.
3.1.2. A Contention for the Right to Control the Strategically Important Areas
The second incompatibility arose from access to the militarily important
areas alongside the Sino-Vietnamese borderland, most of which were under
China’s control after the 1979 border war. The strategic significance of these
disputed sites, Ban Gioc/Detain Falls and Huu Nghi Quan/Youyi Guan among
others, lay more in what they meant or symbolized than in how much area
they covered. For Vietnam, given its complex history heavily influenced
by China, Hanoi did not want to renounce these disputed areas, which had
been extremely important outposts to deter invasions from its formidable
neighbour to the north during its course of history. For China, the same
locations were beneficial to itself in military and economic terms, since they

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 294

29/12/2017 9:22:11 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

295

were China’s ace in the hole against Vietnam during periods of hostility while
generating great economic revenues from tourism and cross-border trade with
Vietnam in post-war reconstruction and development. This contention for
the sovereign ownership over the sensitive areas had resulted in a number of
armed incidents after the 1979 border war and raised the stakes for the two
neighbours, further complicating and protracting the dispute (Chanda, 1986:
10; O’Dowd, 2007: 97-100).
However, the 1993 Agreement and the 1999 Treaty served as the basis
for Beijing and Hanoi to handle this challenging issue constructively and for
this purpose the Joint Commission on Land Border Demarcation was able
to establish three principles: First, areas traversing the new borderline or
those belonging to one side as determined by the Sino-French Conventions
but being under the control of the other must be handed over to the rightful
owner without any conditions. Second, militarily strategic elevation points,
i.e. peaks, hills, etc., located right in the boundary must be demilitarized
completely. Third, for the areas where the Sino-French Conventions did not
clearly fixed the boundary, the following factors must be taken into account
to re-define the borderline: the legal basis of the Conventions, historical
management, topography, historical maps, convenience of management, and
international rules and practices. These principles were implemented faithfully
by the joint commission through mutual accommodation between Chinese and
Vietnamese representatives and the ownership issue of strategically important
areas was completely settled by 2008.7
3.1.3. Local Communities Across the Borderline
During the war times (1954-1989), numerous Vietnamese and Chinese
villages, cemeteries, fields and gardens constituting human landscapes were
created beyond each other’s territory. This gave rise to a major problem in the
China-Vietnam demarcation process, making the process much more intricate,
sensitive and time-consuming. The most important principle that they jointly
established to overcome this challenge was what might be called the principle
of “giving for receiving”. Its purpose was to make sure that the delimitation
of the Sino-Vietnamese boundary would be carried out equitably and strictly
while maintaining the status quo of human landscapes and local people’s
livelihood by adjusting and redrawing where applicable the new boundaries
defined by the 1999 Treaty (Truc, 2015). This exercise was completed by
2008 and resulted in mutual concessions in the delimitation exercise.8 The
favourable outcomes indicated that the two parties successfully applied this
principle by granting equal concessions to each other in a spirit of good
neighbourliness, comradery and fraternity, and that Beijing did not impose its
superior position on its neighbour.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 295

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

296

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

3.2. Gulf of Tonkin Dispute and Its Management
With respect to the delimitation in the Gulf of Tonkin, two major formidable
incompatibilities existed between the positions of the two countries: First,
Vietnam’s historic waters defined by the 1887 Sino-French Treaty versus
China’s claim based on newly established baselines. Second, China’s intention
to combine a fishery agreement and maritime delimitation in a package
versus Vietnam’s claim that the fishery agreement should be on the basis of
successful demarcation results.
3.2.1. Vietnam’s Historic Waters versus China’s Claim Based on Newly 		
Established Baselines
Both China and Vietnam adopted straight baselines from which the breadth
of their territorial seas and other maritime zones could be measured.
Nevertheless, their ideas of the baseline were different from each other. In
1996 when China ratified the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), it announced straight baselines that went along its mainland
coast and Hainan Island. However, Vietnam lodged an official protest to
the United Nations about China’s baselines, as the former believed that the
latter’s baselines, connecting four geographic coordinates from Junbi Jiao to
Yingge Zui along the western coast of Hainan Island might affect delimitation
results in the Gulf (US Department of State, 1983; US Department of State,
1996; Zou, 2005: 14-15). Moreover, Vietnam also rejected China’s proposal
to delimitate the Gulf on a 50-50 basis, which would entitle China to the 50%
of its area. Vietnam’s rejection was based on the fact that Vietnam’s coastline
facing the Gulf was considerably longer than that of China and that the former
owned a number of off-shore islands sporadically located in the Gulf (BBC/
Vietnamese, 2013).
Vietnam, for its part, adopted straight baselines in its 1982 Statement on
the Territorial Sea Baseline of Vietnam, which asserted that the Gulf of Tonkin
had been delineated by the 1887 Sino-French Treaty. As such, the waters on
Vietnam’s side “constitutes the historic waters and is subject to the juridical
regime of internal waters” of Vietnam (Zou, 2005). Vietnam’s claim over
historic waters and the delimitation line in the 1887 Treaty were rejected by
China, which claimed its own version of historic waters. Furthermore, China
feared that the Vietnamese claim, if ever applied, would undoubtedly lead
to giving “full effects” to Vietnam’s two most strategic islands in the Gulf
in delimitation. In this scenario, the proposed boundary would be located
eastward much farther away from the currently established boundary, and such
a shift would certainly not benefit China.9

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 296

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

297

The impasse in the delimitation of the Gulf of Tonkin was broken by the
1997 agreement between the Secretaries-General of the ruling communist
parties of both countries – the same agreement that positively impacted the
delimitation process of the land borders. As was mentioned previously, the two
leaders pledged that China and Vietnam would hasten bilateral negotiations
to completely settle the land border issue and finish the demarcation of the
Gulf of Tonkin by the end of 2000. By specifying such a deadline, the two
states displayed their political commitment to achieving a fair and equitable
solution to the Gulf of Tonkin dispute. Here again, the joint “giving for
receiving” approach played a central role, helped by increasing mutual trust
and mediated by the consideration of legal entitlements. The two sides firstly
agreed to discard the 1887 Treaty and then applied the principles stipulated
in the UNCLOS and related international practices, upheld the principle of
equity, and took into consideration all relevant circumstances in the disputed
waters. As the coasts of the two states are opposite and adjacent to each other,
the UNCLOS principle of equidistance was applied to delineate a single line,
also called an “adjusted median line”,10 measuring both the continental shelf
and an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) between opposite and adjacent coasts.
From 1994 to 2000, the Sino-Vietnamese joint working group on the Gulf of
Tonkin met 17 times and their intensive negotiation process led to the signing
of the maritime delimitation agreement on the Gulf of Tonkin in time on 25th
December 2000.
3.2.2. China’s “Package Deal” versus Vietnam’s Focus on Delimitation
The second key issue of the Gulf of Tonkin dispute was access to fishery
resources. For China, the delimitation of the gulf was of direct interest
to hundreds of thousands of Chinese fishermen whose livelihood heavily
depended on maritime resources in it. Thus, from the beginning of the SinoVietnamese negotiation, Beijing stated expressly that boundary delimitation
must be directly linked to fishery cooperation, and that agreements on these
two matters must be signed and entered into force simultaneously. However,
since most of the good fishing grounds were located well within Vietnam’s
EEZ and due to its huge disadvantage on fishing capability vis-à-vis China,
Hanoi disagreed with Beijing’s proposal. The former would not support
any negotiation that might reduce the strategically significant demarcation
issue to largely technical fishery talks. Thus, it wanted to delimitate the
maritime boundary first, and a fishery agreement must be based on successful
demarcation results (Phung, 2001; Zou, 2005).
The incompatible positions of the two states were eventually reconciled
to each other by mutual accommodation. Beijing tacitly accepted Hanoi’s

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 297

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

298

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

demand to set aside the fishery issue while the joint demarcation process,
which had gained momentum since the 1997 agreement, was going on.
Only eight months before the end of 2000 marked as the deadline for the
settlement of the Gulf of Tonkin dispute, as declared in 1997 and reaffirmed
in 1999 by the two parties’ General Secretaries (Phung 2001), Hanoi agreed
to starting the negotiation on fishery cooperation. Thus, on 25 December
2000, both countries successfully signed two agreements on demarcation
and fishery cooperation, creating the appearance of a package deal, which
China had wished (Phung 2001).11 The fishing agreement established three
fishery zones, i.e., the joint fishing zone, transitional fishing zone and buffer
zone (Figure 1).12
Figure 1 Delimitation and Joint Fishing Zones in the Gulf of Tonkin13

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 298

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

299

3.3. The Aftermath of the Settlement of the First Category of Bilateral 		
Disputes and Some Reflections
As has been seen above, China and Vietnam successfully settled the first
category of their bilateral disputes in time, concluding the years-long
bilateral negotiation process and generating new legal orders on each
other’s peripheries. The three main agreements on borderland demarcation,
maritime delimitation in Tonkin Gulf and fishery cooperation were ratified
by their national assemblies a few years later. Since November 2009, three
additional accords for demarcation of borders, installation of border markers
and arrangement of border-gate management have been signed and come
into effect. It is worth observing that the two neighbours, by relying upon
these documents, have established many local-level paramilitary rangers in
association with national border defence and coastguard forces to safeguard the
markers and the maritime boundary. They also further approved agreements on
joint border and naval patrols, joint development areas and other regulations
for fishery cooperation and sustainable exploitation of natural resources in
common border zones. From a standpoint of dispute management, these
additional measures appear to function as an infrastructure for long-term
peace, as they bring more positive prospects of acquiring wealth locally
through strengthened economic ties with each other and joint economic
projects, which eventually turn areas of contention and protest into those of
cooperation and prosperity.
The investigation into the process of settling the first category of SinoVietnamese disputes suggests a distinctive approach to conflict management,
which possesses the following characteristics. Firstly, fraternal relations
between the two communist parties and, by extension, between the two
neighbouring states played a crucial role in incompatibility management.
This special relationship, having been developed during the Vietnam War
and re-activated since 1991, maintained stability in the interaction between
disputing parties, and contributed significantly to preventing disputes from
escalating beyond certain limits. Specifically, it motivated the parties to
reach agreement by deadlines when invoked by the top officials of the ruling
communist parties, facilitated them in determining legal entitlements for
each side, and helped them to learn about the other side’s interests and take
them into account in negotiation. Besides, such a relationship gave additional
incentive for each party to regulate domestic public sentiments, which might
otherwise have negatively impacted the management process with national
pride and ethnic hostility.14
Secondly, incompatibilities in the disputes were dissolved through the
combination of mutual concession, integration and legal consideration. Mutual
concession took place when the disputing parties adopted the principle of

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 299

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

300

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

“giving for receiving” in the delimitation of areas under contention in both
disputes. Elements of integration can be observed, among others, in their
consideration of the underlying needs of the other side in demarcating the
Gulf of Tonkin and establishing the Joint Fishing Zone. The international law,
particularly the UNCLOS, contributed to the stability of negotiation process
by clarifying legal entitlements to each party. It is notable that these exercises
of incompatibility management were embedded firmly in the above-identified
exercises of fraternity between the two ruling communist parties and couched
in joint working groups that were set up for rule and principle making and
border delimitation.
Finally, the first category of disputes remained bilateral to the end. It
happens frequently that bilateral interstate conflict is internationalized by
the weaker party seeking the intervention of a third party to compensate for
the power disparity that the former perceives against the stronger party, as
has been observed typically in disputes between the Philippines and China
in the SCS (Reuters, 2015). Such internationalization did not take place in
the disputes over the Sino-Vietnamese land-border and the Gulf of Tonkin.
Apparently, the weaker party Vietnam did not feel the need to enlist the
support of ASEAN as the prime organisation of the region nor great powers
such as the United States for its own cause. Here, the good conduct of the two
states in these disputes based on mutual confidence, which in turn stems from
the China-Vietnam interparty fraternity, seems to have made void Hanoi’s
need for internationalization.
4. Second Category of Sino-Vietnamese Disputes and Their Management
This paper posits that the fundamental characteristics of managing the first
category of the disputes between China and Vietnam identified in the previous
section suggest the “Sino-Vietnamese Way of conflict management.” Using
this concept as a touch stone, this section looks at the second category of
bilateral disputes between them, i.e., the disputes over the Paracel Islands and
Spratly Islands in the SCS, and examines to what extent the manner in which
they have been managed conform to the Sino-Vietnamese Way.
4.1. Disputes in the SCS: Basics, Chronology and Recent Developments
Geographically, the Paracel and Spratly Islands are located midway between
Vietnam and the Philippines, and are adjacent to one of the world’s most
important sea-lanes in the potentially energy-rich SCS. Owing to their geopolitically strategic position, these island chains and surrounding waters have
been deemed as the “bones of contention” among the littoral states that have
made decades-long rival claims. Mainland China and Taiwan claim most of

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 300

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

301

the SCS, including the two archipelagos, while Vietnam asserts the ownership
of both island groups, and other claimants – the Philippines, Malaysia and
Brunei – contend over parts of the Spratly Islands. These Southeast Asian
states also claim maritime entitlements, i.e., exclusive economic zones and
continental shelves, which overlap with the ones that China and Taiwan
insist on. In the Paracel Islands, which have been claimed by both China
and Vietnam, the status quo has remained since the Chinese forces expelled
a South Vietnamese garrison from the archipelago towards the end of the
Vietnam War. Meanwhile, the situation of the Spratly Islands dispute is
much more complicated and intractable as it involves six disputants whose
overlapping and conflicting claims to sovereign rights cover either the whole
or particular parts of the islands and the waters surrounding them (Oishi,
2016: 159).
The history of the Spratly Islands dispute dates back at least to the 1970s
when these disputants, except for China and Brunei, had already occupied
parts of the archipelago. Confrontations and skirmishes have taken place
among them, notably between China and Vietnam since Beijing established its
late presence in the islands after a battle with the Vietnamese navy in March
1988 and occupied its six features in Johnson South Reef (Chen and Glaser,
2015; Gady, 2016). In 1995, China newly occupied the Mischief Reef claimed
by the Philippines. This incident more or less tarnished Beijing’s image
among the Southeast Asian public and led to strong protests from Manila
and a low-profile response of concern from other ASEAN member states
(Emmers, 2003: 133-134, 136). However, the positive role that China played
in the wake of the 1997 East Asian financial crisis and its “Charm Offensive”
(Kurlantzick, 2007) towards Southeast Asian countries went a long way to
restore and even enhance its image in the region. These developments brought
about a considerable degree of stability in the SCS, facilitating the signing of
the Declaration on the Conduct of the Parties in the South China Sea (DOC)
in 2001 by China and all the member states of ASEAN. This document has
so far served as a de facto code of conduct in the SCS until a legally-binding
code to be established in the future.
However, since the late 2000s, the SCS has become turbulent again. In
May 2009, Vietnam and Malaysia made a joint submission concerning the
outer limits of continental shelf beyond their own respective 200-nm EEZs
in the southern part of the SCS to the United Nations Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf, publicly challenging China’s sovereignty
claims (Parameswaran, 2015: 7; Quang, 2017). Then came U.S. Secretary
of State Hilary Clinton’s statement in Hanoi in July 2010, declaring that the
U.S. had an interest in the free passage of vessels and airplanes in and over
the SCS. This statement, widely considered as a declaration of the U.S. “pivot
to Asia”, not only infuriated China but also emboldened the regional parties

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 301

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

302

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

to the dispute, especially the Philippines and Vietnam, triggering a series of
stand-offs and confrontations involving fishing, surveying and government
ships or oil rigs from these countries and China (Oishi, 2016: 171-172).
Particularly noteworthy developments in the SCS in recent years are China’s
hectic land reclamation activities on its seven occupied maritime features in
the Spratlys started in early 2014, Freedom of Navigation Operations by U.S.
navy to challenge China’s “excessive” claim of territorial waters surrounding
the reclaimed sites and the Philippines’ submission against China regarding its
“U-shape line” to the Arbitral Tribunal at The Hague in March 2014, followed
by the tribunal’s ruling in favour of the former in July 2016, and the latter’s
firm rejection thereof (Ku et al., 2016; The State Council, 2016; Pham, T.N.,
2016). These provocative moves and new developments have given rise to a
highly volatile situation in the internationalized SCS dispute, where tensions
among the parties involved, including those that are non-claimants, are likely
to increase with evolving dynamics and growing security concerns.
4.2. Issues of the SCS Disputes between China and Vietnam
With the historical background and current situation of the SCS disputes
having been outlined, the paper focuses on the bilateral disputes between
China and Vietnam, which are composed of rival claims over the Paracel and
Spratly Islands and overlapping maritime jurisdictional zones that both states
have established in the SCS. These disputes are examined in terms of the
following contentious issues: (1) overlapping historical titles, (2) disagreement
as to which disputes should be subject to negotiation, (3) differences in
applying international law, (4) mutually clashing national interests, and (5)
different approaches to dispute settlement. Each of these issues contains
incompatibilities shared between the two states. They are extracted for
investigation so that the manner in which they have been handled may be
understood and the prospects of effectively managing them in the future may
be discussed.
4.2.1. Overlapping Historical Titles
China and Vietnam have been heavily relying on historical titles to legitimize
their own uncompromising postures on the SCS disputes. Both countries
publicly affirm that their historical documents and evidence indicate that
islands in the SCS have been part of their respective territories far prior to the
arrival of Western colonisers. Thus, in the past decades the two neighbours
have sought to persuade the international community that they are the first to
have discovered these island chains, and that they have since then established

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 302

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

303

and maintained sovereignty over them and adjacent waters (Shen, 2002: 102;
China Daily, 2016).
Beijing believes that Chinese ancestors discovered the island chains
and had administered them for over two thousand years prior to other
peoples. It is confident that Chinese historical documents and evidence are
valid and fit perfectly with such legal methods of acquiring state territory
as discovery, occupation, prescription and conquest (Hao, 2011). As China
discovered the no-man’s lands of Xisha (Paracels) and Nansha (Spratlys),
and had maintained continuous and effective occupation after discovery, it
deserves the right to hold sovereignty over these islands. However, during the
Cold War, China failed to safeguard its overall rights of the SCS due to the
constant containment by Western countries. As a result, its islands and reefs
were illegally occupied by neighbouring countries (Shen, 2002; Hao, 2011).
On the other hand, Hanoi’s claims are based on documents of Vietnamese
feudal dynasties and original maps produced by European countries during
the colonial period, which affirm that Hoang Sa (Paracels) and Truong Sa
(Spratlys) were part of the Dang Trong (the present-day Southern Vietnam)
and depict that China’s south-eastern frontier ends at the Hainan Island. Hanoi
further argues that China began to claim sovereignty over the SCS as late as
1947 when the Republic of China under the Nationalist Party issued a “Map
of Locations of the South Sea Islands”, giving names to a number of reefs
and shoals, including islands that Vietnam claims, followed by the Beijing
government’s use of force to seize islands of Hoang Sa in 1956 and 1974,
and occupied several features in Truong Sa in 1988 (Vu, 2014; Vietnam News
Agency, 2014a, 2014b).
Thus, the two claimants have been engaged in what may be called a
“historical evidence race” by trying to provide historical facts and interpret
them in favour of their own respective claims while at the same time
searching for further evidence (Erickson and Bond, 2015). This type of
difference is quite difficult to dissolve since it is generated from the mutually
incompatible historical perspectives and highly charged with national pride
and popular sentiments, despite the fact that the two states successfully settled
the first category of their bilateral disputes, where historical incompatibilities
were equally prominent.
4.2.2. Disagreement as to Which Disputes Should be Subjected to 			
Negotiation
The difference on historical understanding and interpretation has led both
sides to divergent and incompatible positions as to which disputed areas
should be considered as valid for their bilateral negotiations. Hanoi pushes

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 303

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

304

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

for the inclusion of the Paracels as an issue alongside the Spratlys, as it
claims that both groups of islands were illegally invaded by China several
times. However, Beijing wants to discuss only the latter islands, as it has
maintained an effective control over the former. To further complicate the
matter, China apparently regards the dispute over maritime jurisdiction, i.e.,
exclusive economic zones and continental shelves, as part of the Spratly
dispute, whereas Vietnam intends to settle the ownership of the two groups of
islands before proceeding to deal with maritime jurisdiction. This is because
Vietnam fears that initiating talks relating to maritime jurisdiction could
be interpreted as giving legitimacy to China’s claim over the island chains,
especially the Paracels, when deciding the baselines of maritime entitlements
(Amer and Jianwei, 2013). This situation stands as a non-starter for bilateral
negotiation over maritime demarcation, which is a major substantive issue
of the dispute.
4.2.3. Differences in Applying International Law
Both China and Vietnam have resorted to international law to justify their own
mutually contradicting claims. This has resulted in different interpretations
of international principles regarding acquisition of territory, diplomatic
documents and international law on the sea (Hayton, 2015; Hao, 2011: 3-5).
For instance, Vietnam takes the stand that no features of Paracel and Spratly
Islands are regarded as “islands” as defined in Article 121 of the UNCLOS,
which would generate EEZs and continental shelves, and that waters around
these features should be limited to territorial waters of 12 nautical miles.
China disagrees, insisting that its occupied features definitely meet the
definition of “islands” (Valencia et al., 1997: 20-24; China Daily, 2016).
Another legal incompatibility between the two disputants arises from
China’s claim of the sea zone within the “U-shape line”, which cuts deeply
into Vietnam’s 200 nautical mile EEZs and continental shelves. This overlap
has long become the area of bilateral contention as maritime agencies of the
two states intensify what they consider as the exercise of sovereign rights
that the international law entitles them to. However, Beijing appears to be
gradually changing its interpretation of the U-shape line, and there have been
already some encouraging signs of re-framing of its claims over the SCS
recently (Oishi, 2016: 169-170). This probably opens up a positive prospect
that through a discursive interaction between China and Vietnam, a mutual
accommodation may take place between them, although the recent ruling
issued by the International Arbitral Tribunal and rejecting China’s claims
in the SCS (Davenport, 2016) may intensify the complexity of this type of
incompatibility.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 304

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

305

4.2.4. Mutually Clashing National Interests
The rival claims, disagreements and differences contained in the issues discussed above have boiled down to clashing national interests between China
and Vietnam (Fravel, 2011: 296; Hao, 2011: 7). Currently, the most prominent
among them are the clashes over: (1) access to fishing and hydrocarbon
resources, and (2) the control of shipping lanes connecting each state’s
mainland and occupied maritime features in the SCS.
Firstly, as was discussed earlier, China and Vietnam have not agreed
on sovereign and jurisdictional rights over the SCS. This disagreement has
fuelled a series of confrontations involving fishing, surveying and government
ships or oil rigs from both sides (Dien, 2015; Blanchard et al., 2015). Vietnam
consistently claims that the waters east of its coast claimed by China are part
of its EEZ pursuant to the 1982 UNCLOS and the disputed waters adjacent
to the Paracels and Spratlys are the Vietnamese fishermen’s traditional fishing
grounds. Meanwhile, China insists that those waters are either part of China’s
“historical waters”, which naturally contains “historical rights” including the
rights to exploit fishing and non-living resources, or EEZs generated by its
occupied maritime features in the two archipelagos.
As a result, policies launched by Hanoi and Beijing regarding living and
non-living resources management and development in the SCS are generating
frictions as they perceive the policy of the other side as infringing on their own
economic interests. For instance, the annual two-month fishing moratorium
in the whole SCS, imposed unilaterally by China, threatens Vietnamese
fishermen with fines, confiscations and possible criminal charges which
Vietnam strictly protests thereof (Fravel, 2011; Nguyen et al., 2015). China,
on the other hand, resolutely opposes Vietnam’s petrol and gas exploration
activities in the resource-rich disputed areas, which often results in their ships
colliding with each other for days (Tuoi Tre News, 2012; AFP, 2014).
Secondly, China’s military presence in its newly reclaimed islands has
disrupted Vietnam’s shipping lanes connecting its mainland and Vietnamoccupied land features in the Spratly Islands. In response to China’s alleged
militarization of its artificial islands and to secure its vital routes, Vietnam
is believed to have fortified its major occupied islands in the Spratlys with
modern military assets, including new mobile rocket launchers (Torode,
2016). Such a silent move by Hanoi is eyed warily by Beijing as it has the
potential to challenge China’s control of sea lanes contiguous to its occupied
features and threaten Chinese garrisons stationing near Vietnamese ones.
Nevertheless, these two issues can possibly be addressed in peaceful
dispute management processes. The apparent incompatibility over the right
to access natural resources in disputed waters may be dissolved if the two
claimants separate the resources access issue from the sovereignty issue,

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 305

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

306

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

and jointly pursue win-win arrangements to replace the current win-lose
situation on the ground. As for the need to control the shipping lanes in the
Spratly Islands, several mechanisms to avoid armed confrontation between the
military forces of both countries may be placed as a result of an innovative
defence diplomacy.15
4.2.5. Different Approaches to Dispute Settlement
China and Vietnam are contending with each other also in the manner the
SCS disputes are to be handled. While Beijing insists that they should be
settled through bilateral negotiation, Hanoi seeks to internationalize them. The
different approaches adopted by the two states undermine their mutual trust
and confidence: Hanoi feels it a tall order to cope alone with its formidable
neighbour to the north, and seeks the help of international institutions,
ASEAN included, and extra-regional powers such as the U.S. and Japan
(Vietnam News Agency, 2011a; VNExpress, 2014; Collin, 2015; M. Pham,
2016). Beijing, on its part, tends to perceive Hanoi’s internationalization
effort in terms of the “China encirclement” (Oishi, 2016: 172-174) allegedly
engineered by the U.S., and this perception would prompt it to take further
unilateral actions in the SCS.
However, with the rise of the “dual track” approach, the gap between
the two positions seems to be narrowing. This is an approach in which China
and ASEAN countries would collaborate for the maintenance of peace and
stability in the SCS by ensuring that the direct disputants be socialized into
conducting themselves peacefully towards each other, while the substantive
issues of the disputes, such as overlapping territorial or maritime claims,
would be handled by the parties that have direct stakes. This third approach
was originally proposed by Brunei Darussalam, and has been accepted by
China (Liu, 2016). Vietnam seems to be opening up to this approach at least
about the management of the Paracel Islands.16 For the Spratlys, however,
Vietnam seems to tread carefully due to several complicating factors. The
most outstanding is the memory of deadly clashes in the past with China in
the disputed islands. This inclines Hanoi to welcome the internationalization
of the dispute, coupled with its perception of a huge disparity with its
neighbour in economic and military capability.
Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that Hanoi has recently sent a clearer and
more direct message that it is willing to address sovereignty disputes through
peaceful bilateral or, where applicable, multilateral negotiation (Tuoi Tre
News, 2016). Particularly, as the Spratly Islands are claimed wholly or partly
by six parties, the resolution of this collective dispute requires multilateral
negotiations. Vietnam asserts that depending on particular disputed areas in
the Spratlys, either bilateral, trilateral or quadrilateral negotiations shall be

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 306

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

307

invoked with constructive attitude (Truc, 2016; Phung, 2016). At the same
time, Vietnam underscores the significance of maintaining peace and stability
in the SCS, and pushes for more robust engagement of ASEAN as a regional
organization as well as that of external powers that subscribe to peace and
justice. Apparently, such a re-consideration of the basic approach to dispute
management by Vietnam more or less fits into the “dual-track” approach
adopted by China. Given this, Hanoi would likely take this approach in
addressing the Sino-Vietnamese portion of the SCS disputes through direct
negotiation with China.
4.3. Sino-Vietnamese Bilateral Dispute Management in the SCS
Against the background of the above-discussed issues of the SCS disputes and
prospects for addressing them, China and Vietnam have engaged themselves
in incompatibility management, which also includes the prevention or
management of crises that may arise while incompatibilities remain. To
effectively pursue these goals, the two states have sought to expand the
bilateral diplomatic space, in which they could interact with each other in
their traditional fraternal way. In October 2011, Hanoi dispatched a special
delegation led by the Secretary-General of the Communist Party of Vietnam
Nguyen Phu Trong to Beijing for high-level dialogues with their Chinese
counterparts, including a summit meeting. Trong’s visit to China resulted in
an “Agreement on Basic Principles Guiding the Settlement of Sea-Related
Issues”. Restoring the collaborative spirit of the “1993 Agreement on Basic
Principles for the Settlement of Border Territory Issues between the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam and the People’s Republic of China”, the new agreement
outlined several principles to address the maritime issues.17
The summit was concluded by a joint statement, which stressed the
commitment of Hanoi and Beijing to settling the SCS disputes by peaceful
means in a step by step approach, beginning with the easier issues to handle.
Thus, among the first initiatives are: cooperation on maritime environmental
issues, joint sea-related scientific research, arrangements to enhance maritime
security, and negotiation on the demarcation of territorial waters off the Gulf
of Tonkin. It was expected that fruitful outcomes of these measures enhance
mutual trust to facilitate the settlement of more difficult issues. In a move
to further institutionalize confidence-building and crisis management on
a bilateral basis, Beijing and Hanoi have jointly held a dozen multi-level
meetings and dialogues and set up hotline mechanisms. This process has
also established a Joint Working Group on “Cooperation in Less Sensitive
Sea Areas,” which has in turn decided to implement two agreements signed
during previous meetings. They are: (1) joint comparative research of the
Holocene sedimentary architecture of Vietnam’s Red River Basin and China’s

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 307

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

308

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

Yangtze River Basin, and (2) cooperation on scientific research and exchange
on insular and maritime environmental management in the Gulf of Tonkin.
Another joint project on “Cooperation on Search and Rescue at Sea between
China and Vietnam” is being mapped out (Lao Dong Newspaper, 2015).
In addition to installing the mechanisms of tension reduction and crisis
management, Beijing and Hanoi established a Joint Working Group on
“Demarcation of Waters beyond the Mouth of the Gulf of Tonkin” in 2012
with a view to dissolving one of the most fundamental incompatibilities
of the SCS disputes. The working group meets twice a year in Hanoi and
Beijing alternately, and one of its tasks is to earmark maritime areas between
the Gulf of Tonkin and the two island chains for demarcation exercise. For
this purpose, it was agreed during its third meeting in Hanoi that a Technical
Team be set up to conduct joint surveys in the areas which it allocates for
demarcation. The working group has so far held eight meetings, resulting in
the technical team conducting a joint survey over a 387km2 section of the
waters contiguous to the Gulf of Tonkin (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2016;
Li and Amer, 2015: 250-251).
For now, tensions between China and Vietnam appear to have been
largely defused and kept out of military clash, although the Haiyang Shiyou
981 oil rig crisis in mid-2014 resulted in a series of ramming incidents
between Chinese and Vietnamese vessels and anti-Chinese riots in Vietnam,
marking the sharpest deterioration of China-Vietnam fraternal relations
in years. During this two-month standoff, however, the above-mentioned
mechanisms of crisis management appeared to be working fairly well.
Over 30 extraordinary meetings were held at different levels to calm down
the situation and, finally, top diplomats from both countries gave timely
handshake to each other (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2014). Apparently,
the 2011 Agreement has been functioning as a de facto “code of conduct”
for the two countries, while it has also opened the prospect of dissolving the
most fundamental incompatibilities in the SCS disputes, which stem from the
overlapping territorial and maritime claims.
Although the above-mentioned process of managing the bilateral disputes
in the SCS appears similar to the one applied to the bilateral disputes of the
first category, at least three situational differences can be identified between
them. Firstly, unlike the management process of the first category, which
was conducted above the heads of the general public of both countries, the
disputes in the SCS have become highly exposed to the scrutiny of them,
who are naturally the major source of nationalistic sentiments. This renders
it more difficult for the state leaders to control the management process,
as was shown by the anti-Chinese riots in Vietnam during the 2014 oil rig
crisis. Even if both states may manage to eventually dissolve the major
incompatibilities of the SCS disputes in the same ways as the disputes of the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 308

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

309

first category were handled, the general public may not be satisfied with the
results. If popular discontents spread, new actors may rise as articulators of
incompatibilities that may have been swept under the carpet. They may not
only disturb the official dispute management process, but may also pose a
challenge to the legitimacy of the government and the ruling communist party
concerned (Weiss, 2016).
Secondly, the demarcation of the SCS between Vietnam and China is
much more complicated and challenging than that of the Sino-Vietnamese
land borders and the Gulf of Tonkin due to two factors. First, depending on
locations, overlapped maritime zones in the SCS are not necessarily bilateral
between the two states exclusively, but can be multilateral, involving other
disputants, while the first category of disputes remained bilateral. It is obvious
that the multilateral situation would make the demarcation exercise a more
complicated and uphill task. Second, the ownership of the Paracel Islands and
the Spratly Islands, which would serve as the basis to determine the maritime
jurisdiction over the SCS, is under dispute and cannot be determined easily,
as was discussed previously. In contrast, past agreements and other records
on the Sino-Vietnamese land borders made during the French colonial period
served as a secure starting point of negotiation between Hanoi and Beijing,
and the baselines for the demarcation of the Gulf of Tonkin were drawn with
no major difficulty by each of them. It is true that a series of negotiations
have been conducted over a portion of the SCS adjacent to the Gulf of
Tonkin. Beyond that, however, no basis on which the demarcation exercise
can proceed appears to come by easily, mostly due to the unsettled status of
the two island chains.
Thirdly, the Beijing-Hanoi relationship in managing the disputes of
the first category was qualitatively different from the one in managing the
SCS disputes. There is a chronological separation between the two events
of conflict management, and the strong sense of brotherhood that mediated
between the two countries in the first category of dispute had all but
disappeared by the time the SCS disputes had escalated to such an extent
as to require serious treatment. This change may be attributed to factional
contentions within the government of Vietnam and its ruling Communist
Party. Vietnam watchers have identified two rival factions that exist among the
Vietnamese elites: the “conservative” pro-China faction that wants to maintain
cordial relations with China on the basis of the time-tested inter-party
fraternity, and the “reformist” pro-U.S. faction that draws inspirations from
American-style neo-liberal economic policies (BBC News, 2016). The recent
period of high tensions with China over the SCS corresponds to the tenure
of pro-U.S. Nguyen Tan Dung as Prime Minister (June 2006 – April 2016).
Enhanced Hanoi-Washington relations in this period18 and a confrontational
posture of Vietnam toward China as a result apparently lay behind recent

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 309

29/12/2017 9:22:12 PM

310

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

maritime incidents between the two countries. However, the hiked tension
was addressed each time with conciliatory gestures by the pro-China faction
led by Nguyen Phu Trong as Secretary-General of the ruling Communist Party
(January 2011 – present). The resultant inconsistent posture of Hanoi towards
Beijing continued until Dung lost an internal power struggle toward the end
of his tenure and was eventually replaced by pro-China Nguyen Xuan Phuc
as Prime Minister (April 2016 – present) (Quang, 2017).
The three differences reveal the obstacles to managing the SCS disputes,
which seem to have narrowed the space in which the fraternity between the
two states would function as the basis of incompatibility management. Such
circumstances in the SCS disputes not only led to military skirmishes in 1974
and 1988, but also caused minor stand-offs and confrontations in recent years,
undermining further the trust between Beijing and Hanoi. As a result, it is
understandable that the weaker disputant, i.e., Vietnam appears to become
highly sensitive to any Chinese action in the SCS. Even though several
stabilizing mechanisms have been put into the SCS disputes as was discussed
earlier, deficiency in diplomatic and legal common ground in the SCS disputes
may trigger tit for tat between Hanoi and Beijing in a rather classical case of
security dilemma.
5. Conclusion
Through an investigation into China-Vietnamese disputes over borderlands
and the Gulf of Tonkin, this paper has identified what can be termed the SinoVietnamese Way of conflict management. It has been found that the mutual
trust that has been forged through time-honoured fraternity between the two
ruling communist parties played a crucial role in it. This trust contributed
to a positive attitude and self-restraint in handling bilateral disputes and
commitment to settling them peacefully and by mutually agreed dates. As a
result, a number of mechanisms to manage the disputes were installed. Joint
working groups in particular served as carriers of functions to regulate the
conduct of the disputants and to dissolve incompatibilities, including the one
over sovereign rights. The peace process going through these mechanisms was
stabilized by the aforementioned mutual trust, and incompatibility dissolution
was carried out within the secure space having thus been created through
mutual concession, integration and legal consideration.
The on-going disputes in the SCS pose formidable challenges to the
Sino-Vietnamese Way of conflict management. Three issues that obstruct
the progress of management process have been identified: (1) the exposure
of management process to nationalistic sentiments of the people, which may
disrupt the process; (2) the existence of complicating factors such as the
multilateral elements of the Spratly and maritime disputes, which the bilateral

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 310

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

311

Sino-Vietnamese Way has to deal with and the lack of a settlement over the
issue of ownership of the Paracles and Spratlys, which would otherwise serve
as a legal basis of maritime delimitation; and (3) the division between the proChina and pro-U.S. factions within the Vietnamese leadership, which affects
the traditional communist fraternity between Vietnam and China.
Since these issues are detrimental to the dissolution of incompatibilities
and undermine the trust between the two countries, several mechanisms to
manoeuvre around the incompatibilities, prevent crisis and reduce tension
have been developed and appear to have been working fairly well. Here
again, mutual trust is crucial for the stable functioning of these mechanisms.
Therefore, it seems that the effective management of the SCS disputes and,
eventually, its peaceful settlement largely depends on which faction, proChina or pro-U.S., is at the helm of the Vietnamese government. In this
respect, a window of opportunity is presently open under the current proChina administration of Vietnam.
Notes
* 		 Dr Mikio Oishi 大石幹夫 is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Humanities,
Arts and Heritage, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Malaysia. His current research
interests include: the new ASEAN Way of conflict management; the East Asian
way of incompatibility management; managing territorial disputes in East Asia
including Southeast Asia; and the Pax Sinica (peace by China). Among his recent
publications are: International Conflict in the Asia-Pacific (Routledge 2010, with
Jacob Bercovitch), Managing Conflict in Economic Development (LAP 2011) and
Contemporary Conflicts in Southeast Asia (Springer 2016, as editor). He can be
reached at <mikio.oishi@ums.edu.my>.
**		 Nguyen Minh Quang is a Lecturer at the School of Education, Can Tho
University, Vietnam and co-founder of the Mekong Environment Forum. His
research interests include: contemporary Vietnam; conflict studies; and politics
and environmental insecurity issues in Southeast Asia. He is also contributing to
The Diplomat, International Policy Digest and some Vietnamese environment
magazines. He can be reached at <nmquang@ctu.edu.vn>.
1.		 On 2 May, 2014, China’s state-owned National Offshore Oil Company (CNOOC)
moved its Haiyang Shiyou 981 oil platform into waters within the EEZ claimed
by Vietnam near the disputed Paracel Islands (Leaf, 2014; Bower and Poling,
2014; Panda, 2015). The incident, which was considered as the most serious
development in their territorial disputes ever since the 1988 Johnson South Reef
Skirmish, has sparked a major crisis between the two countries and resulted in a
series of anti-Chinese protests across Vietnam, many of which quickly escalated
into violent riots in which many Chinese factories and workers were targeted
(Boehler, 2014).
2.		 Disputes over maritime sovereign rights generally take place on the periphery
of a nation far from the national centre. For this reason, this type of conflict is

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 311

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

312

3.		
4.		

5.		

6.		
7.		

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

not considered to pose an existential threat to the state unlike terrestrial dispute
on land borders. For a detailed discussion on this difference, see Mak (2009:
115-118).
This case shows that the interest of the parties, i.e., national security, can be
satisfied by changing their position, i.e., maritime claims, which constitute a
particular incompatibility.
Expert-level talks were undertaken by joint working teams and mapping teams
whose major tasks were to discuss the methodology, legal basis, relevant
circumstances, area and scope of delimitation to work out delimited lines for
the consideration and approval of respective governments. Meanwhile, the
governmental-level negotiations aimed to reach “general understanding and
consensus” and pose “fundamental principles” guiding the common process of
resolution of all border issues (Manh Dong, 2009).
There are several reasons explaining why Sino-Vietnamese leaders decided
to completely settle their first category of dispute by 2000. For example, they
wanted to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the establishment of China-Vietnam
diplomatic ties (1950-2000) and to eliminate existing bilateral obstacles (mainly
territorial tensions and differences) in order to further their comprehensive,
strategic and cooperative partnership in the era of global integration. Furthermore,
it is worth noting that disputed areas along the Sino-Vietnamese land borders and
the Gulf of Tonkin are core parts of what is recently deemed as China-initiated
“One Axis and Two Wings” strategy, characterized by the Beibu Gulf Economic
Belt and China-ASEAN Free Trade Area (CAFTA). Thus, the two neighbours
were sufficiently motivated o settle the prevailing disputes as quickly as possible
to expedite the integration process (People’s Daily, 2000a, 2000b).
These documents have not been made public up to now.
Specific strategically important and sensitive areas under dispute and their settlements are as follows:
•

•

Huu Nghi Quan/Youyi Guan: China and Vietnam agreed to rely on the
Conventions to determine the 300m stretch of the railway between Pingxing
(Guangxi – China) and Dong Dang (Lang Son – Vietnam). The site went to
China eventually;
Thac Ban Gioc/Detain Falls, Bac Luan river mouth and Hoanh Mo village
where the Conventions did not clearly prescribe. Both sides agreed to
delimitate the total area of the falls on a 50:50 basis (Truc, 2016; Phung,
2016).

8.		 Vietnam accepted to give up 5 villages with a total area of about 5.7 sq. km where
Chinese residents live beyond the new boundary. On the other hand, China is
believed to cede the same area of 4 villages where the Vietnamese live in China’s
territory beyond the boundary (Truc, 2015; Amer, 2002: 40).
9.		 The above-mentioned islands under Vietnam’s sovereignty are Bach Long Vi
Island, located right at the centre of the Gulf, and Con Co Island, 13 nm to
the north east of the Vietnamese shore and located right at the closing line of
the Gulf. The UNCLOS can in “full effects” entitle these islands to not only

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 312

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

313

territorial waters of 12 nm, but also exclusive economic zones of 200 nm and
continental shelves of up to 350 nm (Amer, 2002: 42).
The median line was “adjusted” in that Vietnam in a major concession agreed to
not giving “full effects” to its two islands in the Gulf of Tonkin in determining the
line of maritime jurisdiction, although the UNCLOS entitled EEZ and continental
shelf to the islands (Amer, 2002: 42).
China also accepted Vietnam’s demands for the limited duration and area of the
newly established joint fishing zone (Zou, 2005: 16-17; Manh Dong, 2009).
According to the fishery agreement, the joint fishing zone of about 33,500 square
kilometres covered most of the fishing grounds of high productivity in the Gulf
of Tonkin, stretching from 20o N southward to the closing line of the Gulf with
a width of thirty and a half nautical miles and had a 15-year operational period
(including three year of automatic extension after the termination date). The
transitional fishing zone which would last for four years was established to allow
fishermen to have time to adjust their fishing patterns to the new conditions. In
addition, China and Vietnam agreed to establish a buffer zone of 30 sq. nautical
miles outside the estuary of the Bac Luan river, from which fishing boats of either
state mistakenly coming in would be asked to leave (Zou, 2005: 16-17; Manh
Dong, 2009).
Despite the provision of the UNCLOS, Vietnam and China agreed that Bach
Long Vi Island would generate 12 nm territorial sea and 3 nm more of EEZ
and continental shelf outside the territorial sea, totalling 15 nm and that Con Co
Island would be given 6 nm of territorial sea, EEZ and continental shelf in total.
For this reason, the circle surrounding the latter is depicted considerably smaller
than that surrounding the former (Amer 2002: 42; Tuoi Tre News 2004; Zou
2005: 15).
Beijing and Hanoi fully controlled their respective state-owned media, and did not
allow them to report criticism from the public. As a result, no significant domestic
objection emerged after the two states reached agreements to settle the disputes
(BBC/Vietnamese, 2013; Zou, 2005: 15; Beina, 2015).
For a detailed discussion on the potential role of defence diplomacy in Asia, see
Taylor et al. (2014).
For example, Vietnamese Deputy Defense Minister, Senior Lieutenant General
Nguyen Chi Vinh remarked that the dispute over the Paracels and adjacent waters
was a bilateral matter between China and Vietnam and that bilateral negotiations
should be appropriate (Tuoi Tre News, 2016).
The agreement underscores, among others: (1) taking the fraternal relations
between the two countries as the foundation of negotiation, (2) respecting legal
principles, notably the 1982 UNCLOS, and credible historical evidence, (3)
taking into account each other’s legitimate concerns, and (4) settling bilateral
disputes through bilateral negotiations (Vietnam News Agency, 2011b).
During Nguyen Tan Dung’s premiership, Vietnam has moved significantly closer
to the U.S., as represented by an increased number of high level mutual visits in
Hanoi and Washington, including state visits by Vietnamese state leaders and US
presidents (Consulate of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in New York 2013).
For the US “strategic engagement” in this period, see Wong (2013).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 313

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

314

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

References
AFP (2014, October 28), “China opposes oil exploration in South China Sea after
India, Vietnam sign pact”, DNA India, available at <http://www.dnaindia.com/
india/report-china-opposes-oil-exploration-in-south-china-sea-after-india-vietnamsign-pact-2029900> (accessed on 5 September 2016).
Amer, R. (2002), “The Sino-Vietnamese Approach to Managing Border Disputes”,
IBRU Maritime Briefing 3(5).
Amer, R. and Jianwei, L. (2013, April 18), “How to Manage China-Vietnam Territorial
Disputes”, China US Focus, available at <http://www.chinausfocus.com/peacesecurity/how-to-manage-china-vietnam-territorial-disputes/> (accessed on 25
September 2016).
BBC News (2016, January 25), “Vietnam PM Nguyen Tan Dung Pulls Out of Party
Boss Race”, available at <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-35401259>
(accessed on 25 December 2015).
BBC/Vietnamese (2013, September 16), “Viet Nam co nhuong bo Trung Quoc ve bien
gioi?”, available at <http://www.bbc.com/vietnamese/vietnam/2013/09/130916_
trao_doi_bien_gioi_viet_nam> (accessed on 6 December 2015).
Beina, X. (2015, April 7), “Media Censorship in China”, Council on Foreign
Relations, available at <http://www.cfr.org/china/media-censorship-china/p11515>
(accessed on 26 December 2016).
Bennis, W.G., Benne, K.D. and Chin, R. (1984), The Planning of Change (4th
edition), London: Holt, Rinehart and Winton.
Blanchard, B., Rose, A. and Torode, G. (2015, June 26), “China Moves Controversial
Oil Rig Back Towards Vietnam Coast”, available at <http://www.reuters.com/
article/us-southchinasea-china-vietnam-idUSKBN0P60X320150626#673XFUBr
LZUgTd27.97> (accessed on 5 December 2015).
Boehler, P. (2014, May 20), “Just 14 Factories Targeted in Vietnam’s anti-China
Protests Belonged to Mainland Chinese”, South China Morning Post, available at
<http://www.scmp.com/news/asia/article/1515912/few-factories-hit-vietnams-antichina-riots-were-mainland-chinese-owned?page=all> (accessed on 31 July 2016).
Bower, E.Z. and Poling, G.B. (2014, May 7), “China-Vietnam Tensions High Over
Drilling Rig in Disputed Waters”, Center for Strategic and International Studies,
available at <https://www.csis.org/analysis/china-vietnam-tensions-high-overdrilling-rig-disputed-waters> (accessed on 31 July 2016).
Chanda, N. (1986), Brother Enemy: The War after the War. Auckland: Harcourt.
Chen, J. and Glaser, B. (2015, November 5), “What China’s ‘Militarization’ of the
South China Sea Would Actually Look Like”, The Diplomat, available at <http://
thediplomat.com/2015/11/what-chinas-militarization-of-the-south-china-sea-wouldactually-look-like/> (accessed on 1 August 2016).
China Daily (2016, June 29), “South China Sea Arbitration Abuses International
Law, Threatens World Order”, available at <http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
world/2016-06/29/content_25902989.htm> (accessed on 31 July 2016).
Collin, K.S.L. (2015, October 07), “The Japan-Vietnam Maritime Security Relationship”, The Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.com/2015/10/the-japanvietnam-maritime-security-relationship/> (accessed on 26 December 2016).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 314

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

315

Consulate of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in New York (undated), “Milestones
in the Bilateral Relations”, available at <http://vietnamconsulate-ny.org/page/
milestones-bilateral-relations> (accessed on 26 December 2016).
Davenport, T. (2016, July 8), “Why the South China Sea Arbitration Case Matters
(even if China gnores it)”, The Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.
com/2016/07/why-the-south-china-sea-arbitration-case-matters-even-if-chinaignores-it/> (accessed on 9 February 2017).
Dien, A. (2015, June 25), “Vietnam Lambastes China for Fishermen Harassment,
Island Building”, Thanh Nien News, available at <http://www.thanhniennews.com/
politics/vietnam-lambastes-china-for-fishermen-harassment-island-building-47155.
html> (accessed on 5 December 2015).
Emmers, R. (2003), Cooperative Security and the Balance of Power in ASEAN and
the ARF, New York: Routledge.
Erickson, A.S. and Bond, K. (2015, July 20), “Archaeology and the South China Sea”,
The Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.com/2015/07/archaeology-and-thesouth-china-sea/> (accessed on 10 January 2016).
Fiorino, D.J. (2001), “Environmental Policy as Learning: A New View of an Old
Landscape”, Public Administration Review, Vol. 61, No. 3, pp. 322-334.
Fisher, R. and Ury, W. (1981), Getting to YES, Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Fravel, M.T. (2011), “China’s Strategy in the South China Sea”, Contemporary
Southeast Asia, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 292-319.
Gady, F. (2016, March 10), “What US Intelligence Thinks about China’s Militarization
of the South China Sea”, The Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.
com/2016/03/what-us-intelligence-thinks-about-chinas-militarization-of-the-southchina-sea/> (accessed on 31 July 2016).
Hao, S. (2011, September 12), “China’s Positions and Interests in the South China
Sea: A Rational Choice in its Cooperative Policies”, Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS), available at <https://csis.org/publication/chinaspositions-and-interests-south-china-sea-rational-choices-its-cooperative-policies>
(accessed on 10 January 2016).
Hayton, B. (2015, June 12), The Importance of Evidence: Fact, Fiction and the
South China Sea”, Thanh Nien News, available at <http://www.thanhniennews.
com/commentaries/the-importance-of-evidence-fact-fiction-and-the-south-chinasea-46540.html> (accessed on 10 January 2016).
Ku, J.M., Fravel, M.T. and Cook, M. (2016, May 16), “Freedom of Navigation
Operations in the South China Sea Aren’t Enough”, Foreign Policy, available at
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/05/16/freedom-of-navigation-operations-in-thesouth-china-sea-arent-enough-unclos-fonop-philippines-tribunal/> (accessed on
12 August 2016).
Kurlantzick, J. (2007), Charm Offensive: How China’s Soft Power is Transforming
the World, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Lao Dong Newspaper (2015, June 5), “Việt – Trung đàm phán hợp tác các lĩnh vực
ít nhạy cảm trên biển”, available at <http://laodong.com.vn/chinh-tri/viet-trungdam-phan-hop-tac-cac-linh-vuc-it-nhay-cam-tren-bien-337961.bld> (accessed on
5 September 2016).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 315

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

316

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

Leaf, P.J. (2014, August 30), “Learning from China’s Oil Rig Standoff with Vietnam”,
The Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.com/2014/08/learning-from-chinasoil-rig-standoff-with-vietnam/> (accessed on 5 December 2015).
Li, J. and Amer, R. (2015), “Managing Tensions in the South China Sea: Comparing
the China-Philippines and the China-Vietnam Approaches”, in Thuy, T.T. and
Trang, L.T. (eds), Power, Law, and Maritime Order in the South China Sea (pp.
243-266), Lanham: Lexington Books.
Liu, A. (2016, July 24), “China Sticks to ‘Dual-track’ Approach to Solve South
China Sea Issue: FM”, Xinhua News, available at <http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/2016-07/24/c_135536484.htm> (accessed on 30 August 2016).
Mak, J.N. (2009), “Sovereignty in ASEAN and the Problem of Maritime Cooperation
in the South China Sea”, in Bateman, S. and Emmers, R. (eds), Security and
International Politics in the South China Sea: Towards a Cooperative Management
Regime (pp. 110-127), London and New York: Routledge.
Manh Dong (2009), “Maritime Delimitation between Vietnam and Her Neighboring
Countries”, UN-Nippon Foundation Alumni Meeting, available at <http://www.
un.org/depts/los/nippon/unnff_programme_home/alumni/tokyo_alumni_presents_
files/alum_tokyo_dong.pdf> (accessed on 2 January 2016).
Miall, H. (2004), Conflict Transformation: A Multi-dimensional Task, Berlin: Berghof
Research Center for Constructive Conflict Management.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2014, July 08), “Lập trường chính thức của VN về việc
TQ hạ đặt giàn khoan trái phép”, available at <http://vov.vn/chinh-tri/lap-truongchinh-thuc-cua-vn-ve-viec-tq-ha-dat-gian-khoan-trai-phep-337526.vov> (accessed
on 25 December 2016).
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2016, April 24), “Việt Nam – Trung Quốc kết thúc khảo
sát chung trên biển”, available at <http://nld.com.vn/thoi-su-trong-nuoc/vietnam-trung-quoc-ket-thuc-khao-sat-chung-tren-bien-20160424135944758.htm>
(accessed on 25 December 2016).
Nguyen, M., Wee, S. and Rajagopalan, M. (2015, May 18), “Vietnam Opposes
Chinese Fishing Ban in Disputed Sea”, Reuters, available at <http://www.reuters.
com/article/us-vietnam-china-fish-idUSKBN0O20PF20150518> (accessed on 8
January 2016).
Oishi, M. (2011), Managing Conflict in Economic Development: Southeast Asian
Experiences, Saarbrücken, Germany: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Oishi, M. (2016), “The South China Sea Dispute: Formation of a Mediation Regime
and Challenges for Management”, In Oishi, M. (Ed.), Contemporary Conflicts in
Southeast Asia: Towards a New ASEAN Way of Conflict Management (pp. 157180), Singapore: Springer.
O’Dowd, E.C. (2007), Chinese Military Strategy in the Third Indochina War: The Last
Maoist War, London: Routledge.
Panda, A. (2015), “1 Year Later: Reflections on China’s Oil Rig ‘Sovereignty-Making’
in the South China Sea”, The Diplomat, 12 May, available at <https://thediplomat.
com/2015/05/1-year-later-reflections-on-chinas-oil-rig-sovereignty-making-in-thesouth-china-sea/> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
Parameswaran, P. (2015), “Playing it Safe: Malaysia’s Approach to the South China
Sea and Implications for the United States”, Maritime Strategy Series No. 6,
Washington, D.C.: Center for a New American Security.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 316

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

317

People’s Daily (2000a, January 18), “Vietnamese Leadership Message on 50th
Anniversary of Sino-Vietnam Ties”, available at <http://en.people.cn/english/
200001/18/eng20000118A102.html> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
People’s Daily (2000b, September 02), “Chinese Cities on Beibu Gulf Increase
Cooperation”, available at <http://en.people.cn/english/200001/18/eng20000118A
102.html> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
Pham, M. (2016, October 18), “Vietnam Gives Thumbs-up to U.S. Regional Role as
Pivot Stumbles”, Reuters, available at <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-vietnamusa-idUSKCN12I1BR> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
Pham, T.N. (2016, August 12), “The South China Sea Ruling: 1 Month Later”, The
Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.com/2016/08/the-south-china-sea-ruling1-month-later/> (accessed on 13 August 2016).
Phung, L.C. (2001), “Hiep dinh phan dinh Vinh Bac Bo va Hiep dinh hop tac
nghe ca giua Viet Nam va Trung Quoc trong Vinh Bac Bo”, The Communist
Review, available at <http://www.mofahcm.gov.vn/vi/mofa/cs_doingoai/cs/
ns04081808401148> (accessed on 7 December 2015).
Phung, L.C. (2016), “Interview with Le Cong Phung, Former Government’s Chairman
of the Committee on Border Affairs, by Quang, N.M.”, 9 June, Ha Long City,
Vietnam.
Quang, N.M. (2017, January 25), “The resurgence of China–Vietnam Ties”, The
Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.com/2017/01/the-resurgence-of-chinavietnam-ties/> (accessed on 10 February 2017).
Ramsbotham, O., Woodhouse, T. and Miall, H. (2005), Contemporary Conflict
Resolution (2nd ed.), Cambridge: Polity Press.
Reuters (2015, April 15), “Philippines Seeks Help from U.S. in South China
Sea Dispute’, available at <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinaseaphilippines-usa-idUSKBN0N616A20150415> (accessed on 9 February 2017).
Shen, J. (2002), China’s Sovereignty Over the South China Sea Islands: A Historical
Perspective. New York: Oxford University Press.
The State Council (2016, July 13), “Full Text: China Adheres to the Position of Settling through Negotiation the Relevant Disputes between China and the Philippines
in the South China Sea”, The People’s Republic of China, available at <http://
english.gov.cn/state_council/ministries/2016/07/13/content_281475392503075.
htm> (accessed on 12 August 2016).
Taylor, B., Blaxland, J., White, H., Bisley, N., Leahy, P. and Tan, S.S. (2014),
“Defence Diplomacy: Is the Game Worth the Candle?”, Centre for Gravity Series
Paper No. 17, Canberra: Australian National University.
Torode, G. (2016, August 10), “Vietnam Moves New Rocket Launchers into Disputed
South China Sea”, Reuters, available at <http://www.reuters.com/article/ussouthchinasea-vietnam-idUSKCN10K2NE> (accessed on 4 September 2016).
Truc, T.C. (2015, January 24), “Hon 30 nam dam phanxac lap biengioitrenbo Viet –
Trung”, VNExpress, available at <http://vnexpress.net/tin-tuc/the-gioi/tu-lieu/hon30-nam-dam-phan-xac-lap-bien-gioi-tren-bo-viet-trung-3133569.html> (accessed
on 6 December 2015).
Truc, T.C. (2016), “Interview with Tran Cong Truc, Former Chief of the Vietnamese
Government’s Border Committee, by Quang, N.M.”, 9 June, Ha Long City,
Vietnam.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 317

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

318

Mikio Oishi and Nguyen Minh Quang

Tuoi Tre News (2004, July 1), “Phan dinh Vinh Bac Bo: giai phap cong bang”,
available at <http://tuoitre.vn/tin/the-gioi/20040701/phan-dinh-vinh-bac-bo-giaiphap-cong-bang/39879.html> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
Tuoi Tre News (2012, April 25), “Chinese Boats Cause Cable Cut to Vietnam’s Ships”,
available at <http://tuoitrenews.vn/society/4755/chinese-boats-cause-cable-cut-tovietnam%E2%80%99s-ship> (accessed on 5 December 2015).
Tuoi Tre News (2016, June 06), “Vietnamese Deputy Minister of Defense Warns of
‘Complicated Factors’ in Regional Security”, available at <http://tuoitrenews.
vn/politics/35216/vietnamese-deputy-minister-of-defense-warns-of-complicatedfactors-in-regional-security> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
US Department of State (1983, December 12), “Limits in the Sea No. 99 Straight
Baselines: Vietnam”, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, US Department of
State, available at <https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/58573.pdf>
(accessed on 28 December 2016).
US Department of State (1996, July 9), “Limits in the Sea No. 117 Straight Baselines
Claim: China”, Office of Ocean Affairs, Bureau of Oceans and International
Environmental and Scientific Affairs, US Department of State, available at
<https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/57692.pdf> (accessed on 28
December 2016).
Valencia, M.J., Van Dyke, J.M. and Ludwig, N.A. (1997), Sharing the Resources of
the South China Sea, Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Vietnam News Agency (2011a, June 09), “Hòa bình biển Đông gắn liền với các nước
khu vực” available at http://www.mofahcm.gov.vn/vi/mofa/nr040807104143/
nr040807105001/ns110610151525> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
Vietnam News Agency (2011b, October 12), “Việt - Trung thỏa thuận nguyên tắc giải
quyết vấn đề trên biển”, available at <http://vnexpress.net/tin-tuc/the-gioi/viettrung-thoa-thuan-nguyen-tac-giai-quyet-van-de-tren-bien-2207907.html> (accessed
on 25 December 2016).
Vietnam News Agency (2014a, May 29), “Sovereignty of Vietnam over Paracel
and Spratly Archipelagoes”, VietnamPlus, available at <http://en.vietnamplus.
vn/sovereignty-of-vietnam-over-paracel-and-spratly-archipelagoes/61024.vnp>
(accessed on 25 December 2016).
Vietnam News Agency (2014b, June 20), “Undeniable History: Hoang Sa, Truong
Sa Have Always been Sacred Territories of Vietnam”, VietnamPlus, available at
<http://en.vietnamplus.vn/undeniable-history-hoang-sa-truong-sa-have-alwaysbeen-sacred-territories-of-vietnam/62038.vnp> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
VNExpress (2014, July 25), “Vietnam Expects Japan Coastguard Ships Next Year:
Vice Defense Minister”, available at <http://vnexpressnews.net/politics/vietnamexpects-japan-coastguard-ships-year-vice-defense-minister/> (accessed on 24
August 2016).
Vu, Q.V. (2014, June 11), “China’s Southeastern Border Ends at Hainan Island:
Chinese Emperor’s Map”, Vietnamnet Newspaper, available at <http://english.
vietnamnet.vn/fms/special-reports/104163/china-s-southeastern-border-ends-athainan-island--chinese-emperor-s-map.html> (accessed on 25 December 2016).
Vuving, A.L. (2015, July 6), “A Tipping Point in the US-China-Vietnam Triangle”,
The Diplomat, available at <http://thediplomat.com/2015/07/a-tipping-point-in-theu-s-china-vietnam-triangle/> (accessed on 1 February 2016).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 318

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

China-Vietnam Territorial Disputes

319

Weiss, C.J. (2016, July 14), “Here’s What China’s People Really Think about the South
China Sea”, The Washington Post, available at <https://www.washingtonpost.com/
news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/07/14/heres-what-chinas-people-really-think-aboutthe-south-china-sea/> (accessed on 23 August 2016).
Wong, C.H. (2013, June 1), “Vietnamese Prime Minister Welcomes Larger Role
for U.S.”, The Wall Street Journal, available at <http://blogs.wsj.com/indonesia
realtime/2013/06/01/vietnamese-prime-minister-welcomes-larger-role-for-u-s/>
(accessed on 28 December 2016).
Xinhua News (2015, November 6). “Xi Calls for New Chapter of China-Vietnam
Strategic Partnership”, available at <http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/201511/06/c_134791569.htm> (accessed on 2 February 2016).
Zou, K. (2005), “The Sino-Vietnamese Agreement on Maritime Boundary Delimitation in the Gulf of Tonkin”, Ocean Development & International Law, Vol. 36,
No. 1, pp. 13-24.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 319

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 320

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

South
China Sea
the Context
of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation
International
Journal
of in
China
Studies
Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017, pp. 321-345

321

“Sea of Cooperation” or “Sea of Conflict”?:
The South China Sea in the Context of
China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation
Lai Yew Meng*
Centre for the Promotion of Knowledge and Language Learning,
Universiti Malaysia Sabah

Abstract
China and most Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) memberstates share a common bond in the South China Sea due to their geographical
designation and contiguity as maritime nations and littoral states to this
strategic waterway. Indeed, the significance of this semi-enclosed sea to their
respective as well as mutual geo-strategic and geo-economic interests has
made maritime cooperation a critical, if not compulsory agenda in the overall
vision and framework of China-ASEAN engagements. Such importance
has been underlined by the Chinese-sponsored Maritime Silk Road of the
21st Century (MSR) agenda and its related programmes, which serve as the
blueprint for enhanced China-ASEAN maritime cooperation especially in
the South China Sea. However, sceptics/critics have pinpointed that these
Chinese-driven agendas are not new, and that the maritime ASEAN states’
responses have been somewhat lukewarm. Undeniably, Beijing’s efforts have
been largely hampered by its longstanding maritime-territorial disputes in
the South China Sea vis-à-vis several ASEAN member-states, and perhaps
even more so, by its growing assertiveness in handling the imbroglio. Not
only has it created a “trust deficit”, China’s South China Sea policy has also
encouraged the affected ASEAN claimant-states to “balance” or “hedge”
against unpredictable Chinese strategic behaviour by rekindling security
relations with and soliciting intervention from non-resident powers in the
region. Such apparent “contradictions” pose political and even military
challenges to maritime cooperation between China and ASEAN countries.
This article addresses the South China Sea “problematique” by firstly
providing an overview of China-ASEAN maritime cooperation, and by
extension, China-ASEAN relations, as well as the South China Sea maritimeterritorial debacle, from both past and present vantage points. It then examines
the mutual motivation and drivers behind the aforesaid initiatives to propel

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 321

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

322

Lai Yew Meng

maritime cooperation, before deliberating on the contending issues and
challenges in the disputed waters that could derail such an ambitious strategic
vision. Lastly, it explores the way forward and prospects for the South China
Sea to become a “sea of cooperation” that could facilitate the MSR agenda,
and ultimately the realization of greater China-ASEAN maritime cooperation.
Keywords: China-ASEAN relations, maritime cooperation, South China Sea,
maritime-territorial dispute
1. Introduction
China and most Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
member-states share a common bond in the South China Sea due to their
geographical designation and contiguity as maritime nations and littoral states
to this waterway, which is amongst the busiest sea-line of communication
(SLOC) in the contemporary world. Indeed, the significance of the semienclosed regional sea to their respective as well as mutual geo-strategic
and geo-economic interests has made maritime cooperation a critical, if not
compulsory agenda in the overall vision and framework of China-ASEAN
engagements. Such importance has been underlined by Chinese President,
Xi Jinping, in his address to the Indonesian parliament back in 2013, when
he proposed the creation of a blueprint and joint effort to build the Maritime
Silk Road of the 21st Century (MSR) to serve as a new driving force for
enhanced China-ASEAN maritime cooperation, in which the South China
Sea has a contingent role to play. Together with the Lancang-Mekong
Cooperation initiative (which forms the maritime half of China’s ambitious
“Belt and Road” grand design), the MSR is envisioned to create a “one
river, one sea” concept for comprehensive regional cooperation under the
auspices of a China-ASEAN community forged by common destiny, interests
and responsibilities. The prior unveiling of the China-ASEAN Maritime
Cooperation Fund in 2011 and last year’s declaration as the landmark year for
China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation (2015), not mentioning the recent 2016
statement by China’s State Oceanic Administration (SOA) officials regarding
a new five-year action plan for international cooperation in the South China
Sea including the setting up of a China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation
Centre, clearly highlighted Beijing’s commitment to advancing the MSR,
ostensibly for the mutual interests and benefits of both parties concerned.
The recently held “Belt and Road” forum in Beijing, officially named as the
“Vision and Action Plan of Jointly Building Silk Road Economic Belt and
21st Century Maritime Silk Road”, which saw the presence of 130 countries
and 70 international organizations, as well as the signing of 32 trade and
financial accords (The State Council, The People’s Republic of China, 2017),

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 322

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

323

further attest to China’s unwavering commitment towards building a platform
for global connectivity, where the success of the maritime dimension of
its global grand design may very well rest on sustainable China-ASEAN
maritime cooperation.
However, sceptics and critics have pinpointed that the latest Chinesedriven agenda for regional maritime cooperation is not new, and that despite
the aforementioned overtures, the response of the ASEAN states has been
thus far lukewarm, at best. Undeniably, the Chinese efforts have been largely
hampered by the longstanding and simmering maritime-territorial disputes in
the South China Sea between the Chinese and several ASEAN member-states,
and perhaps even more so, by China’s growing assertiveness in handling the
imbroglio in recent times. For certain, it has not only created a “trust deficit”,
but also encouraged the affected ASEAN claimant-states to “balance” or
“hedge” against unpredictable Chinese strategic behaviour by rekindling
security relations with and soliciting intervention from non-resident powers
in the region. Such apparent “contradictions” pose political and even military
challenges to maritime cooperation between China and ASEAN countries.
This article addresses the above “problematique” by firstly providing an
overview of China-ASEAN maritime cooperation, and by extension, ChinaASEAN relations, as well as the South China Sea maritime-territorial debacle,
from both past and present vantage points. It then examines the mutual
motivation and drivers behind the aforesaid initiatives to propel maritime
cooperation, before deliberating on the contending issues and challenges in
the disputed waterway that could derail such an ambitious strategic vision.
Lastly, it explores the way forward and prospects for the South China Sea
to become a “sea of cooperation” that could facilitate the MSR agenda, and
ultimately the realization of greater China-ASEAN maritime cooperation, and
even integration.
2. Overview of China-ASEAN Relations: Past and Present Viewpoint
China has interacted with both landlocked and maritime Southeast Asia for
centuries due to their shared history and geographical proximity. Historians
generally concur that the relationship between the various governments and
peoples of China and their counterparts in Southeast Asia spans over two
millennia (Stuart-Fox, 2003; Zhao, 1998). Early Chinese engagements with
the Nanyang or Southern Sea region, which the Chinese refer Southeast Asia
to, can be traced as far back to the indirect trade during the Shang dynasty
that took place by both overland and maritime trade routes. Over the next
few centuries, along with flourishing trade relations and the spread of the
Chinese civilization/culture, not to mention, exchanges of diplomatic envoys
and the provision of Chinese security umbrella, relations between China and

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 323

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

324

Lai Yew Meng

Southeast Asia came to be conducted in accordance to what was known as
the “tributary” system. More specifically, Southeast Asian kingdoms became
tributary/vassal states in a Chinese-orchestrated “Sinocentric” world order
with China as the so-called “Middle Kingdom”, by and large assuming the
role of a benevolent hegemon.
Nonetheless, a severely weakened China under the yoke of Western and
Japanese imperialism during the so-called “century of shame” in the late 19th
and early 20th century precipitated the end of the dynastic period and the
Chinese world order, and together with it the demise of the tributary system.
China’s subsequent transition from empire to republic affected the way the
Chinese conducted international relations, since the old Chinese world order
was replaced by a radically and culturally different international system of
nation-states that professed different norms and values of interaction. Indeed,
China’s relations with the rest of Southeast Asia were minimal during this
period of transition, which also coincided with the protracted domestic turmoil
and conflict in post-imperial China, the age of imperialism in (Southeast)
Asia, and the two world wars (see Zhao, 1998; Stuart-Fox, 2003: 2).
The founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in 1949 following
the Chinese communist party’s victory over the Nationalist Guomindang
in the Chinese civil war, and the subsequent advent of Mao’s proletariat
internationalism that provided active support to communist insurgencies
across Southeast Asia during the first two Cold War decades saw China’s
relationship with the region reaching a nadir, with many Southeast Asian
states severing formal diplomatic ties with Beijing for its role in advancing
the so-called “domino theory” and effect. In fact, when the ASEAN was
established in 1967, none of its founding member-states had normal relations
with China, due to strong distrust resulting from Beijing’s clandestine
involvement in and ties with the local communist movements in Southeast
Asian polities.
Nevertheless, the rigid bipolar order of the Cold War in Asia eventually
gave way as a result of the fallout between the Soviet Union and communist
China in the late 1960s that saw the Chinese begun leaning towards and
courting the Americans. The PRC’s ascension into the United Nations (UN)
in 1971 and the Sino-US rapprochement epitomized by Nixon’s China
visit, followed by America’s Japanese ally’s speedy rapprochement and
normalization of diplomatic relations with the Chinese in 1972, have had a
positive effect on China-Southeast Asia ties. Specifically, this strategic shift in
the regional security landscape coupled with the deradicalization of Chinese
foreign policy from one that fostered revolutionary zeal in the past to one that
promoted a moderate policy of peaceful co-existence, engendered a rethinking
among ASEAN states of their respective relations with China (Ba, 2003:
624). Such transformations in both the international and domestic realms

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 324

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

325

saw a gradual thawing of ties that eventually led to the re-establishment of
formal diplomatic relations between China and a number of Southeast Asian
states, including Malaysia, which became the first ASEAN member-state to
normalize relations with Beijing in May 1974, followed by Thailand and the
Philippines, a year later. Although Singapore and Indonesia did not normalize
relations with the PRC until the 1990s, both had expanded trade ties with and
officially engaged Beijing.
Although China-ASEAN relations became more dynamic during the
1980s onwards, resulting from ASEAN polities’ promotion of a more
equidistant foreign policy in their respective relations with the big powers,
it was the Cold War’s demise that served as the watershed in China-ASEAN
relations. The obsolescence of the Cold War together with international
response to the 1989 Tiananmen Square incident forced China to recalibrate
its foreign policy that was geared more towards Asia, with Southeast Asia
serving as the major focus (Egberink & van der Putten, 2011: 20). Similarly,
the changing regional dynamics triggered several external outcomes that
contributed to “pulling” the ASEAN states towards a re-orientation of their
respective China policy, including the uncertainties of US commitment in
Southeast Asia following its military withdrawal from the Philippines, and
rising concerns regarding inter-regional economic competition following the
formation of the NAFTA and EU economic blocs. The coalescence of such
dynamics, together with China’s charm offensive served as the bulwark for
the acceleration and intensification of China-ASEAN relations in the postCold War decade.
Indeed, according to Ba (2003: 634), “the 1990s was generally a very
good decade for China and ASEAN, with more factors emerging to unite than
to divide them”. In the diplomatic realm, the remaining ASEAN founding
member-states, followed by its new members from mainland Southeast Asia
steadily re-established formal ties with Beijing. Diplomatic exchanges and
reciprocal visits by Chinese and ASEAN leaders also intensified annually with
both sides putting greater emphasis on enhancing their overall relations, in
view of their common interests and geographical contiguity, as well as their
mutual realization of a sense of shared destiny, fostered by deepening regional
interdependence. In 1991, China was invited to attend its first ASEAN
Ministerial Meeting as an observer, and by 1996, Beijing has graduated to
becoming a full dialogue partner. China also proactively engaged ASEAN via
the latter’s own multilateral platforms such as the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF), the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM), the ASEAN-Plus-Three and the
East Asia Summit (EAS).
Meanwhile, in the economic realm, China-ASEAN ties have grown
exponentially in terms of trade and investments. Sino-ASEAN trade witnessed
a dramatic increase beginning in the 1990s, with an average 75 per cent

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 325

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

326

Lai Yew Meng

annual growth between 1993 and 2001 (Mitchell & Harding, 2009: 84; see
also ASEAN, 2001). As the Chinese economy began to grow at a rapid pace
along with healthy growth rates of the Southeast Asian economies, economics
have emerged as the salient reason as to why China has become increasingly
important to ASEAN states, as with ASEAN to the Chinese. Although initially
perceived to be a significant economic competitor, ASEAN saw the potential
benefits of developing closer economic ties with China, with the Chinese
economy serving as an alternative growth engine for Southeast Asia during
a time of uncertain global and regional transition that saw the advent of the
above mentioned regional trading blocs that could curtail the market access of
these export-oriented ASEAN economies. For China, the Tiananmen incident
of 1989 and its aftermath generated insecurities towards the West, which led
to Beijing’s overtures to ASEAN states, seeing them as potentially attractive
economic partners and political allies vis-à-vis the West, not to mention,
alternative development model (Ba, 2003: 632). China-ASEAN relations
strengthened further following the Asian financial crisis of 1997. China’s
decision in not devaluing the Yuan during the regional financial meltdown was
greatly appreciated by the ASEAN states, as it not only demonstrated China’s
commitment to Southeast Asia but also heralded a new dawn in Chinese
leadership in the region. Sino-ASEAN economic relations were further
boosted by the political will to enhance economic cooperation, which resulted
in the formation of the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (Kuik, 2005; Severino,
2008). In 1999, China became ASEAN’s main trading partner, collectively as
well as bilaterally with most of the ASEAN states.
Although Sino-ASEAN ties flourished in diplomatic and economic
dimensions, China’s engagement with ASEAN states in the political-security
realm was limited during the same period, despite having normalized relations
with several ASEAN states. Their de facto alignment against Vietnam
following the Vietnamese annexation of Cambodia in 1978, which lasted
until 1989, was arguably the hallmark of Sino-ASEAN security relations
prior to the end of the Cold War. The negligible security relations was due
mainly to the legacy of China’s earlier revolutionary policies in the region
and the lingering distrust/uncertainty that ASEAN states had regarding
Beijing’s strategic intentions in the region. Compounding the ASEAN states’
apprehension was their longstanding maritime-territorial dispute vis-à-vis
China over the South China Sea, which had witnessed occasional flare-ups,
such as the Sino-Vietnamese fiery high-sea clash in 1988 over parts of the
South China Sea’s Spratly archipelago. To a large extent, China’s policy
towards the South China Sea was arguably ASEAN’s chief concern as
China-ASEAN relations moved into the post-Cold War phase, with Beijing
demonstrating not only assertiveness, but equally, willingness to use coercive
measures to defend its contending claims in the disputed waters. In fact,

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 326

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

327

overriding concerns over Chinese strategic behaviour in the South China Sea
in the early 1990s became the impetus for ASEAN to actively engage the
Chinese via its own multilateral frameworks, such as the expanded ASEAN
Post-Ministerial Conference (PMC) that later metamorphosed into the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF), Asia’s maiden multilateral security dialogue, and
the Indonesia-sponsored South China Sea Workshops. Together with all the
other ASEAN-centred bilateral and multilateral platforms as well as their
mutual interest to promote a sustainable partnership, they became the basis
and drivers of China-ASEAN maritime cooperation.
3. The Evolution of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation
It is reasonable to say that maritime cooperation between China and ASEAN
started in the 1990s in direct response to the South China Sea problem, with
the latter initially seeking to engage the former as a dialogue partner in an
effort to desensitise the maritime-territorial dispute, which involves the
Chinese and five other claimant parties, four of which are ASEAN states.
From ASEAN’s viewpoint, China’s assertiveness in advancing its maritimeterritorial interests in the South China Sea amid a fluid and unpredictable
post-Cold War regional security environment fuelled so much uneasiness that
the original ASEAN Six had to collectively respond by issuing a statement in
the form of the 1992 ASEAN Declaration on the South China Sea as a means
to rein in Chinese coercive behaviour in the disputed waters. The declaration
prompted the Chinese to assuage to ASEAN’s call for a peaceful resolution to
the South China Sea imbroglio via negotiations and consultations.
However, despite the initial assurance, the South China Sea issue
resurfaced in 1995 following Manila’s discovery of new Chinese installations
at the Mischief Reef, a feature in the Spratly archipelago that the Philippines
claims under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS)’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Ba (2003: 627-628) opined
that the Mischief Reef incident was significant in that it marked the first
instance China had directly challenged an ASEAN member’s claim, not
mentioning Beijing’s blatant disregard of the ASEAN’s 1992 Declaration.
In spite of the ensuing diplomatic row, the incident provided the impetus for
China to eventually make conciliatory gestures, namely Beijing’s recognition
of the UNCLOS, the signing of bilateral accords with Malaysia and the
Philippines over several South China Sea features, and perhaps most saliently,
China’s agreement to discuss the South China Sea issue in a multilateral
setting, as opposed to bilaterally vis-à-vis the affected ASEAN claimant-states
(Egberink and van der Putten, 2011).
To be sure, China had been traditionally reluctant to engage ASEAN
multilaterally, preferring instead to negotiate bilaterally, for fear of the smaller

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 327

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

328

Lai Yew Meng

ASEAN states ganging up against it, and because of the better leverage it
had doing on a one-on-one basis. However, Beijing’s participation in the
ARF as a founding member in 1994 marked a shift in its modus operandi
in that Beijing has gradually come to acknowledge the strategic upside of
engaging ASEAN as an “insider”, for not only the purpose of mutual trust
and confidence-building, but also to potentially set the agenda and influence
the discourse regarding the SCS and other regional security issues. Most
observers commonly identify two key factors shaping China’s policy shift
in favour of ASEAN multilateralism, namely 1) Beijing’s preference for the
“ASEAN Way” rule of interaction based on consensus-building, informal
diplomacy and non-interference which the Chinese share with its ASEAN
neighbours; and 2) ASEAN’s centrality reduces the possibility of its platforms
turning into “anti-China forums” (Egberink and van der Putten, 2011; Kuik,
2005, Narine, 2008). In other words, China is comfortable in dealing with
the ASEAN states due to their shared values and strategic preference, and
confident that Chinese foreign policy interests would be safeguarded with
ASEAN in the driver seat. More importantly, the ARF together with other
ASEAN-originated multilateral frameworks could equally serve as platforms
to advance China-ASEAN maritime cooperation comprehensively as a means
to facilitate China’s regional grand strategy which has duly manifested in the
current Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), previously called the “one belt, one
road” (OBOR) agenda.
Indeed, apart from assuaging security concerns over the South China
Sea, the ARF provided the platform for both sides to further discuss on
the forms of maritime cooperation that the Chinese and their ASEAN
neighbours could undertake. Accordingly, the ARF members agreed in
principle to refer maritime cooperation chiefly to non-traditional security
cooperation, as stipulated in the 1995 ARF concept paper. They included
a range of cooperative endeavours from prevention of naval collision and
maritime search and rescue to marine environmental monitoring and marine
science (see Cai, 2015). Also emphasized was the mutual understanding that
negotiations be conducted bilaterally between the affected/claimant-states
over maritime-territorial disputes and delimitation of maritime boundaries.
Following the 1995 ARF session, China and the Philippines took the
initiative to co-host the much-lauded 1997 ARF inter-sessional meeting on
confidence-building measures (CBMs), which laid the foundation for future
ARF inter-sessional meetings on maritime security (Cai, 2015). This nascent
phase of China-ASEAN maritime cooperation also witnessed the joint efforts
of both sides in advocating for marine environment protection under the
auspices of the UN, such as the UN Regional Programme for the Prevention
and Management of Marine Pollution in the East Asian Seas (1994), and the
Sustainable Development Strategy for the Seas of East Asia.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 328

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

329

Maritime cooperation became even more pronounced as China-ASEAN
relations entered the new millennium, riding on the back of the dynamism of
their overall engagements, with the status of their relationship having been
upgraded from “good-neighbourly” (1997) to “strategic partnership” (2003).
In 2002, China and the ASEAN states concluded their negotiations on and
signed the Declaration on the Code of Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea or the “DoC” which reaffirms their mutual commitment “to the adoption
of a code of conduct in the South China Sea … to further promote peace and
stability in the region”. Besides the code of conduct on maritime-territorial
disputes, the DoC also spelt out areas of maritime cooperation which China
and the ASEAN states agreed in principle to, such as those listed in the above
said 1995 ARF paper, including combating transnational crimes, i.e. piracy,
illicit drugs and armed smuggling, and human trafficking.
Besides the DoC, the China-ASEAN “strategic partnership” agreement
of 2003 was another framework that facilitated the implementation of
various maritime cooperation programmes, under the purview of one of
its 10 major cooperation fields, namely transport. Indeed, although the
DoC appeared on paper to be the central framework facilitating maritime
cooperation programmes, it was the “strategic partnership” agreement that
has been, in reality, the most progressive in promoting the various maritime
cooperative endeavours between the two sides since the early 2000s. Among
the notable areas of cooperation that have taken off include the identification
of priority areas of maritime cooperation; establishing high-level coordination
management mechanism, i.e. the China-ASEAN Transport Ministers’ Meeting
and the China-ASEAN Maritime Consultation Mechanism (2003); developing
a shipping cooperation plan; signing of the China-ASEAN Agreement on
Maritime Transport; enhancing maritime transport cooperation; and human
resource training and capacity-building for ASEAN maritime personnel,
among others (see Cai, 2015).
Apart from the multilateral platforms, maritime cooperation also transpired bilaterally and trilaterally between China and several ASEAN states with
commendable results. They include China’s notable participation in disaster
prevention and relief activities with Indonesia and other ASEAN states in the
wake of the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami; China-Indonesia bilateral maritime
cooperation on various areas of mutual interests; China-Vietnam maritime
cooperation and the joint sea hydrocarbon exploration in the Beibu Bay;
China-Malaysia maritime cooperation in marine science and technology, i.e.
signing of China-Malaysia Marine Science and Technology Agreement (2009);
and the China-Thailand maritime cooperation in an identical area.
In response to the ASEAN connectivity plan in 2010, which was partand-parcel of the ASEAN Community agenda, China has identified and
taken initiatives to enhance its maritime connectivity with the Southeast

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 329

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

330

Lai Yew Meng

Asian region as a priority area in China’s overall maritime cooperation with
ASEAN. The establishment of the above mentioned China-ASEAN Maritime
Cooperation Fund in 2011 was precisely meant to facilitate this Chinese
strategic agenda to elevate maritime cooperation between the two sides to
greater heights. In fact, China has continued to actively promote maritime
cooperation with ASEAN states by further proposing and establishing a
number of key initiatives. They include the proposed establishment of
a China-ASEAN maritime partnership, and issuing of the International
Cooperation Framework for the South China Sea and Other Neighbouring
Sea Areas in 2012, followed by the much hyped strategic plan to build the
21st Century MSR with Southeast Asia as its hub, a year later. In 2014, the
Chinese set up the USD40 billion Silk Road Fund which encompasses the
funding of development projects in the maritime dimension of the Belt and
Road Initiative, before officially designating 2015 as the Year of ChinaASEAN Maritime Cooperation.
The above overview clearly highlights the dynamics that have positively
contributed to shaping the development and prospects of China-ASEAN
maritime cooperation. Specifically, the systematic efforts and “charm
offensive” undertaken by the Chinese to convince ASEAN states of the
mutual benefits of expanding the socio-economic and non-traditional security
dimensions of their maritime cooperation have been impressive, to say the
least. Yet, despite all that, the response of ASEAN states, especially those
directly involved in the South China Sea maritime-territorial row, have been
somewhat lukewarm, at best, due to their growing skepticism towards the
rhetoric and reality of Chinese intentions and ambitions, which have been
accentuated by Beijing’s inconsistent and allegedly contradictory behaviour
in the disputed sea. The following section discusses the South China Sea
“problematique” that affects China-ASEAN relations in general, and their
maritime cooperation specifically, and the dynamics that could potentially
transform the South China Sea into either a “sea of cooperation” or “sea of
conflict”.
4. The South China Sea “Problematique”
The South China Sea (Nanhai in Chinese) is a semi-enclosed sea spanning
a maritime area of 3.5 million square kilometres which borders China to the
south and located in the vicinity of most of the littoral states in Southeast
Asia. Linking the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean, the South China Sea
serves a vital sea line of communication (SLOC) that together with the Straits
of Malacca, connects Europe, the Middle East, and the Indian subcontinent
to maritime East Asia, through which the bulk of East-West and global trade/
commerce passes through annually. Apart from possessing a large number

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 330

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

331

of islands/shoals/rocks/reefs/banks/atolls, the South China Sea is also rich
in hydrocarbon deposits. It is likewise an important source of seafood for
Southeast Asian countries, whose maritime regions and borders are located
within its vicinity.
The South China Sea “problematique” refers to none other than the
multilateral dispute over this strategic waterway that encompasses both
overlapping territorial and maritime claims between China and the related
ASEAN states. The territorial dimension of the dispute commonly but not
exclusively relates to the Spratly and Paracel archipelagoes, but also potentially
includes other geographical features in the South China Sea and their
surrounding waters, which are either in actuality or perceived to be disputed,
due to the distinct lack of geographical clarity and the vaguely defined
meanings of China’s so-called “nine-dash-line” boundary (Hayton, 2015).
The Paracel chain located in the northern part of the South China Sea is
disputed between China and Vietnam, but has been under the control of the
Chinese since 1974. The Spratly archipelago, meanwhile, refers specifically
to the group of southerly SCS islands/reefs/atolls and its surrounding waters,
which are currently contested by six claimant-states, namely China, Vietnam,
Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan. This notorious archipelago have
been deemed by observers as “the epicentre of competing maritime-territorial,
geo-economic and geo-strategic interests” as well as “a potential turf/hotspot
for great power politics”, due to its abundant natural resources (i.e. fisheries
and hydrocarbon reserves), and strategic location, straddling along the world’s
busiest SLOC (Emmers, 2010; Lai, 2015a: 395; Lai, 2015b: 64).
Both China and Vietnam claim the Spratlys in their entirety, while the
Philippines and Malaysia officially lay claims over fifty-three and twelve
geographical features, respectively. As for Brunei and Taiwan, the former
claims only two Spratly features, while the latter’s claims replicate that of the
People’s Republic, in lieu of their common assertion of Chinese sovereignty
over the South China Sea. The basis of their contending claims varies from
historical to geographical/legal grounds based on existing international
conventions of the law of the sea (namely UNCLOS) or a combination of
both. As of 2012, Vietnam has occupied 25 geographical features, while China
has control over 12 reefs and shoals, the Philippines and Malaysia occupy
eight and five features, respectively, while Taiwan has control over the Itu
Aba/Taiping, which is the largest and most habitable of the Spratly chain
(Kostadinov, 2013: 3).
The Spratlys row has witnessed claimant-states asserting their contending
claims by employing multiple strategies, including the use of force. Indeed,
all claimant-states except Brunei, have established military presence in
most of the islands they currently occupy, which contributes to increasing
tension and the possibility of naval confrontation. China, especially, has been

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 331

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

332

Lai Yew Meng

periodically and harshly criticized for allegedly adopting “coercive tactics”
(i.e. gunboat diplomacy) in pursuit of its so-called “creeping invasion” or
“incremental assertiveness” of the archipelago, as exemplified in the Fiery
Cross Reef and the aforementioned Mischief Reef incidents in 1988 and 199495, respectively. Beijing was reprimanded again in April 2012 for its alleged
belligerence in managing the Chinese-Filipino standoff at the Scarborough
Shoal. In fact, it has been recently described in a Pentagon report that China
“is using coercive tactics … to advance their interests in ways that are
calculated to fall below the threshold of provoking conflict” (Agence France
Presse (AFP), 2016). The report also states that the Chinese have deployed
both the PLA-Navy and Chinse coastguards to maintain a “near-continuous”
presence in the South China Sea since 2015 (AFP, 2016).
From most observers’ viewpoint, China has somewhat altered its strategic
behaviour in the South China Sea, after enduring almost one-and-a-half
decades of “strategic patience” under the mantra of “peaceful development”
to strengthen its comprehensive national power. It is claimed that the Chinese
have been “buying time” by incrementally enhancing their strategic presence
as well as reinforcing their military capabilities in the South China Sea over
the last couple of decades. Among the “eyebrow raising” developments
include the building of naval bases (i.e. Sanya Island) and the sizeable
expansion in the PLA-Navy’s South China Sea Fleet, which comprises the
indigenous building/commissioning of aircraft carrier battle groups and
a massive fleet of submarines (see Goldstein and Murray, 2004). These
developments, commensurate with the largest PLA outlay allocated for the
South China Sea fleet, have been reckoned as Beijing’s groundwork for the
eventual assertion of Chinese sovereignty over the troubled waters.
The Chinese have also employed complementary strategies to strengthen
their assertion in the South China Sea, including the alleged unilateral
declaration of maritime boundaries and the highly contentious land reclamation of previously uninhabitable features, ostensibly to provide a legal
basis to its sovereignty claims. The 1992 Territorial Waters Law is a case in
point, which not only reaffirms China’s indisputable sovereignty over the
Paracels and Spratlys, but also “legalizes” the Chinese claim to more than 80
per cent of the South China Sea via the notorious “nine-dash-line” boundary
(Emmers, 2010: 71). In fact, the “nine-dash-line” which forms a “U-shaped”
boundary from China’s southerly borders, originates from the “eleven-dashline” Chinese map of 1947, which encloses most of the SCS based on Chinese
historical claim to the related geographical features dating as far back as the
Qin and Han dynasties (Shen, 2002: 103).
In addition, Beijing has used official statements as contemporary basis
to its claims, such as the 1951 statement by then Chinese premier Zhou
Enlai asserting sovereignty over the island groups, and the 1958 statement

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 332

29/12/2017 9:22:13 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

333

linking China’s territorial claims over the Spratlys and Paracels to maritime
jurisdiction in the surrounding waters. China also submitted a note verbale to
the UN Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf in 2009, to declare
its jurisdiction over the said maritime borders, in response to several ASEAN
states’ similar efforts in the same year to strengthen the geographical and
legal basis to their respective claims. They include the Malaysia-Vietnam joint
submission to the same UN commission in 2009 to delimit their 200-nautical
miles (nm) of Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ), and the Philippines’ passing
of a congressional legislation to revise its archipelagic baselines in conformity
with the UNCLOS’ “regime of islands” doctrine that covers the Kalayaan
group of islands and Scarborough Shoal, which overlaps with the claims of
other claimant-states.
On a similar note, ASEAN states have been spooked by China’s
blatant land reclamation of a number of Spratly features, which have been
largely transformed into habitable ‘islands’ (some even with airstrips).
According to estimates, China’s land reclamation efforts have added 3,200
acres of land to the seven features it occupies in the Spratlys. The Chinese
reclamation exercise came to a pause last year, and they have since focused
on “infrastructure development” of those reclaimed features. To be sure, the
UNCLOS is unequivocal in its definition of geographical features that can or
cannot lay claim to an extended EEZ. While the Chinese land reclamation of
the related uninhabitable SCS features (reefs/banks/atolls) does not serve such
a purpose, these newly formed and habitable “islands” can surely masquerade
as forward bases of deployment and logistical support that allow the PLANavy to sustain future naval operations to assert Chinese sovereignty over
the disputed waters (Lai, 2015b: 65). In fact, the Chinese did not wait long to
provoke further suspicion regarding the possible future use of these artificial
islands by landing aircrafts, initially a civilian one, followed by a military
plane at a newly installed airstrip in a remarkably transformed Fiery Cross
Reef, which drew diplomatic flaks from other disputant-states and the US
(Reuters, 2016; Cable News Network (CNN), 2016). Since then, the Chinese
have, as insinuated in a recent headline of the Japan Times, continued a
“steady pattern of militarization” in the South China Sea, such as building
structures ostensibly to house surface-to-air missile systems, and deploying
anti-aircraft and anti-missile systems, among others (Japan Times, 2017).
China’s actions in the South China Sea have inevitably prompted the
US to renew its presence and engagement in the disputed waters under the
auspices of the “US pivot to Asia” initiative. This include strengthening
security ties with the Philippines, Vietnam, and to various extent, Malaysia
and other affected ASEAN claimant-states, in what some would be deemed
as “balancing” or “hedging” against China’s growing assertiveness and
unpredictable behaviour on the part of the ASEAN states, and plausibly

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 333

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

334

Lai Yew Meng

“containment” in Washington’s strategic vocabulary. With regard to China’s
South China Sea claims, the US has insisted that Beijing’s “nine-dash-line”
boundary contravenes the UNCLOS, and does not have basis in international
law. Washington has also up-the-ante vis-à-vis Beijing by launching several
“freedom of navigation” exercises lately, such as sending American warships
close to the sites claimed by China and conducting military over-flights in
the related airspace to test Chinese reaction. Washington even went a step
further by having Secretary of Defense, Ashton Carter, taking a tour of the
South China Sea aboard a US aircraft carrier in November 2015. Beijing
expectedly viewed such actions as undue provocation from Washington that
could increase the risk of miscalculation and military mishap.
From Malaysia’s perspective, the country has neither been at the
receiving end of China’s military assertions, nor has it been compelled by
the Chinese to forcefully defend its Spratly outposts, possibly an outcome
of their “special relationship”. Nevertheless, Malaysia is increasingly
sharing the apprehensions of other ASEAN-states regarding the deteriorating
security ambiance in the South China Sea. In fact, Putrajaya has cause for
concern, since Beijing’s renewed assertion of its “nine-dash-line” boundary
has ultimately led to the Chinese “breaking tradition” with Malaysia, when
they made their first-ever military assertions, albeit in the form of two
naval exercises off a Malaysian-claimed feature known as James Shoal in
2013 and 2014. This was followed by another alleged incursion in June
2015 by a Chinese coastguard vessel at Luconia Shoals located about 150
kilometres north of Sabah, which is also claimed by Brunei. There was also
a media report in March 2016 that saw a Malaysian minister claiming that
approximately a hundred China-registered fishing boats guarded by two
Chinese coastguard vessels have been detected encroaching into Malaysian
waters near the Luconia Shoals (South China Morning Post, 2016). Malaysia
has since responded by departing from its traditionally soft and cautious
approach to officially reprimand the Chinese via diplomatic channels.
Putrajaya has likewise in its capacity as the ASEAN chair, sought albeit
unsuccessfully to broker for the Code of Conduct (CoC) in the South China
Sea, to rein in potential Chinese belligerent behaviour. While continuing
its pragmatic policy of engaging China and seeking diplomatic means to
manage the maritime-territorial imbroglio, Malaysia has also sought to
“hedge” against the uncertainties of future Chinese strategic behaviour by
acquiescing to a revitalised American military presence via the “US ‘pivot’
to Asia” initiative (see Kuik, 2013) and maintaining military links with other
regional powers, especially the Five Power Defence Arrangement (FPDA)
member-states, and even Japan to a renewed extent. Malaysia has similarly
embarked on military modernization as part of its “hedging” strategy, which
included procuring submarines and other naval assets for forward deployment

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 334

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

335

at the Royal Malaysian Navy bases in Sabah (i.e. Sepanggar) to safeguard
its maritime-territorial integrity and interests in the South China Sea (Lai,
2015b: 65).
5. The Impact of the South China Sea Imbroglio on China-ASEAN 		
Maritime Cooperation
The longstanding yet unresolved and increasingly problematic maritimeterritorial disputes between China and the related ASEAN states in the South
China Sea has undoubtedly cast a long shadow of doubt over the prospects
of advancing China-ASEAN maritime cooperation. Indeed, despite all the
previously mentioned fanfare regarding maritime cooperation and the MSR
initiative, there has been a general lack of progress in advancing the multitude
of plans put forward beyond the proposal stage. For certain, the inability of
the claimant states to amicably resolve, defuse or even shelve the festering
dispute, not mentioning their perceived inconsistent behaviour and mixed
signals as well as provocative actions and counteractions in the South China
Sea that fuel further suspicion and tensions, have created a severe “trust
deficit” between them that made it difficult for genuine cooperation to take
place in the maritime domain.
For instance, China’s charm offensive and wooing of ASEAN states
to strengthen their maritime cooperation as a new pillar of their strategic
partnership, on the one hand, has been conversely undercut by Beijing’s above
mentioned unilateral actions in the South China Sea that caused uncertainties
concerning Chinese intentions, let alone triggering a groundswell of distrust
among the affected ASEAN claimant states vis-à-vis the People’s Republic.
Similarly, notwithstanding its official rhetoric in the various ASEAN-centred
multilateral fora, Beijing’s apparent lack of enthusiasm in addressing the
rising concerns of its ASEAN neighbours via its perceived “foot-dragging”
on the negotiations process and conclusion of the much sought after Code of
Conduct in the South China Sea, has further accentuated the so-called “trust
deficit”, from the ASEAN viewpoint.
In fact, the string of Chinese proposals to foster maritime cooperation
under the auspices of the MSR have been perceived by skeptics to be no
more than Beijing’s effort to shift the attention away from its intentions and
behaviour in the South China Sea conflict. Since the dispute directly concerns
only four of the ten ASEAN states, the Chinese have been perceived to be
seeking to divide ASEAN as a grouping on the South China Sea issue per se
and how it should be addressed, by courting some ASEAN states with the
“win-win” logic of maritime cooperation to offset their concerns regarding
Chinese actions in the South China Sea, not to mention, their budding “China
threat” perceptions. This may be true to some extent, since the Chinese are

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 335

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

336

Lai Yew Meng

well aware that while some ASEAN states and interested parties may worry
about China’s behaviour in managing territorial-maritime disputes in the
South China Sea, most if not all, stand to benefit from enhanced maritime
cooperation in a wide range of areas, from economic to people-to-people
interactions (Parameswaran, 2015). Hence, observers like Parameswaran
(2015) opines that Beijing may view this strategy of continuously wooing
the ASEAN states bilaterally with new, lucrative proposals and minimal
confidence-building measures to be in its best calculated interests, while it
continues to assertively stake its claims in the South China Sea. The strategy
of dividing ASEAN manifested most succinctly in the open disagreement
between ASEAN members at the 2012 ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
(AMM) which resulted in the historic failure of the regional organization to
issue a joint statement regarding the South China Sea disputes. Likewise, the
April 2016 statement by Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi during the Boao
Forum emphasizing China’s “four-point ‘consensus’” with Brunei, Cambodia
and Laos on the South China Sea territorial disputes, namely the agreement
that they are “not an issue between China and ASEAN as a whole”, seems to
support such an observation regarding Beijing’s possible modus operandi of
splitting ASEAN with enticement of broad-based maritime cooperation, and
its continuous preference for a bilateral approach as opposed to the ASEANChina approach to addressing the South China Sea problematique.
More significantly, China’s grandiose plan of developing the Belt and
Road Initiative, which include the MSR agenda, is increasingly perceived by
some to be Beijing’s grand strategy to establish its regional predominance,
or even hegemony, where ASEAN states are eventually expected to assuage
to Chinese demands, when it comes to the South China Sea question. In fact,
the Belt and Road Initiative has been hotly debated insofar as some China
watchers view it as having a subtle military dimension, with some even
deeming it as an “elaborate cloak under which Beijing can disguise its military
ambition” (Kleven, 2015). For the skeptics, China’s ultimate goal would be
to provide the PLA-Navy access to a series of Chinese-friendly port/naval
facilities stretching from the African east coast to the South China Sea in
what has been previously coined as the “string of pearls” model (e.g. Gwadar
[Pakistan]; Colombo [Sri Lanka]; Chittagong [Bangladesh]; Maday Island
[Myanmar]; Port Victoria [Seychelles]. The Chinese government’s recent
signing of a 10-year agreement with the East African state of Djibouti to set
up a naval base to serve as a logistics hub for the PLA-Navy vessels engaged
in anti-piracy operations off the coast of Yemen was among the clearest
indications yet of Beijing’s intentions (Kleven, 2015).
The aforementioned Chinese mixed signals and modus operandi,
compounded by Beijing’s controversial actions in the South China Sea
have undoubtedly created the so-called “trust deficit” between China and

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 336

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

337

ASEAN. This apparent shortage of mutual trust has since been exacerbated
by the counteractions of some ASEAN states, which have contributed to
widening the China-ASEAN rift with regard to the South China Sea dispute.
For one, Manila’s initial decision to halt bilateral negotiations with Beijing
on the South China Sea issue, in preference for legal arbitration of its case
against China at the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), and Vietnam’s
contemplation to pursue a similar path, have incensed the Chinese, who
responded by rebuking the Filipino action, apart from vehemently questioning/
disputing the jurisdiction of the PCA over the issue. The PCA had since ruled
that it had jurisdiction in the case and had moved to consider the merits of
the complaints brought by the Philippines against China under the auspices
of the UNCLOS. In July 2016, the independent tribunal at The Hague nearunanimously arbitrated in favour of Manila in a landmark ruling that legally
denied China’s historic sovereignty claims over the South China Sea based on
its “nine-dash line” boundary, as well as declaring the related Chinese actions
in building artificial “islands” and its denial of fishing rights to the Philippines
as unlawful (Williams, 2016). The PCA’s ruling not only triggered a Chinese
backlash, but has also hardened Bejing’s resolve in advancing its claims over
the disputed waters.
Additionally, Beijing was upset by Manila’s, and to a lesser extent,
Hanoi’s decision to openly court the Americans and the Japanese in the
realm of security cooperation, in what was seen as a “balancing act” to
check China’s intentions and ambitions in the South China Sea. Furthermore,
the strategic uncertainties over the South China Sea, coupled with China’s
rapid military development, have spurred ASEAN states to increase defence
spending to beef up their military preparedness at the expense of a potential
regional arms-race, which further aggravated tensions in China’s ties with
the affected ASEAN clamant-states. According to security think-tank HIS
Janes’ recent estimation prior to the 2016 Shangri-La Dialogue, tensions in the
South China Sea are expected to drive-up Asia-Pacific defense spending by
approximately 25 per cent to USD533 billion by the year 2020 (Law, 2016).
Closely related to and intertwined with the “trust deficit” problem is
the lack of political will among some ASEAN states to take the so-called
“leap-of-faith” to advance maritime cooperation. It is a given that maritime
and territorial sovereignty is a fiercely/jealously guarded and defended
Westphalian concept by most Southeast and even Northeast Asian states
including China, due to the legacy of Western imperialism/colonialism, and
to some, the bitter experience of their hard fought/struggle for independence.
For these post-colonial states, maritime-territorial integrity and sovereignty
are a non-negotiable element of statehood, as it is tied to their respective
nationalisms and sense of national pride and prestige. Furthermore, according
to Mark J. Valencia (2015), most have only recently extended their maritime

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 337

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

338

Lai Yew Meng

jurisdiction based on the UNCLOS’s EEZ regime, and views the related
maritime-territorial gains as well as economic and strategic resources, as part
of their national heritage. Hence, most states still consider the concept of
maritime cooperation as highly sensitive, especially in a disputed sea like the
South China Sea, since they entail working together in complicated fields that
may necessitate a compromise to various degrees of their respective national
interests (i.e. Joint Marine Seismic Undertaking agreement between China,
Vietnam and the Philippines which was not renewed following allegations of
the arrangement having undermined ASEAN claimants’ claims and ASEAN
Unity, apart from the judicial position of the Philippines in regard to the South
China Sea disputes). Moreover, maritime cooperation may not necessarily
entail equitable gains among the participating states due to their different
levels of development and readiness, where bigger, more powerful states stand
to gain relatively more benefits especially in their role as the drivers of such
cooperation. In a nutshell, proposals of civil maritime cooperation which seem
to be mutually beneficial and considered as confidence-building measures
(CBM) may ultimately turn out otherwise. The apparent reluctance of some
ASEAN states to outwardly embrace the Chinese proposals for maritime
cooperation especially in the South China Sea may essentially be due to such
overriding concerns vis-à-vis China.
6. The Way Forward
In view of the reality of the situation in the South China Sea today, both
China and ASEAN have to realistically accept the fact that addressing the
“trust deficit” and enhancing mutual trust and confidence-building is the prerequisite if not the only viable way forward to genuinely advancing ChinaASEAN maritime cooperation. Indeed, mutual trust is a rare commodity
and a premium that China and ASEAN have to secure in the context of
the maritime disputes, for without which all the much hyped maritime
cooperation proposals would remain proposals that never come to fruition/
see the light of day.
For a start, both sides (China and the related ASEAN claimant states)
have to put an immediate hiatus to any unilateral and/or controversial
actions that could further aggravate lingering tension and suspicion as well
as destabilize the South China Sea. This includes halting the contentious
land reclamation and infrastructure development at the affected geographical
features in the South China Sea, as well as avoiding “heavy-handed” actions
and provocative manoeuvers by their respective naval and civil maritime
authorities in the disputed waters, including their aircrafts in the associated
air space. China, for instance, has halted its land reclamation activities in the
South China Sea, but is now rapidly developing infrastructures that include

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 338

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

339

airstrips and other dual-use civilian-military facilities, which are generating
unease among its ASEAN neighbours and the US. For instance, China had
announced in October 2015 the installation of 50-metre high lighthouses
on Chinese-occupied Johnson South Reef and Cuateron Reef in the Spratly
chain. The Chinese vice foreign minister also reiterated to the media during
the East Asian Summit in November 2015 that China would continue
“building and maintaining necessary military facilities … required for China’s
national defense and the protection of those islands and reefs” (Sutter and
Huang, 2016: 67-68).
Similarly, provocative actions such as the landing of a military aircraft
on the man-made reef-turned-island, massive naval exercises/military drills
and aggressive sea patrolling by naval and coastguard ships as well as aerial
manoeuvers by military aircrafts at the contested areas should be avoided
by all contesting parties, notably Beijing, to alleviate the “China threat”
and “China bully” perceptions amongst the ASEAN states. To be sure,
there has been evidence of a longer lasting pause in Chinese assertiveness
in the South China Sea following Chinese President Xi Jinping’s moderateconciliatory gesture during his November 2015 “fence-mending” working
visit to Vietnam, where he undertook personal responsibility to restore the
workable framework for cooperation with the Vietnamese that was shattered
by China’s contentious deployment of an oil rig in Vietnamese-claimed waters
that triggered confrontations at sea and violent popular anti-Chinese protest
in the Vietnamese republic. The Chinese has since withdrawn the oil rig from
the disputed waters.
Secondly, and correlated to the first point is the urgent requirement to
proceed with the negotiations of the Code of Conduct in the South China
Sea (CoC). An early conclusion and formulation of the CoC is critical for
the overarching purpose of effectively maintaining peace and stability in the
South China Sea. As a matter of fact, the CoC should be the foremost and
most salient area of maritime cooperation that China and ASEAN need to
address in the short-term, in order to reduce if not reverse the burgeoning
“trust deficit”. Undoubtedly, the reversing of the “trust deficit” would go a
long way in opening the floodgate of China-ASEAN cooperation in other
maritime areas/endeavours, which are already in the pipeline. However, the
progress to reach a conclusion of the CoC has remained rather sluggish that
even the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting back in 2015 expressed its concerns
over the pace of the CoC negotiations. As mentioned earlier, China has been
accused of “foot-dragging” and purposely prolonging negotiations due to
its assertion that “the time was not ripe” for a CoC in the South China Sea.
Yet, it seems obvious that Beijing has been reluctant to upgrade the existing
DoC with the much more binding CoC, which when enforced, is expected to
curtail Chinese behaviour and preference-of-action in the disputed waterway.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 339

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

340

Lai Yew Meng

Nevertheless, Chinese President Xi Jinping’s moderate-conciliatory pledge
at the Washington summit in November 2015 that “China does not intend
to pursue militarization” of the disputed SCS islands, and that it favours
“an early conclusion” of the deliberation of the CoC, augurs well with the
prospect of its materialization.
Indeed, both China and the ASEAN member-states have, after a delay of
more than a decade, finally reached an agreement in May 2017, with regard to
the establishment of a “framework” for this much sought after code of conduct
to manage the South China Sea disputes (Reuters, 2017). However, it is still
premature to reach any conclusion as to whether the “framework”, which is
more of an agreement on “how the document would be structured”, would
eventually be successfully translated into a legally binding “text” of the CoC,
to make it an “effective and meaningful code of conduct” compatible with the
UNCLOS (Reuters, 2017). To be sure, skepticism remains in the air, with the
media reporting that some ASEAN diplomats are still concerned regarding
Beijing’s sincerity in realising the CoC, and, perhaps more significantly,
whether ASEAN has the leverage to ensure China’s commitment to “a set of
rules” they mutually agreed to (Reuters, 2017).
Besides the CoC, China and ASEAN should continue to undertake
maritime cooperation in other non-sensitive and perceived non-zerosum areas, to keep the momentum of cooperation going while serving as
confidence-building measures (CBMs) for both sides. Specifically, the easing
of tensions and trust building between China and the ASEAN claimant-states
can and should be done by framing the South China Sea disputes as just one
of many issues in the broader ASEAN-China relationship. In other words, the
unresolved maritime-territorial disputes notwithstanding, both sides should
strive to explore and advance maritime cooperation in the South China Sea
in mutually beneficial and less controversial areas such as humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief (HADR) as well as other civil maritime cooperation endeavours. The logic of intensified cooperation reaping mutual
trust and confidence that eventually paves the way for dispute resolution is
not as hollow as it sounds. Indeed, several positive bilateral and multilateral
initiatives have emerged that could serve to advance maritime cooperation in
the South China Sea. These are as follows:
i)		Singapore-proposed China-ASEAN enhanced Code for Unplanned
Encounters at Sea (CUES) to prevent miscalculations and incidents in
high sea;
ii)		 the AMM-proposed ASEAN Coast Guard Forum to address civil maritime
cooperation;
iii)		the expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum in the guise of the East Asia
Maritime Forum;

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 340

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

341

iv)		 ARF inter-sessional meeting on maritime security;
v)		Maritime security expert working group under the ASEAN Defence
Ministers Meeting Plus; and
vi)		China-Malaysia joint military exercise on search-and-rescue; hijacked
vessel rescue, and disaster relief at sea.
China, on its part, has sought to continue “dangling the economic carrot”
via its Belt and Road Initiative, which in many ways, serve to encourage
the disputant parties in ASEAN to focus on reaping the mutual benefits of
enhanced cooperation with China, while “shelving” their maritime-territorial
dispute till such a time when it can be amicably resolved, albeit to Beijing
advantage. Manila’s apparent diplomatic “change of direction” vis-à-vis
Beijing under the newly-minted Duterte administration, as opposed to its
predecessor’s hardline position, not to mention, both Hanoi and Putrajaya’s
“softening” stance and muted reaction over continuous Chinese presence
in the contested waters, are ominous signs of the effectiveness of such a
Chinese strategy. It may not even be far-fetched to suggest that the previously
“balancing” and/or “hedging” policies of ASEAN claimant-states may slowly
be giving way to “pseudo-bandwagoning” with the preponderant resident
power of East Asia.
Apart from boosting maritime cooperation in less sensitive areas, building
trust and confidence through shared rules and norms are equally critical and
needed to be embraced by all SCS claimant-states. Aileen Baviera (2014)
argues that one of the biggest obstacles to addressing the South China Sea
disputes has been the lack of “standardization and agreement on rules and
norms”. From the Philippines’s PCA arbitration case to the CoC negotiations,
confusion has been abounding on which set of rules apply and should take
precedence, i.e. domestic laws, UNCLOS, IMO conventions, to name a few.
The downside of such a lack of standardization has been the proclivity of
different interpretations arising from the skewed understanding and legal
referent point used by the claimant-states, which complicated negotiations let
alone the possible conclusion/resolution of the SCS disputes. Moreover, given
asymmetries in power capability among the disputant parties, Baviera (2014)
in referring to the South China Sea issue, opines that “agreement on the force
of law, consensus on shared norms, and predictability of agreed rules can
help build trust and assuage fundamental insecurity of states”. When states
agree and are committed to clear rules, regime-building can then ensue to
ensure that even peace and stability can take hold in the anarchic international
order. Simply put, China and ASEAN need to conscientiously agree to some
standardized and shared rules and norms as a way forward to resolving the
bone-of-contention that holds them back from fully realizing their muchtalked about “community of common destiny”.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 341

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

342

Lai Yew Meng

In this regard, China and the ASEAN states’ adoption and adherence
to the UNCLOS regimes are vital to ensure the peaceful management and
potential resolution of their contending disputes in the South China Sea. In
this regard, China has lately, according to Bill Hayton (2015), shown signs
of a “shift in its thinking”, leaving “clues” of possible Chinese acceptance of
“a legal regime closer to the UNCLOS” rather than its vaguely articulated
“historical rights” in asserting its maritime-territorial claims in the SCS.
Beijing’s ambiguous response to the recent American warship USS Lassen’s
deliberate sail-by near the Chinese occupied and reclaimed Subi Reef during
a “freedom of navigation” exercise, suggests Beijing’s move towards a
compliance with the UNCLOS’s definition of territorial sea. To an extent,
Beijing’s somewhat subdued response towards Washington’s “provocation”
has been perceived as its “deliberate efforts towards trying to fit China’s
claims within the language of the UNCLOS”, albeit subtly and informally.
Observers like Hayton (2015) also believe that the Chinese leadership may
have begun to see the benefits of UNCLOS to China in view of their country’s
dependence on sea-lanes to secure its vital resources and for economic
development, not to mention, “legitimizing” the movement and outreach of
China’s growing blue-water naval power. Therefore, bringing their maritime
claims in line with shared rules and norms like the UNCLOS may yet benefit
the Chinese insofar as it would help reduce tension with the ASEAN states
and the US. This, in return, would facilitate more open and robust cooperation
in the maritime domain between the related actors that only serves to help
China realize its supra-regional MSR and the Belt-and-Road initiatives.
7. Conclusion
China-ASEAN relations have grown leaps and bounds over the last couple
of decades due to their increasingly shared common destiny. Specifically,
the maritime contiguity in the guise of the South China Sea that bounds
them together regionally makes maritime cooperation a salient if not vital
dimension in their overall relations. Indeed, China has taken the initiative
to drive maritime cooperation through a comprehensive range of proposals
under the auspices of the MSR and the Belt-and-Road agenda. However,
the festering, unresolved disputes between China and the related ASEAN
claimant-states over the contested archipelagoes and their surrounding waters
in the South China Sea suggest the waterway to be more of a stumbling
rather than a building block in facilitating greater China-ASEAN maritime
cooperation. The burgeoning “trust-deficit” affecting both China and ASEAN
due a plethora of unilateral actions and counteractions in advancing and/or
defending their respective claims, not to mention, the shortage of political will

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 342

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

343

as well as shared rules and norms, have to be duly addressed and reversed
by both parties. The current situation may indeed be ripe for negotiating
a compromise, in view of the South China Sea imbroglio having arguably
reached a state described by Zartman as “mutually hurting stalemate”, where
the costs of non-compromise becomes higher for all parties concerned (cf.
Baviera, 2014). Needless to say, their failure to do so would not only ensure
China-ASEAN maritime cooperation remains in the rhetorical realm, but
also accentuates the propensity of the South China Sea turning into a “sea
of conflict” that could undermine the peace and stability of Southeast Asia,
specifically, and the East Asian region, as a whole.
Note
* 		 Lai Yew Meng is Associate Professor of Politics and International Relations at
the Centre for the Promotion of Knowledge and Language Learning (CPKLL),
Universiti Malaysia Sabah. Lai was formerly attached to the Japan Institute of
International Affairs (JIIA) as a Visiting Research Fellow (2003-2004). He was
also Junior Visiting Scholar at the Keio Institute of East Asian Studies in 2007,
and again, at the Faculty of Law and Political Science, Keio University in 2008.
His research interests include Japanese and Chinese foreign policy, Sino-Japanese
relations, East Asian security, Malaysian politics, and Indonesia-Malaysia
relations. He is the author and/or editor of multiple books and research articles
including Security Studies: A Reader (Routledge, 2011), Nationalism and Power
Politics in Japan’s Relations with China: A Neoclassical Realist Interpretation
(Routledge, 2014), “Malaysia’s Security Concerns: A Contemporary Assessment”
in Meredith L. Weiss (ed.) The Routledge Handbook of Contemporary Malaysia
(Routledge, 2015), and Higher Education in the Middle East and North Africa:
Exploring Regional and Country-Specific Potentials (Springer, 2016). He can be
reached at <lyewmeng@ums.edu.my>.

References
Agence France Presse (AFP) (2016), “China Using ‘Coercive Tactics’ in Maritime
Claims: Pentagon”, 14 May.
Association of Southeast Asian Nation (ASEAN) (2001), “Forging Closer ASEANChina Economic Relations in the Twenty-First Century”, a report submitted by
the ASEAN-China Expert Group on Economic Cooperation, October, available at
<http://www.asean.org/storage/images/archive/newdata/asean_chi.pdf> (accessed
on 15 December 2017).
Ba, Alice (2003), “China-ASEAN: Renavigating Relations for a 21st-century Asia”,
Asian Survey, Vol. 43, No. 4, pp. 622-647.
Baviera, Aileen (2014), “China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation in the SCS: Building
Trust through Shared Rules and Norms”, Boao Forum Roundtable on South China
Sea, 24-25 March.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 343

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

344

Lai Yew Meng

Cai, Penghong (2015), China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation: Process, Motivation,
and Prospects, China Institute of International Studies (CIIS), 25 September.
CNN Politics (2016), “U.S. Protests after Chinese Military Jet Lands on South China
Sea Island”, 19 April.
Egberink, Fenna and van der Putten, Frans-Paul (2011), “ASEAN, China’s Rise and
Geopolitical Stability in Asia”, Clingendael Paper No. 2, The Hague: Netherlands
Institute of International Relations ‘Clingendael’.
Emmers, Ralf (2010), Geopolitics and Maritime Territorial Disputes in East Asia,
London: Routledge.
Goldstein, Lyle and Murray, William (2004), “Undersea Dragons: China’s Maturing
Submarine Force”, International Security, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 161-196.
Hayton, Bill (2015), Is China Moving Towards Compromise in the South China Sea?,
Chatham House, the Royal Institute of International Affairs, 31 October, available
at <https://www.chathamhouse.org/expert/comment/china-moving-towardscompromise-south-china-sea#sthash.GuVvIlyJ.dpuf> (accessed on 10 May 2016).
Japan Times (2017), “Beijing Continuing ‘Steady Pattern of Militarization’ in
South China Sea”, 24 February, available at <http://www.japantimes.co.jp/
news/2017/02/24/asia-pacific/beijing-continuing-steady-pattern-militarizationsouth-china-sea/> (accessed on 15 May 2017).
Kleven, Anthony (2015), “Is China’s Maritime Silk Road a Military Strategy?”, The
Diplomat, 8 December, available at <http://thediplomat.com/2015/12/is-chinasmaritime-silk-road-a-military-strategy/> (accessed on 12 May 2016).
Kostadinov, Y.A. (2013), “Small Islands, Big Flashpoints: China’s Maritime Territorial
Disputes in South and East China Seas on International Security and Cooperation”,
Master’s Thesis, Graduate School of International Affairs, Ming Chuan University,
Taiwan.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee (2005), “Multilateralism in China’s ASEAN Policy: Its Evolution,
Characteristics and Aspirations”, Contemporary Southeast Asia, Vol. 27, No. 1,
pp. 102-122.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee (2013), “Making Sense of Malaysia’s China Policy: Asymmetry,
Proximity, and Elite’s Domestic Authority”, The Chinese Journal of International
Politics, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 429-467.
Lai, Yew Meng (2015a), “Malaysia’s Security Concerns: A Contemporary Assessment”, in Meredith L. Weiss (ed.) Routledge Handbook of Contemporary Malaysia,
London: Routledge, pp. 391-402.
Lai, Yew Meng (2015b), “Securing Sabah: Issues, Challenges and Responses”,
Journal of Public Security and Safety, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 59-79.
Law, Elizabeth (2016), “Thailand Asks China, Rivals to Look Beyond Border Rows”,
Agency France Presse (AFP), 3 June.
Mitchell, Derek J. and Harding, Brian (2009), “China and Southeast Asia”, in Carola
McGiffert (ed.). Chinese Soft Power and Its Implications for the United States:
Competition and Cooperation in the Developing World – a Report of the CSIS
Smart Power Initiative, Washington D.C.: Center for Strategic and International
Studies (CSIS).
Narine, Shaun (2008), “Forty Years of ASEAN: A Historical Review”, The Pacific
Review, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 411-429.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 344

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

South China Sea in the Context of China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation

345

Parameswaran, Prashanth (2015), “China’s Plan for ASEAN-China Maritime
Cooperation”, The Diplomat, 1 April, available at <http://thediplomat.com/
2015/04/chinas-plan-for-asean-china-maritime-cooperation/> (accessed on 10
May 2016).
Reuters (2016), “S. China Sea Tensions Surge as China Lands Plane on Artificial
Island”, 5 January, available at <https://www.reuters.com/article/southchinaseachina/s-china-sea-tensions-surge-as-china-lands-plane-on-artificial-islandidUSKBN0UI1ZX20160105> (accessed on 15 December 2017).
Reuters (2017), “China, ASEAN Agree on Framework for South China Sea Code of
Conduct”, 18 May, available at <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinaseachina-philippines-idUSKCN18E1FS> (accessed on 24 May 2017).
Severino, Rodolfo C. (2008), “ASEAN-China Relations: Past, Present and Future”,
paper presented at the Third China-Singapore Forum, Singapore, 17 April,
available at <http://www.iseas.edu.sg/aseanstudiescentre/ascp5-08.pdf> (accessed
on 13 May 2016).
Shen, Jianming (2002), “China’s Sovereignty Over the South China Sea Islands: A
Historical Perspective”, Chinese Journal of International Law, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp.
94-157.
South China Morning Post (2016), “100 Chinese Boats ‘in Malaysian waters’ of
Disputed South China Sea: Beijing Says ‘It’s Fishing Season’, Analysts Say It’s a
Message”, 25 March, available at <http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacydefence/article/1930573/gone-fishing-100-chinese-boats-malaysian-waters>
(accessed on 10 January 2017).
Stuart-Fox, Martin (2003), A Short History of China and Southeast Asia: Tribute,
Trade and Influence, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin.
Sutter, Robert and Huang, Chin-hao (2016), “China-Southeast Asia Relations: Limited
Moderation amid Pressures and Complaints”, Comparative Connections, Vol. 17,
No. 3 (January), pp. 61-72.
The State Council, The People’s Republic of China (2017), “Belt and Road Forum
to Bring about Fresh Ideas”, available at <http://english.gov.cn/news/video/
2017/05/12/content_281475653319187.htm> (accessed on 20 May 2017).
Valencia, Mark J. (2015), “Maritime Security Cooperation in Asia: Visions and
Realities”, The Japan Times, 17 September.
Williams, Robert D. (2016), “South China Sea: Tribunal Issues Landmark Ruling
in South China Sea Arbitration”, Lawfare, 12 July, available at <https://www.
lawfareblog.com/tribunal-issues-landmark-ruling-south-china-sea-arbitration>
(accessed on 15 February 2017).
Zhao, Suisheng (1998), Power Competition in East Asia: From the Old Chinese World
Order to Post-Cold War Regional Multipolarity, London: Macmillan.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 345

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 346

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

The Philippines’
Lawfare versus
China’s
Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute
International
Journal
of China
Studies
Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017, pp. 347-372

347

The 12 July 2016 Permanent Court of Arbitration’s
(PCA) Award: The Philippines’ Lawfare versus
China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute
Renato Cruz De Castro*
International Studies Department
De La Salle University, Manila, Philippines
(Visiting Research Fellow, Japan Institute of International Affairs)

Abstract
On 12 July 2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) ruled in favour of the
Philippines in 14 of its 15 submissions against China’s expansive territorial
claims in the South China Sea. The PCA declared that China’s claims –
defined by the nine-dash line – violate international law. The arbitral tribunal
also asserted that Chinese reclamation and construction projects in the land
features of the disputed waters infringe on Philippines’ territorial rights. The
ruling likewise found China guilty of destroying the maritime environment
by building artificial islands and illegally preventing Filipinos from fishing
and conducting oil exploration activities in the area. The PCA award to the
Philippines illustrates the efficient and impartial dispute resolution mechanism
of the UNCLOS as well as the short-term triumph of the Philippines’
lawfare over China’s realpolitik approach in the dispute. Unfortunately, the
Duterte Administration has shelved the PCA ruling saying that enforcing it
has a minimal chance of success. Instead, he has adopted an appeasement
policy in exchange for China’s goodwill and economic largess. The article
concludes that the Duterte Administration’s course of action lends credence
to former State Councilor Dai Bingguo’s statement that the PCA award to the
Philippines is nothing more than a “piece of trash paper”.
Keywords: China-Philippine maritime-territorial dispute, Permanent Court
of Arbitration (PCA) award, realpolitik, South China Sea, United Nations
Convention on the Law of the SEA (UNCLOS)

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 347

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

348

Renato Cruz De Castro

1. Introduction
… Law, like politics, is a meeting place for ethics and power.
The same is true of international law, which can have no existence except
in so as far as there is an international community which, on the basis of
a minimum common view, recognizes it as binding. International law is a
function of the political community of nations. Its defects are due, not to any
technical shortcomings but to the embryonic character of the community in
which it functions.1
E.H. Carr, 1939

				
The Scarborough Shoal stand-off in 2012 exemplifies a historic pattern of
Chinese protracted, low-intensity, and incremental moves to gain control of
a large portion of the South China Sea. The impasse pitted the Philippines
– which has the weakest navy in the region, and an ill-equipped air force
incapable of safeguarding its vast maritime territory – with China in a
naval brinkmanship game. The stand-off began on 10 April 2012 when
the Philippine Navy’s (PN’s) flagship, the BRP Gregorio Del Pilar tried to
apprehend several Chinese fishing boats at the Scarborough Shoal. However,
at this juncture, two Chinese maritime surveillance vessels arrived and
prevented the arrest of the Chinese fishermen who were hauling corals, clams
and live sharks into their boats. To diffuse the tension and avoid a dangerous
armed confrontation with the Chinese patrol vessels, the Philippines
replaced its surface combatant with a smaller coast guard vessel. Instead of
reciprocating, China raised the stakes by deploying the Yuzheng 310 – the
most advanced and largest patrol vessel equipped with machine guns, light
cannons and electronic sensors. When the Philippines government filed a
diplomatic protest, the Chinese Embassy in Manila contended that the three
Chinese surveillance vessels in Scarborough Shoal were “in the area fulfilling
the duties of safeguarding Chinese maritime rights and interests.” It added that
the shoal “is an integral part of the Chinese territory and the waters around it
are the traditional fishing area for Chinese fishermen.”2 Clearly, this incident
underscores an international reality – Chinese economic and naval power cast
a long shadow over the Philippines and Vietnam, which are at the forefront of
a maritime dispute with China in the South China Sea.3
However, much to China’s surprise, the Philippine government decided
to fight back. In January 2013, the Philippines directly confronted Chinese
realpolitik approach in the South China Sea dispute by filing a statement of
claim against China in the Arbitral Tribunal of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
This paper examines why and how the Philippines used the legal/
liberal approach as lawfare to blunt China’s realpolitik strategy against
the Philippines which began as early as 1995 with the occupation of the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 348

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

349

Mischief Reef by Chinese forces, and culminated with the 2012 confrontation
between a Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) vessel and four Chinese Maritime
Surveillance (CMS) ships at the Scarborough Shoal. It addresses two major
questions: 1) what events led to the Philippines’ filing of a case against
China’s expansive maritime claims in the South China Sea in 2013, and
2) how does the 2016 Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) award to
the Philippines affect its stance against China’s expansionist moves in the
disputed waters? This paper also raises these ancillary questions: 1) how
did the Philippines respond to China’s realpolitik tactic during and after the
Scarborough Shoal stand-off? 2) How did the Philippines pursue its liberal/
legal approach vis-à-vis China’s realpolitik approach after the Scarborough
Shoal stand-off? 3) How did the PCA award to the Philippines blunt China’s
realpolitik approach to the maritime dispute? 4) What are the geo-strategic
implications of the PCA award to the Philippines for China’s maritime design
in the contested waters? 5) How has the Duterte Administration used the
PCA ruling to challenge China’s claim of sovereignty over most of the South
China Sea?
2. International Law as a Lawfare
A common premise in the study of International Relations/Global Society
since Thucydides wrote an account of the 27-year Peloponnesian War among
the Greek city-states is that the major or big powers overwhelm or subdue
small or minor powers in all kinds of conflicts from wars and diplomatic
tussles to business and sports competitions. Furthermore, in an asymmetric
conflict – a contention between political actors with a wide disparity in
capabilities – the strong is bound to and should win.4 However, history shows
that power preponderance does not give big powers carte blanche to impose
their will on the small powers, and determine international outcomes. Small or
minor powers, on several occasions, have applied balancing strategies against
the major powers despite the military and diplomatic disparities between
them, e.g., Finland against the Soviet Union in 1939-1940, North Vietnam
against the U.S. in the 1960s, Nicaragua versus the U.S. in the 1980s, and
finally, Iraq against the U.S. in 1991 and again in 2003. Clearly, inferences
based on relative power relations cannot explain why small powers challenge
big powers and in certain cases, even provoke or instigate an international
crisis or an armed conflict.5 Sometimes, small powers ignore disproportionate
power relations and adopt a balancing policy against big powers because of
their domestic politics, geography and ability to manipulate local circumstances. If global conditions for their balancing gambits are ripe, small
powers can either draw on their geo-strategic location to exert leverage on the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 349

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

350

Renato Cruz De Castro

powerful state, rely on other major powers for military assistance and security
guarantee, or rely on the liberal approach by appealing to international law
and global/regional organizations.
The liberal approach banks on a promise of rewards, the power of
persuasion and reliance on the legitimacy of its claims in the dispute.6 It
uses legal precedent and reciprocity to make one’s claim legitimate and
that of the opponent illegitimate before the global society. Collectively,
these methods comprise the liberal/legal institutional approach. The liberal/
legal/institutional approach is one that pursues conflict resolution through
negotiation, bargaining, adherence to international norms or law, and debates
that promote problem-solving rather than contention and subjugation.
This approach provides compromise, third-party mediation or arbitration,
or adjudication of some sort.7 This approach rejects certain types of state
policy or behaviour, particularly unilateral actions or power-politics goals,
while preferring alternative styles of conflict management. It also fosters
interactive communication to reduce the possibility of war, even in the
presence of a conflict.8
Lacking a credible military capability to stand up against China’s naval
prowess in the South China Sea, the Philippines opted for the liberal/legal
approach leading to the use of lawfare to resolve its maritime dispute with
this emergent power. By availing itself of the arbitration mechanism of the
UNCLOS, the Philippines adopted international law as a “lawfare” or the use
of law as a substitute for traditional military means to achieve an operational
objective.9 It is the application of legal or judicial processes to enable a
weaker adversary to engage in political and legal battle against a superior
opponent.10 It is the same vein as Sun Tzu’s aphorism to “subdue the enemy
without fighting.”11 The importance of this approach is clear and cannot be
overemphasized particularly when former Foreign Secretary Del Rosario
opined that the “UNCLOS has never been more important for the Philippines
than today, when overlapping maritime claims threatens as never before the
peace and prosperity in our part of the world.”
The Philippines’ filing statement of 15 submissions against China’s
expansive maritime claims in the arbitral tribunal of the UNCLOS showed
that the former could not be subdued easily by the latter’s strong-arm tactic.
In effect, the Philippines thwarted China’s realpolitik approach as it sought a
multilateral and legal solution to the maritime row and argued that the global
society has a stake in the outcome of the case. The country showed to the
international community that the appropriate way of dealing with disputes
involving conflicting claims to the global commons should be the liberal/
legal approach based on multilateralism and international law and not on
sheer powerpolitik.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 350

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

351

3. China’s Maritime Expansion in the South China Sea
In the mid-1980s, Admiral Liu Huaqing, the Commander of the People’s
Liberation Army Navy (PLAN), announced the “Near Seas Active Defense”
doctrine. This doctrine called for the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to
form layered defences in the first island-chain to deter a potential adversary
from threatening China from the sea.12 In the mid-1990s, China developed an
arsenal of conventional yet inexpensive and highly precise armed ballistic and
cruise missiles aimed at virtually every U.S. air-base and port in the Western
Pacific. These weapons are also designed to sink enemy surface vessels
(including U.S. aircraft carriers) operating hundreds of miles off China’s
coast.13 Chinese military planners believe that their missiles, with anti-access/
area denial (A2/AD) capabilities, can adequately prevent the U.S. Navy from
intervening or provoking a confrontation with China in the region.14 Thus,
since the last decade of the 20th century, the U.S. Navy maintains that China
has the means to disrupt or slow down the deployment of American air and
naval forces to the theatre of operations.15
China’s phenomenal economic prosperity during the first decade of
the 21st century transformed it into an engine of growth in East Asia and,
indeed, the wider world. With its gross domestic product (GDP) surpassing
Japan in 2010, it has become the second largest economy in the world next
only to the U.S. Its rapid economic progress has not only made the country
more confident and assertive in foreign affairs but also heightened its military
prowess.16 China has had an annual double-digit increase in defence spending
since 2006. Recently, the Chinese government increased its defence budget by
13% to boost the PLAN’s capability to accomplish a wide range of military
functions including winning local wars under information-age conditions.
Since the early years of the new millennium, the PLAN has easily acquired a
fleet of Russian-made diesel-electric Kilo-class submarines and Sovremmenyclass destroyers, along with several types of indigenously-built destroyers,
frigates, and nuclear-powered attack submarines. It also continues to upgrade
its operational capabilities across the waters surrounding Taiwan and has
deployed two new classes of ballistic and attack submarines. In 2012, the
PLAN commissioned China’s first aircraft carrier – the Lianoning. Likewise,
China has developed and deployed the carrier-based J-15 fighter plane and
the new Jaingdao-class light frigate for long-distance security patrol in the
disputed waters around the Spratlys and the Senkaku Islands.17
China’s current naval build-up is designed to bolster its A2AD, which can
prevent foreign navies from occupying or crossing vast stretches of maritime
territory, and make the Western Pacific off limits to the U.S. and Japanese
navies.18 To achieve this goal, the PLA has implemented the following:19
a) setting up anti-satellite missiles, lasers and a sophisticated cyber-attack

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 351

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

352

Renato Cruz De Castro

mechanism to target the U.S. military’s command and control systems that
rely operationally and logistically on satellites and the Internet; b) deployment
of conventional ballistic and cruise missiles, and stealth combat aircraft that
can destroy major U.S. military facilities in the region and limit the U.S.
Navy’s ability to manoeuvre in international waters; and c) the purchase of
submarines armed with advanced torpedoes and high-speed cruise missiles to
counter U.S. aircraft carriers and the surface vessels that protect them.
Strong economically and militarily, China has taken several provocative
actions in the South and East China Seas. These include the unilateral
declaration of an East China Sea Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ);
the active conduct of several live-fire naval exercises by the PLAN and the
People’s Liberation Army’s Air Force (PLAAF) in the Western Pacific/South
China Sea, and the hardline responses by the PLAN in coordination with
other Chinese maritime law-enforcement agencies on territorial rows with
the Philippines and Vietnam in the contested sea.20 These moves worry the
other littoral states about China’s maritime design in the region.21 From their
viewpoint, these manoeuvres smack of Chinese territorial expansionism and
adventurism.22 However, from China’s perspective, it is a case of the country
outgrowing its subordinate status in the past and feeling confident enough
to press its case in the western Pacific – to stand resolute in managing its
territorial and sovereignty issues in the East and South China Seas.23
Arguably, China’s aggressive pursuit of its territorial claim over the
South China Sea has increased in tandem with the expansion of its navy
and maritime services.24 Its regular naval exercises utilize modern surface
combatants and even submarines. 25 These actions concretize China’s
intention to unilaterally and militarily resolve the maritime issue, flaunt
its naval capabilities, and impress upon the other claimant states its “de
facto” ownership of the disputed territories.26 In the long run, China’s naval
capabilities will be directed not only to expand its maritime domain but to
deny foreign navies – especially that of the U.S. – access to the South China
and East China Seas. In time, it will be capable of depriving the U.S. 7th Fleet
access to the Western Pacific inside of the so-called first-island chain.27 Hence,
China’s long-term goal to project its naval power not only to the near seas but
to the far seas – the sea adjacent to the outer rim of the first-island-chain and
those of the north Pacific – is no longer a remote possibility.28
4. On the Path of China’s Maritime Expansion: The Philippines
By early 2012, China’s fervent nationalism, growing naval prowess, and
unilateral moves were overtly directed against a militarily-weak Philippines.
As early as the last quarter of 2010, the Philippine Department of Foreign
Affairs (DFA) noted increased Chinese naval presence and activities in the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 352

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

353

Spratlys and monitored around six or seven major intrusions by Chinese
vessels into the waters claimed by the Philippines. On 25 February 2011,
Filipino fishermen alleged that they were fired upon by a Jianghu-B
class missile frigate off Jackson Atoll, 140 miles west of Palawan.29 On 2
March 2011, two Chinese patrol boats reportedly harassed a survey vessel
commissioned by the Philippines Department of Energy (DOE) to conduct oil
exploration in the Reed Bank, 150 kilometres east of the Spratly Islands and
250 kilometres west of the Philippine island of Palawan.
Then in June 2011, the PN discovered a number of Chinese structures
in the vicinity of Philippine-claimed Iroquois Reef-Amy Douglas Bank near
Palawan and within the country’s 200-nautical mile exclusive economic zone
(EEZ). Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) observers reported that CMS
vessels and PLAN ships unloaded building materials, erected an undetermined
number of posts, and placed a buoy near the breaker of the Amy Douglas
Bank. In a diplomatic protest sent to the Chinese Embassy in Manila, the
DFA argued that any new construction in the vicinity of the uninhabited Amy
Douglas Bank is a clear violation of the 2002 ASEAN-China Declaration on
the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea.30
In response, the Chinese foreign ministry sternly told the Philippines to
stop “harming China’s sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, which
leads to unilateral actions that can expand and complicate [sic] South China
Sea dispute.”31 It was Beijing’s defensive reaction when the Philippines
unravelled China’s plan to construct an oil rig deep within the Philippines’
EEZ. The Philippines also sought clarification on the recent sightings of
CMS and PLAN ships near the Kalayaan group of islands. Beijing went on
to demand that Manila seek Chinese permission first before it could conduct
oil exploration activities even within the Philippines’ EEZ.
Moreover, the Chinese ambassador in Manila justified the actions of the
two Chinese patrol boast that harassed a Philippine survey ship at the Reed
Bank. He regarded it as an exercise of jurisdiction over purported part that is
a part of China’s territory.32 He added that the Philippine surveying activity in
the area is a “violation of Chinese sovereignty and that is something that we
(China) are against.” Thus, China’s aggressive actions against the Philippines
and Vietnam in the first half of 2011 heightened the tension in the contested
sea. Consequently, the previous Aquino Administration recognized that the
Philippines was potentially on a collision course with China relative to the
South China Sea imbroglio.33
5. The 2012 Scarborough Shoal Stand-off
The two-month stand-off between the Philippines and China at the
Scarborough Shoal epitomized an international incident waiting to happen.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 353

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

354

Renato Cruz De Castro

The stand-off began on 8 April 2012, when a Philippine Air Force (PAF)
reconnaissance plane spotted eight Chinese fishing boats around the shoal.
Immediately, President Aquino ordered the AFP and the PN to step up
their monitoring activities and enforce the country’s fisheries and maritime
environmental protection laws. Accordingly, the PN deployed the BRP
Gregorio Del Pilar, the recently-purchased U.S. Coast Guard cutter that
sailed from its homeport in Palawan into the shoal. The ship was tasked with
protecting marine environment and resources and asserting the sovereignty of
the Philippines as a coastal state.
On the morning of 10 April, the BRP Gregorio Del Pilar verified
the presence of eight Chinese fishing vessels anchored inside the lagoon.
Following the established rules of engagement, the PN ship dispatched a
boarding team to inspect the fishing vessels. Large amounts of illegally
collected corals, giant clams and live sharks were found inside the compartments of the first fishing vessel boarded. On the fateful April day,
however, before the PN could apprehend the fishing vessels at the shoal,
however, two Chinese marine surveillance vessels arrived and placed
themselves between the arresting Philippine warship and the Chinese fishing
boats. The surveillance vessels not only prevented the arrest of the Chinese
fishermen but also informed the captain of the BRP Gregorio Del Pilar that
he had strayed into Chinese territorial waters. Clearly, China’s reaction was
a complete turnaround from its previous stance on maritime encroachments.
Firstly, the Chinese patrol vessels inhibited the PN from arresting the
fishermen. Secondly, China defied Philippine territorial rights over the shoal
that is only 224 kilometres from the province of Zambales in Luzon and well
within the country’s EEZ that extends outwardly up to 200 nautical miles.
While Chinese and Philippine patrol vessels were in an impasse at the
Scarborough Shoal, the Chinese Embassy in Manila confirmed that both
countries were engaged in a long and tedious diplomatic negotiation. Again,
the Chinese Embassy articulated the official mantra that the Scarborough
Shoal is an integral part of Chinese territory. It also warned Manila not to
take actions that could irreparably damage Philippines-China relations and
affect the stability of the South China Sea.34 By the end of April 2012, the
Philippines-China negotiations were getting nowhere. The Chinese embassy
accused Manila of negotiating in bad-faith and of distorting the facts during
the lengthy discussions. It also “urged the Philippines to stop illegal activities
and leave this area,” and insisted once more that China has sovereign rights
over almost the whole of the South China Sea. The embassy spokesperson
also said “that ever since the ancient times, numerous documents on Chinese
history have put down definitely in writing that Huangyan Island belongs to
Chinese territory.” Manila, in turn, criticized China’s aggressive stance against
other claimant states like the Philippines.35 Tersely, it reminded China that the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 354

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

355

“responsibility for resolving the stand-off in the South China Sea rests not
just with one party but both parties” and challenged it to let the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Seas (ITLOS) mediate the dispute.
6. The End of the Stand-off and its Aftermath
In mid-June 2012, the two countries withdrew their civilian vessels on the
pretext of the onset of the typhoon season. On 16 June, President Aquino
ordered all Philippine vessels to leave the shoal because of rough seas and
heavy rains brought by a seasonal typhoon.36 On 18 June, Chinese fishing
boats and civilian vessels near the area were heading back to port. A Chinese
foreign ministry spokesperson announced that with the withdrawal of the
civilian ships, “We (China) hope (that) there will continue to be an easing
in the situation and bilateral cooperation will recover and be safeguarded.”37
The following day, the China Maritime Search and Rescue Center deployed a
rescue ship to the Scarborough Shoal to assist Chinese fishing boats leaving
the shoal due to “rough sea conditions.”38 The coordinated withdrawal of
Filipino and Chinese civilian vessels from the shoal came amid ongoing
consultations between the two countries. However, while the withdrawal
of these vessels was aimed to de-escalate the tension, both countries have
persisted in claiming sovereignty over the shoal.
In June 2012, when tension at the Scarborough Shoal eased up, China
immediately consolidated its control over the area. Chinese Maritime
Surveillance (CMS) vessels constructed a chain barrier across the mouth of
the shoal to block the Philippines’ access to it. China also deployed these
vessels to protect the fleet of Chinese fishing boats operating deep into the
Philippines’ EEZ. In October 2012, then Chinese Assistant Deputy Foreign
Minister Fu Ying visited Manila for a high-level dialogue. The visit was seen
as China’s stop-gap measure to prevent a similar critical confrontation from
happening again. However, instead of finding a mutually acceptable solution,
the high-ranking official warned Manila not to do the following: 1) appeal
to the UN; 2) internationalize the issue in forums such as the ASEAN; 3)
coordinate with other countries such as the U.S.; and 4) issue any press release
regarding the negotiations. In effect, she badgered the Philippines to accept
in silence China’s exercise of de facto occupation of the Scarborough Shoal.
In January 2013, the Philippines directly confronted Chinese realpolitik
approach in the South China Sea dispute by filing a statement of claim against
China in the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague in the Netherlands.
In its Notification and Statement of Claim, the Philippines asked the arbitral
tribunal to determine the country’s legal entitlements under the UNCLOS to
the Spratly Islands, Scarborough Shoal, Mischief Reef, and other land features
within its 200-mile EEZ. These entitlements are based on the UNCLOS

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 355

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

356

Renato Cruz De Castro

provisions on the rights of the Philippines to a Territorial Sea and Contiguous
Zone under Part II, to an Exclusive Economic Zone under Part V, and to a
Continental Shelf under Part VI.39
In its statement of claim, the Philippines made it clear that it was not
seeking arbitration over which party has sovereignty over the islands. Rather,
it was merely requesting the arbitral tribunal to issue an opinion on the
following issues: a) whether China’s maritime claim in the South China Sea
based on its so-called nine-dash line is valid or contrary to UNCLOS; and
b) whether the Scarborough Shoal, Johnson Reef, Cuarteron Reef, and Fiery
Reef, which are submerged features and that are below sea level at high tide
are islands or rocks under Article 121 (3) of the Convention. It also petitioned
the Arbitral Tribunal to declare that the Philippines is entitled to a 12-mile
Territorial Sea, a 200-mile EEZ, and a Continental under Parts II, V, and VI
of UNCLOS and that China has unlawfully prevented the Philippines from
exercising its rights to exploit resources in its EEZ and to navigation within
and beyond the 200-mile of the Philippines’ archipelagic baselines.40
The notification and statement of claim was filed to show that the
Philippines’ ownership of its six-islands in the Spratlys and other land features
within its legitimate maritime jurisdiction is firmly grounded on international
law – specifically the UNCLOS. The Philippines also requested the arbitral
tribunal to require China to “bring its domestic legislation into conformity
with its obligations under the UNCLOS and for it to stop any activities that
violate the rights of the Philippines in its maritime domain in the ‘West
Philippine Sea’ (South China Sea).”
7. Realpolitik Strikes Back!
As expected, China refused to participate in the international mediation and
openly expressed its opposition to the Philippines’ filing of a case with the
arbitral tribunal. On 20 February 2013, the Chinese ambassador in Manila
returned the notice of arbitration to the Department of Foreign Affairs. At the
same time, Mr. Hong Lei, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson in Beijing
branded the filing as “factually flawed” and accused Manila of violating the
non-binding 2001 Declaration of the Code of Conduct of the Parties in the
South China Sea which provides for ASEAN states and China to settle their
maritime disputes among themselves.
In April 2013, a visiting Chinese foreign ministry official warned Manila
of the consequences of pushing the arbitration process against China.41 In
late August 2013, Beijing withdrew its invitation for President Aquino to
attend the China-ASEAN Expo in Nanning after the Philippine government
declined its precondition for Manila to withdraw its arbitration case filed
with the arbitral tribunal.42 From early September to mid-October 2013,

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 356

29/12/2017 9:22:14 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

357

President Xi Jin Ping and Prime Minister Li Keqiang took part in a public
relations show of strong Chinese interest in fostering relations and managing
differences with the Southeast Asian countries by visiting Indonesia, Malaysia,
Brunei, Thailand, and Vietnam. The two Chinese leaders, however, snubbed
the Philippines. China’s resentment towards the Philippines became more
glaring in November 2013 after it donated a measly US$100,000 to the relief
and rehabilitation efforts for the victims of Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan) – a
category five typhoon. As a result, the international media questioned China’s
ability to assume global leadership and responsibility.43
From 7 to 13 July 2015, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The
Hague held its first hearing on the Philippine claims against China in the
South China Sea. Then Philippine Foreign Affairs Secretary Albert Del
Rosario made a presentation before the five-member tribunal hearing
Manila’s case filed against China’s expansive maritime claim in the disputed
waters. He acknowledged that the tribunal does not have authority to make
decisions on the issues of sovereignty. However, he said that the Philippines
wanted to clarify its maritime entitlements in the South China Sea, a question
over which the tribunal has jurisdiction.44 He also argued that the 1982
UNCLOS does not recognize, or permit the exercise of so called “historic”
rights in areas beyond the limits of maritime zones that are recognized or
established by the UNCLOS.”45 He then lamented that China has acted
forcefully to assert its so-called right by exploiting the living and non-living
resources in the areas beyond the UNCLOS limits while forcibly preventing
other coastal states, including the Philippines from exploiting resources in
the same areas.46
To justify its non-participation in the proceedings, China cited its
policy of resolving disputes on territorial and maritime rights only through
direct consultation and negotiation with the countries directly involved.47 It
repeatedly declared that “it will neither accept nor participate in the arbitration
unilaterally initiated by the Philippines,” and it also made it clear – through
the publication of a position paper, the 2014 December Position Paper and
in other official statements – that, “in its view the tribunal lacks jurisdiction
in this matter.”48 For a crafty player that had benefited from the ambiguity of
its goal and on the full extent of its South China Sea claim, China had much
to lose in the ruling.49 Since 2009, however, it has slowly shifted its strategy
away from delaying the resolution of the dispute to one that emphasizes its
sovereignty over the contested waters. This tactic aims to deter other claimant
states like the Philippines and Vietnam from cementing their claims and to
enable China to negotiate with small powers from the position of strength.50
Furthermore, it does not want to extend any legitimacy to the tribunal since it
holds other instruments of power – economic, diplomatic, and strategic – that
it can wield to settle the dispute according to its own terms.51

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 357

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

358

Renato Cruz De Castro

Without China’s participation, the arbitration proceeded in accordance
with the provisions of UNCLOS. Representatives from Indonesia, Japan,
Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam also attended the hearings. 52 On 29
October 2015, after almost three years of proceedings, the arbitral tribunal
unanimously decided that it has jurisdiction over the maritime dispute
between China and the Philippines in the South China Sea. In its ruling, the
tribunal held that both the Philippines and China are parties to the Convention
and are bound by its provisions on the settlement of the dispute.53 It also
stated that China’s choice not to participate in the proceedings does not
deprive the tribunal of its jurisdiction over the case and that the Philippine
decision to commence arbitration was not an abuse of the UNCLOS’ dispute
settlement procedure.54 The tribunal’s ruling meant that it would hold further
hearings to settle the highly contentious territorial dispute between the
Philippines and China in the South China Sea. On 30 November 2015, the
Philippine panel concluded the presentation of its claims against China to
the tribunal.
8. Blunting China’s Realpolitik Approach in the South China Sea 		
Dispute
On 12 July 2016, the PCA delivered its long-awaited ruling on the protracted
and tense maritime dispute between the Philippines and China. Surprisingly,
the PCA ruled in favour of the Philippines in 14 of its 15 claims against
China’s expansive territorial claims in the South China Sea. The court
declared that China’s claims – defined by the nine-dash line – defy and
violate international law. The tribunal concluded that whatever historic
rights China had to the resources in the waters of the South China Sea were
extinguished when it joined and ratified the UNCLOS.55 It also noted that,
although Chinese navigators and fishermen, as well as those of other states,
had historically made use of the islands in the South China Sea, there was
no evidence that China had historically exercised exclusive control over the
waters or their resources.56 The tribunal asserted that historical navigation and
fishing by Chinese fishermen and navigators in the waters of the South China
Sea involved the exercise of high seas freedom, rather than a historic right,
and that there was no concrete evidence that China had historically exercised
exclusive control over the South China Sea or prevented other states from
exploiting its resources. This ruling on China’s claim to historic rights within
the nine-dash line was a major legal victory for the Philippines since this was
the major reason why it initiated the arbitration proceedings against Asia’s
new emergent power.57
In addition, the PCA ascertained although the Spratly Islands were
historically used by small groups of fishermen and several fishing and

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 358

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

359

guano mining enterprises, these land features could not sustain habitation
by a stable community. Accordingly, the tribunal gathered that none of the
Spratly Islands is capable of generating extended maritime zones.58 It also
noted that these features now have constructed installations with maintenance
personnel. However, these modern presences are dependent on outside
resources and support. In fact, many of the features have been modified to
improve their habitability. The tribunal ruled that the Chinese land reclamation
and construction projects in the area infringe on the Philippines’ territorial
rights. More importantly, it found China guilty of destroying the maritime
environment by building artificial islands and illegally preventing Filipinos
from fishing and exploring oil in the area.
All in all, these decisions effectively invalidate any Chinese claim based
on the nine-dash line to more than the disputed land features themselves
and the territorial seas they encompass. Furthermore, the PCA determined
that China violated the rights and obligations of nations utilizing the ocean
by destroying the marine environment, through its constructions of artificial
islands; openly defied Philippines sovereign rights by interfering with oil
and gas exploration at the Reed Bank; and illegally constructed a facility on
Mischief Reef, which sits on the Philippine continental shelf.59
The PCA award to the Philippine case is a strong assertion of the
impartiality and effectiveness of the dispute resolution mechanism of
UNCLOS and more significantly, the triumph of the Philippines’ liberal
approach over China’s realpolitik approach in the maritime dispute. On the
implication of the PCA’s award for the South China Sea dispute, an American
specialist on maritime law commented:
…the decision is much more that a pyrrhic victory for the Philippines as
some will be tempted to suggest. This opinion will have normative power
that over the long run will and should affect the way every state thinks about
the South China Sea in the future. Ultimately, the ruling’s power is not in
its direct enforceability, but the way it will inevitability alter perceptions
about right and wrong actions in the South China Sea. Coercion will no
longer stand with moral impunity. Even if indirectly, the opinion should
therefore serve as the basis for improved bilateral relations in the future. It
has significantly narrowed the scope of what is in reasonable and justifiable
dispute and therefore should help the parties move closer to a final resolution
of their differences.60

9. The PCA Award as a Lawfare
The PCA award to the Philippines is not simply a sweeping legal victory
and a decisive setback for China. It also has significant strategic and
geopolitical implications for East Asia. Thus, it is considered a potential

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 359

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

360

Renato Cruz De Castro

game changer that has introduced new factors transforming the strategic
milieu of the dispute, reshaping the actors’ strategies and identities, and
strongly motivating them to change their courses of actions and decisions.
At the core of this change is the engendered clarity of the maritime dispute
particularly China’s claim based on the nine-dash line that has neither legal
nor historical foundation and the ruling that no country can lawfully assert
“historic rights” in the high seas.61 By clarifying the legal status of the South
China Sea, the ruling has exposed China’s expansive maritime claim as
simply a component of its concerted long-term maritime strategy aimed to
erode American preponderant position in the region, weaken the credibility of
U.S. security commitments in East Asia, fragment ASEAN and other regional
bodies, and coerce specific regional states to accommodate its self-defined
and self-proclaimed “core interests.”62
Likewise, the PCA ruling revealed that the maritime dispute between
China and the other littoral states such as the Philippines is part and parcel
of an old-fashioned great power competition between an emergent regional
power and a status quo power in East Asia.63 From a geo-strategic perspective,
Chinese control of the South China Sea will extend the PLA’s A2/AD.64
This will enable the PLA to fully deploy advanced submarines and surface
combatants, for longer-ranged strike warfare, and more sophisticated aircraft
to delay or deter U.S. response to regional crisis, such as over the Taiwan
Straits or in the Senkaku Islands.65 Maritime control over the South China Sea
will also support the PLAN’s power-project capabilities into the far seas.66
In specific terms, using its historic claim as the legal basis of its maritime
expansion, China was able to occupy, build-up and construct military-grade
facilities on a network of seven disputed land features in the South China Sea.
These fortified land features can be fully militarized within days and utilized
to intimidate other littoral states, as well as complicate U.S. naval operations
in the South China Sea short of creating an all-out conflict.67
Consequently, the PCA ruling forces states in the region to take sides –
either to be on the side of international law (or the status quo) or against it
(revisionism leading to China’s domination of the South China Sea) – and
this significantly narrows the room for manoeuvre by both sides. Prior to
the ruling, regional states articulated their own interpretations of the various
South China Sea disputes and preferred to be fence-sitters. Interestingly, the
PCA award also produces the basis and motivation for cooperation among
states that are threatened by China’s maritime expansion and consequently,
are supportive of international law. Before 12 July 2016, the maxim of “each
to his own” hindered these states from engaging in robust cooperation to
constrain China’s maritime expansion. With the PCA’s ruling that China’s
nine-dash line is invalid, littoral states like the Philippines, Malaysia,
Indonesia, and Vietnam can join forces and lawfully align themselves with

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 360

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

361

major naval powers like the United States, Japan, Australia, and India to
defend their EEZ against Chinese encroachment, and rationalize this effort to
uphold international law. If cooperation among these states before the ruling
could easily be interpreted as taking sides and ganging up on China, now
it can be regarded as a collective effort by the international community to
defend the rule-based order against an aggressive and expansionist power.68
These states can then apply a strategy of constrainment on China.
Nonetheless, formulating a constrainment policy entails an assessment of
whether China’s neighbours and the major powers are strong enough to resist
Chinese expansion in the South China Sea.69 The policy also requires that the
interests of the states must be collectively defended by means of incentives
for good behaviour, deterrence for bad behaviour, and punishment when
deterrence fails.70 The legitimacy of the PCA ruling and its alignment with the
strategic interests of these states will provide the raison d’etre of this coalition
which will set the appropriate mechanisms for the effective implementation
of the constrainment policy on China.
10. The Duterte Administration’s Goal: To Reduce the Ruling as a 		
“Piece of Trash”
Despite the fact that the eagerly awaited 12 July 2016 PCA ruling was
a legal victory for the Philippines, the Duterte Administration met the
decision with sober, cautious and even muted reaction. Then Philippine
Foreign Affairs Secretary Perfecto Yasay Jr. called for restraint and sobriety
among the Filipinos who were euphoric about their country’s decisive legal
triumph against an expansionist power. During the ASEAN summit meeting
in Laos, President Rodrigo Duterte digressed from his prepared speech on
the PCA ruling on the South China Sea, and instead, narrated accounts of
American atrocities against the Moros of Mindanao in the early 20th century.
Before the summit, President Duterte claimed that the PCA ruling is purely
a bilateral issue between the Philippines and China, and not a matter for
ASEAN, echoing both Cambodia’s and China’s position on the matter. On 13
September 2016, he announced an end to Philippine-U.S. joint patrols in the
South China Sea and, added that the PN will confine its routine patrol within
the country’s territorial waters to avoid provoking other countries.71
In his speech at the Center of Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in
Washington D.C., in September 2016, Secretary Yasay reasoned out “that joint
patrols (with the U.S.) could be seen by China as a provocative acting, making
it more difficult to peacefully resolved territorial disputes.”72 He disclosed that
the Philippines is quietly making arrangements through diplomatic channels
for bilateral talks with China without any preconditions. Clearly, the Duterte
Administration is determined to establish an entente with China even though

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 361

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

362

Renato Cruz De Castro

the Chinese Navy and Coast Guard vessels are operating inside potential
flashpoints such as the Scarborough Shoal and the Mischief Reef.
President Duterte pursues a calibrated foreign policy by gravitating closer
to China. He declared that he is opened to any direct bilateral negotiations.
In contrast, former President Aquino brought the dispute to be resolved
by the Permanent Court of Arbitration. Supportive of President Duterte’s
policy pronouncements, then Foreign Secretary Yasay commented “that the
relationship between the two countries (China and the Philippines) was not
limited to the maritime dispute. There were other areas of concern in such
fields as investment, trade and tourism and discussing them could open the
doors for talks on the maritime issues.”73
In late September 2016, President Duterte divulged that he would forge
“new alliances” to cushion the fallout from the possible withdrawal of the
U.S. from the Philippines in 2017.74 In a speech delivered in the province
of Pampanga, he urged Filipinos to make a small sacrifice for his plan of
“crossing the Rubicon” in his ties with the U.S. as he establishes partnerships
with rival countries (China and Russia) or what he called countries on the
other side of the ideological barrier.75 He also announced his forthcoming
visits to Russia and China to chart an independent foreign policy and “open
(new) alliances” with these two regional powers that are ideological and
traditional rivals of the U.S., the Philippines’ only strategic ally.
In his most recent speeches and policy initiatives, he has intimated that
he is diplomatically and strategically distancing the Philippines from the
United States while gravitating towards China and Russia.76 On 21 October
2016, 250 Filipino businessmen accompanied him when he visited China.
The Philippines set aside years of hostility and sought a new partnership
with China at a time when strained relations between the Philippines and its
long-standing ally, the U.S., were mounting.77 This trip manifested President
Duterte’s independent posture in foreign affairs that allows him to adroitly
balance the major powers. This diplomatic gambit also impelled him to
downplay the arbitral tribunal’s landmark decision on the South China Sea
disputes and giving credence to former State Councilor Dai Bingguo’s remark
that the ruling is nothing more than a “piece of trash paper.”
Toeing the line, then Secretary Yasay admitted that the Philippines is
helpless in stopping China’s maritime expansion and militarization activities
on the disputed islands in the South China Sea.78 He mentioned that it was
wiser to let other countries with special concerns about China’s activities
take action (themselves), citing the U.S. and Japan which had raised concern
on freedom of navigation and overflight operations.79 He announced as well
that the Philippines has its own bilateral engagement with China to ensure no
further actions.80 On 20 December 2016, Chief Presidential Legal Counsel,
Salvador B. Panelo, stated to set aside temporarily the PCA ruling favouring

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 362

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

363

the Philippines “since the country cannot enforce it against China.” 81
According to him, “the ruling is a mere paper judgement.”82 Accordingly,
“instead of trying to enforce it against China with minimal chances for
success, the Philippines should take advantage of economic benefits resulting
from better relations with China.”83 He went to say instead of trying to
enforce it against China with a minimal chance of success, the Philippines
should take advantage of economic benefits resulting from better relations
with China.84 On 22 December 2016, President Duterte himself declared his
readiness to set aside the PCA ruling amidst reports that PLAN has installed
weapon systems in the seven land features which China occupies in the
disputed waters.85 Succinctly, he said the changing nature of international
politics in Southeast Asia prompted his decision. This standpoint obviously
and radically differs from President Aquino’s position of standing up to China.
11. The Duterte Administration’s Appeasement Policy and the 30th 		
ASEAN Summit
Since early 2017, President Duterte made several statements and undertook
several measures that could be construed as an appeasement policy on
China. In March 2017, he publicly admitted that the Philippines cannot stop
China’s reported plan to construct an environmental monitoring station on the
disputed Scarborough Shoal.86 Questioned by a journalist about his view on
the prospect of China building a radar station on the shoal, President Duterte
revealed his appeasement agenda when he replied: “We cannot stop China
from doing this thing. So what do you want me to do … declare war on
China? I can, but we’ll all lose our military and policemen tomorrow.”87 He
even announced that he wants Chinese ships “to pass or come and dock” in
the Philippines as long as “they will not do anything to the Philippine Coast
Guard as it patrols the country’s maritime waters.”88
President Duterte’s announcements that he would not do anything to
stop China from building on the disputed shoal was based on the calculation
that appeasing this emergent power has its rewards in the form of US$6
billion dollars in deals including agreement for agricultural exports to China,
and loans for infrastructure projects. In March 2017, Chinese Third-Vice
Premier Wang Yang visited Davao City and witnessed the exchange of
letters between Philippine and Chinese officials on the feasibility studies of
infrastructure projects China will bankroll.89 Mr. Wang visited portions of
the proposed Davao Coastline and Portland Development Project. He was
also briefed on the Davao City Expressway and the Mindanao Railway. In
the aftermath of this trip in Mindanao, Premier Wang expressed China’s
interest in funding the various infrastructure projects presented to him while
he was in Davao City.90

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 363

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

364

Renato Cruz De Castro

Also during Premier Wang’s visit, the Philippines and China signed a
six-year economic cooperation agreement.91 It commits China to finance 15
big-ticket infrastructure projects such as the US$53.6 million Chico River
Pump Irrigation, the US$374 million New Centennial Water Source-Kaliwa
Dam, and the South Line of the North-South Railway.92 Moreover, China
also extended to the Philippine government a credit package worth US$500
million for the AFP’s procurement of Chinese-made military hardware.93
Under the initial part of this assistance package, China will extend to the
Philippines US$144.4 million for the Philippine military’s acquisition of small
arms, speed boats and night vision goggles to enhance its counter-terrorism,
counter-insurgency, counter-terrorism and anti-narcotics capabilities.94
Historically, the AFP has acquired its hardware from the U.S. However, under
his administration, the Philippine military’s procurement pattern will likely
change as President Duterte explores the possibility of reducing the AFP’s
dependence on the U.S. by procuring Chinese-made weapons financed by
Chinese loans over a 25-year period.95
Not surprisingly, President Duterte is resigned to heightened Chinese
island-building activities in the South China Sea. Clearly, he has been lured
by the Chinese promise of trade concessions, grants, loans and investment.
Consequently, his administration has subscribed to Beijing’s official mantra
“that after several years of disruption caused mainly by “non-regional
countries (Japan and the U.S.), the South China Sea has calmed with
China and Southeast Asian countries agreeing to peacefully resolve [their]
disputes.”96 He put this mantra into practice during the 30th ASEAN Summit
held in Manila in late April 2017.
Even before the summit began President Duterte announced that he
would not raise the PCA rulings on the South China Sea during the ASEAN
Summit on 27 April.97 During a press conference held in the presidential
palace two days before the event, he emphatically declared “We [ASEAN]
will skip, I will skip the arbitral ruling. It is not an issue here in the
ASEAN.”98 By accepting Chinese economic largess and rejecting former
President Aquino’s confrontational stance on the South China Sea dispute,
President Duterte dismissed the idea that any benefits could come out
from the PCA ruling. Responding to his domestic critics, President Duterte
deridingly pointed out: “What would be the purpose of discussing it? Who
will dare pressure China?”99
True to his word, the chairperson’s communique for the 30th ASEAN
Summit avoided any adversarial statements directed at China. It did not
include any references to China’s island building and weapons deployment on
the reclaimed land features nor did it touch on the PCA ruling that declared
China’s excessive claim in the South China Sea as a violation of international
law. ASEAN diplomats reported that there were some efforts exerted by the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 364

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

365

Chinese government to pressure the Philippines to keep the South China
Sea issue totally off the ASEAN agenda. The statement, however, retained
the phrase “the need to demonstrate full respect for legal and diplomatic
process in resolving the dispute.” This was a very subtle reference to the
PCA ruling and to the regional negotiations for the COC.100 Nevertheless, the
statement also welcomed China’s cooperation with ASEAN on the drafting
of a framework for a Code of Conduct for the Parties in the South China Sea.
A few ASEAN leaders tried to include the phrase “such reclamation
and militarization (in the South China islands) that may further complicate
the situations.” However, as the current chair of ASEAN, President Duterte
determined it was pointless to discuss China’s island reclamations in the
South China Sea and the PCA ruling, calling both a non-issue.101 Pleased
by the Philippine president’s moves to soften the chairman’s statement, the
Chinese foreign ministry announced that “it had noted Mr. Duterte’s remarks
and would continue to deal with the Philippines to create a sound environment
for stable development of bilateral relations.”102 The following month, the
Duterte Administration made sure that its relations with China would indeed
further develop. He attended the opening ceremony of China’s One Belt, One
Road Project in Beijing; the Philippine and Chinese coast guards formed a
commission on maritime security cooperation; and the two countries’ foreign
ministries began conducting bilateral talks on the South China Sea dispute.103
12. Conclusion
The Philippines’ decision to file a case against China’s claim of sovereignty
over much of the South China Sea stemmed from the 2012 Scarborough
stand-off. This impasse was the proverbial tipping point caused by China’s
pattern of protracted series of aggressive actions against the Philippines which
began two years earlier. Confronted by an assertive China, the Philippines
resorted to the instrumentality of international law that governs the use of
the world’s oceans to settle maritime territorial disputes. Former Philippine
Foreign Secretary Albert Del Rosario stressed the importance of this approach
when he declared that the “UNCLOS has never been more important for
the Philippines than today, when overlapping maritime claims threatens as
never before the peace and prosperity in our part of the world.” Without
any credible military capability to back its diplomacy, the Philippines saw
that “the legal track presents the most durable option to defend the national
interests and territory on the basis of international law.” During the stand-off,
the Philippines reiterated its proposal to present the dispute over the shoal
for arbitration by the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea (ITLOS).
It insisted on a multilateral approach to resolve the conflict and to ensure the
freedom of navigation and the unimpeded commerce in the South China Sea
which are also issues of grave concerns.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 365

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

366

Renato Cruz De Castro

In January 2013, the Philippines confronted Chinese coercive diplomacy
head-on by filing a statement of claim against China in the arbitral tribunal of
the UNCLOS. In its statement of claim, the Philippines made it clear that it
was not seeking arbitration over which party has sovereignty over the islands
claimed by both the Philippines and China. Rather, it was simply requesting
the tribunal to issue an opinion on two points in question: a) whether China’s
maritime claim in the South China Sea based on its so-called nine-dash line
is valid or contrary to UNCLOS; and b) whether the Scarborough Shoal,
Johnson Reef, Cuarteron Reef and Fiery Reef, which are submerged features
that are below sea level at high tide, are islands or rocks under Article 121
(3) of the Convention.
With its filing of the 15 submissions with the PCA and the consequential
ruling of the court on 12 July 2016, the Philippines foiled China’s strongarm tactic. By winning most of its claims, the country blunted China’s
realpolitik approach specifically when it patiently pursued a multilateral and
legal solution to the maritime dispute, and appealed for the support of the
international society that also has a stake in the outcome of the case. The
Philippines showed to the global society that the appropriate way of settling
disputes involving overlapping claims to the global commons should be the
liberal/legal approach based on multilateralism and international law, not on
powerpolitik. The challenge then for the Philippines was to forge a strong
partnership with law-abiding countries in the world so that, collectively,
they can avert China’s realpolitik approach resolving disputes in an evolving
regional order still haunted by recent history and still susceptible to the use
of coercion and force. Finally, the PCA ruling could also be a potential game
changer since it ascertained that China’s expansionism into the South China
Sea is bereft of neither legal nor historical foundation. It also created the
raison e’etre for littoral states and major naval powers to form a coalition to
effectively constrain an expansionist China.
Unfortunately, the Duterte Administration has shelved the PCA ruling
saying that enforcing the decision has minimal chance of success. Instead,
it has adopted a policy of appease in exchange for China’s goodwill and
economic largess. In the process, the Duterte Administration has unwittingly
lent credence to former State Councilor Dai Bingguo’s assertion that the 12
July 2016 PCA award to the Philippines is nothing more than a “piece of
trash paper.”
Notes
* 		 Renato Cruz De Castro is a full professor in the International Studies
Department, De La Salle University, Manila, and holds the Charles Lui Chi
Keung Professorial Chair in China Studies. He is an alumnus of the Daniel

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 366

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

367

Inouye Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies in Hawaii, USA. In 2009, Dr.
De Castro became the US State Department ASEAN Research Fellow from the
Philippines and was based in the Political Science Department of Arizona State
University. He earned his Ph.D. from the Government and International Studies
Department of the University of South Carolina as a Fulbright Scholar in 2001,
and obtained his B.A. and two master’s degrees from the University of the
Philippines. Professor De Castro has conducted several courses on International
Relations and Security Studies in the National Defense College and Foreign
Service Institute. He is also a member of the Board of Trustees of the Albert
Del Rosario Institute for Strategic and International Studies (ADR Institute).
A current consultant in the National Security Council of the Philippines,
Professor De Castro’s research interests include Philippine-US security relations,
Philippine defence and foreign policies, US defence and foreign policies in East
Asia, and the international politics of East Asia. He has written over 80 articles
on international relations and security that have been published in a number of
scholarly journals and edited works in the Philippines, South Korea, Canada,
Malaysia, France, Singapore, Taiwan, Germany, the United Kingdom, Australia,
and the United States. He can be reached at <renato.decastro@dlsu.edu.ph>.
E.H. Carr, The Twenty Years’ Crisis (New York, New York: Palgrave, 2001), p.
165.
James Hookway, “Philippine, China Ships Square Off”, The Wall Street Journal
Asia (12 April 2012), p. 2. http://search.proquest.com/docview/993221572/
fulltext/1368A3AE…
William Chong, “Path to Scarborough Far from Fair: South China Sea Rivals no
Match for China’s Economic, Military Clout”, The Strait Times (21 April 2012),
p. 1. http://search.proquest.com/docview/1008636649/fulltext/1368A3A…
Ivan Arregiun-Toft. How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conflicts
(Cambridge, UK; New York, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2005), pp. 2-3.
Steve Chan, 2011. “Preventive War by the Weak: Loss Aversion, Strategic
Anticipation and Third Power Intervention”, Tamkang Journal of International
Affairs, Vol. 14, No. 3 (January), p. 4.
Russet, Bruce and Starr, Harvey, 1996. World Politics: The Menu of Choice
(USA: W.H. Freeman and Company), p. 144.
Ibid. pp. 143-144.
John Vasquez, 1993. The War Puzzle (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press), p. 271.
Michael Scharaf and Elizabeth Anderson (2010). “Is Law fare Worth Defining?
Report of the Cleveland Experts Meeting September 11, 2010”, Case Western
Reserve Journal of International Law, Vol. 43, No. 1, p. 12.
Michael T. Palmer and Michael Johnson, “Undersea Lawfare: Can the U.S.
Navy Fall Victim to this Asymmetric Warfare Threat?”, Naval War College
Review (Winter 2016) Vol. 69, No. 1. p. 135.
Ibid. p. 135.
Christopher H. Sharman, China Moves Out: Stepping Stones toward a New
Maritime Strategy (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University, April 2015),
p. 4.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 367

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

368

Renato Cruz De Castro

13. Aaron L. Friedberg, “Buckling Beijing: An Alternative U.S. China Policy”,
Foreign Affairs (September/October 2012), Vol. 91, No. 5, p. 53.
14. Ibid. p. 53.
15. Roger Cliff, Mark Burles, Michael S. Chase, Derek Eaton and Kevin L.
Pollpeter, Entering the Dragon’s Lair: Chinese Anti-Access Strategies and their
Implications for the United States (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2007),
p. xvii.
16. National Institute for Defense Studies, NIDS China Security 2014: Diversification of Roles of the People’s Liberation Army and the People’s Armed Police
(Tokyo: National Institute for Defense Studies, 2015), p. 2.
17. Christopher H. Sharman, China Moves Out: Stepping Stones toward a New
Maritime Strategy (Washington D.C.: National Defense University Press, April
2015), pp. 34-35.
18. See Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., “How to Deter China: The Case for Archipelagic Defense”, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 94, No. 2 (March/April 2015), p. 79.
19. Ibid. pp. 79-80.
20. National Institute for Defense Studies, NIDS China Security Report 2014
(Tokyo: National Institute for Defense Studies, 2015), p. 3.
21. Ibid. p. 3.
22. David Scott, China Stands Up: The PRC and the International System (Oxon;
New York: Routledge, 2007), p. 104.
23. Michael D. Swaine, “The Real Challenge in the Pacific: A Response to ‘How to
Deter China’”, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 94, No. 3 (May/June 2015), pp. 146-147.
24. Peter Dutton, “Three Disputes and Three Objectives: China and the South China
Sea”, Naval War College Review (Autumn 2011) Vol. 54, No. 4, p. 6.
25. For details on China’s Training Exercises in its surrounding waters see National
Institute for Defense Studies, NIDS China Security Report (Tokyo: National
Institute for Defense Studies, 2011), pp. 14-21.
26. See The International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2011:
The Annual Assessment of Global Military Capabilities and Defence Economics
(London: The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2011), p. 196.
27. Yoichi Kato, “China’s Naval Expansion in the Western Pacific”, Global Asia,
Vol. 5, No. 4 (Winter 2010), p. 19.
28. Sharman, op. cit. p. 6.
29. See Carl A. Thayer, “China’s New Wave of Aggressive Assertiveness in the
South China Sea”, International Journal of China Studies (December 2011, Vol.
2, No. 3, pp. 561-562.
30. Anonymous, “Philippines Protests against China’s Planned Oil Rig, Constructions in Spratlys”, BBC Monitoring Asia-Pacific (2 June 2011), p. 2. http://
proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?index=329did-329&did=2363645341&Sr…
31. Anonymous, “China Says Philippines Harming Sovereignty, Interests in
Spratlys”, BBC Monitoring Asia-Pacific (9 June 2011), p 1. http://proquest.umi.
com/pqdweb?index=64&did=2369715781&Src…
32. Ibid. p. 3.
33. See Edward Wong, “China Asserts Role as a Naval Power”, International
Herald Tribune (23 April 2010), pp. 1 & 4.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 368

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

369

34. Thai News Service Group, “Philippines/China: China Seeks Preservation of
Over-All Friendly Relations with Philippines as Tension Over Scarborough Ebbs
Momentarily”, Asia News Monitor (12 April 2012), p. 2. http://search.proquest.
com/docview/993552866/138B64F7C717082…
35. “Philippines/China: No Agreement Reached with Chinese Government
on Pull-Out of Philippine Vessels from Scarborough Shoal—DFA”, Asia
News Monitor (26 April 2012), p. 1. http://serach.proquest.com.docview/
1009600955/138FC30C1134…
36. Jane Perlez, “Stand-off Over South China Sea Shoal Eases: Beijing and
Manila Pull Their Ships from Area, but the Dispute is Not Settle”, International Herald Tribune (19 June 2012), p. 4. http://search.proquest.com/
docview/1020884288/1386FC0C1134…
37. Ibid. p. 2.
38. Teddy Ng, “Stand-Off Eases as Sides Withdraw Ships from Shoal: Beijing
Follows Manila in Pulling Vessels out of Disputed Area because of Bad
Weather”, South China Morning Post (19 June 2012), p. 1. http://search.proquest.
com/docview/1020927910/139091870A75BB1E5FF/15?accounti=2…
39. Department of Foreign Affairs, “Notification and Statement of Claim to the
United Nations Convention of Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) Arbitral Tribunal”,
Manila (22 January 2013), pp. 12-14.
40. Ibid. pp. 18-19.
41. Robert Sutter and Huang, Chin-hao (2014), “China’s Growing Resolve in the
South China Sea Dispute”, Comparative Connections: A Triannual E-Journal
on East Asia Relations (May 2014): 1-8. http://csis.org/files/publication/1301qseasia.pdf
42. Sutter, Robert and Huang, Chin-hao (2012), “China’s Shifts to Positive,
Downplays Disputes”, Comparative Connections: A Triannual E-Journal on
East Asia Relations (January 2014): 4. http://csis.org/files/publication/1303q_
seasia.pdf
43. Ibid. p. 4.
44. Frank Ching, “Seeking a South China Sea Solution”, New Straits Times (30 July
2015), p.1. http://search.proquest.com/docview/169973814?accountid=28547
45. Michaela Callar, “China’s Historical Claim over South China Sea Invalid under
UNCLOS”, The Philippines News Agency (8 July 2015), p. 1. http://search.
proquest.com/docview/1694690512?accountid=28547
46. Ibid. p. 2.
47. BBC Monitoring Asia-Pacific (14 July 2015), “China not to Accept Third Party
Decision over Sea Dispute with Philippines”, p. 5. http://search.proquest.com/
docview/1695962448?accountid=28547
48. Permanent Court of Arbitration, “The South China Sea Arbitration (The
Republic of the Philippines versus the People’s Republic of China)”, Press
Release (The Hague, 12 July 2016), p. 1.
49. Mather Waxman, “Legal Posturing and Power Relations in the South China
Sea”, Asian Maritime Transparency Institute (AMTI) (21 January 2015), p. 3.
http://amti.csis.org/chinas-mariime-actors-coordinate-and-directed-from-thetop/

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 369

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

370

Renato Cruz De Castro

50. See Fravel M. Taylor, “China’s Strategy in the South China Sea”, Contemporary
Southeast Asia, Vol. 33, No. 3 (December 2011), pp. 292-319. http://search.
proquest.com/docview/921618988/accountid=28547
51. Waxman, op. cit. p. 3.
52. Asia News Monitor (21 July 2015), “Philippines/China: International Tribunal
Vows to Rule on Jurisdiction Issue on Philippine-China Sea Row before
Yearend”, p. 1. http://search.proquest.com/docview/1697280629?accountid=
28547
53. BBC Monitoring Newsfile, “Philippines Scores against China in South China
Sea Arbitration Case—Paper”, BBC Worldwide Limited (30 October 2015), p.
1. http://search.proquest.com/docview/1728148041?accountid=28547
54. Ibid. p. 1.
55. Permanent Court of Arbitration, op. cit. p. 1.
56. Ibid. p. 2.
57. Robert Beckman, “The South China Sea Ruling: Game Changer in the Maritime
Disputes”, RSIS Commentary 180/2016 (18 July 2016), p. 2.
58. Permanent Court of Arbitration, op. cit. p. 2.
59. Gregory Poling, Michael Green, Bonnie Glaser, Murray Hiebert, Chris Johnson,
and Amy Searight, “Critical Questions: Judgement Day; the South China Sea
Tribunal Issues for its Ruling”, PACNET#57 (12 July 2016), p. 2.
60. Peter Dutton, “Comments” in China’s Claims in the South China Sea Rejected:
A China File Conversation (12 July 2016). A Project of the Center on U.S.China Relations of Asia Society, p. 1. http://www/chinafile.com/conversation/
chinas-claims-south-china-sea-rejected
61. Permanent Court of Arbitration, op. cit. pp. 8-9.
62. Andrew Shearer, “Post-Arbitration Geopolitical Assessment”, Remarks delivered
during the Albert Del Rosario Institute of Strategic and International Studies’
(ADRI) Upholding the Law of the Sea Convention and the Post-Arbitration
Philippine Challenge, 15 July 2016, University of the Philippines, College of
Law, p. 2.
63. Ibid. p. 2.
64. Malcolm Davis, “China’s Next Step in the South China Sea”, ASPI Strategist
(21 July 2016), p. 1. http://www.aspistrategist.org.au/author/malcolm-davis/
65. Ibid. p. 2.
66. Sharman, op. cit.
67. Ibid. p. 2.
68. Alexander L. Vuving, “Why the South China Sea Ruling Is a Game Changer:
Make No Mistake, the Verdict has Transformed the Strategic Landscape”, The
Diplomat (27 July 2016), p. 2. http://www.thediplomat.con/2016/07/why-thesouth-china-sea-ruling-is-a-game-changer/
69. Gerald Segal, “East Asia and the ‘Constrainment’ of China”, East Asian Security
(edited) Michael E. Brown, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, Steven E. Miller (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1996), p. 160.
70. Ibid. p. 186.
71. Jay Solomon and Alan Cullison, “U.S. Seeks Strategy to Sustain Philippine
Ties amid Rodrigo Duterte’s Outbursts”, The Wall Street Journal (14 September

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 370

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

The Philippines’ Lawfare versus China’s Realpolitik in the South China Sea Dispute

72.
73.
74.

75.
76.
77.

78.
79.
80.
81.

82.
83.
84.
85.

86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.

371

2016). p. 1. http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-weeks-strategy-sustain-philippineties-amid-rodgrigo-duterte-outbursts-1473902096
Jose Katigbak, “Philippines Eyes Talks with China Sans Preconditions”, The
Philippine Star (18 September 2016), p. 1.
Ibid. p. 2.
Gil Cabacungan, “Duterte Seeks Alliances with China and Russia”, Philippine Daily Inquirer (28 September 2016), p. 1. http://globalnation.inquirer.
net/145595/duterte-seeks-alliances-china-and-russia?utm_source=Arangkada+News+Clips&utm-campaign=57936169b7-Aran…
Ibid. p. 1.
AFP, “Presidential Remarks on China, Russia Send Investors Fleeing”, Business
World (28 September 2016). p. 1.
Neil Jerome Morales and Karen Lema, “The Philippines is Preparing a Major
Pivot toward China amid Tension with the U.S., Business Insider (11 October
2016), p. 1. http://www.businessinsider.com/the-philippines-is-preparinga-major-pivot-toward-china-2016-10?source=Arangkada+News+Clips&u
tm_campaign=2df…
Jeannette I. Andrade, “Philippine Helpless versus China—Yasay”, Philippine
Daily Inquirer (17 December 2016), p. 1.
Ibid. p. 2.
Ibid. p. 2.
David Cagashastian, “Malacanang Shelves Ruling for Better Relations with
China”, Business Mirror (21 December 2016), p. 1. http://www.businessmirror.
com.ph/malacanang-shelves-ruling-for-better-relations-with-china/?utm_
source=Arangkada+News+Clips&utm_campaign=4857ce…
Ibid. p. 1.
Ibid. p. 1.
Ibid. p.1.
Alexis Romero and Edith Regalado, “Rody Ready to Set Aside Ruling on Sea
Dispute”, The Philippine Star (18 December 2016), p. 1. http://www.philstar.
com/headlines/2016/12/18/1654564/rody-ready-aside-ruling-set-aside-rulingsea-dispute?utm_source=Arangkada+News+Clips&utm_campaign=b066…
Christina Mendez, “No One Can Stop China on Panatag–Duterte”, The
Philippine Star (20 March 2017), p. 1.
The American Interest (21 March 2017), “Duterte: We Can’t Stop China at
Scarborough Shoal”, p. 1. http://www.the-american-interest.com/2017/03/20/
duterte-we-cant-stop-at-scarborough-shoal/
Mendez, op. cit. p. 2.
Philippine News Agency (21 March 2017), “Chinese Leader’s Visit Brightens’
Realization of Mindanao Railway, 4 Other Development Projects”, p. 1. http://
www.businessmirror.com.ph/chinese-leaders-visit-brightens-re…
Ibid. p. 1.
Czeriza Valencia, “Philippines, China Sign Development Plan”, The Philippine
Star (19 March 2017), p. 1.
Ibid. p. 2.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 371

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

372

Renato Cruz De Castro

93. Jon Grevatt, “China Offers US$500 Million in Military Assistance to Philippines,” Jane’s Defense Weekly: Horley, Vol. 54, No. 8 (December 2016),
p. 1. http://search.proquest.com.lib1000.dlsu.edu.ph/docview/1851029631/
834095F0419D406CPQ12?accountid=28547
94. Peter Layton, “The Battle for Southeast Asia’s Soul”, Real Clear Defense (2
June 2017). http://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2017/06/02/the_battlefor_southeast_asias-soul_111504.html
95. Jon Grevatt, “China Offers US$500 Million in Military Assistance to Philippines”, Jane’s Defense Weekly: Horley, Vol. 54, No. 8 (December 2016),
p. 1. http://search.proquest.com.lib1000.dlsu.edu.ph/docview/1851029631/
834095F0419D406CPQ12?accountid=28547
96. Ibid. p. 43.
97. The Associated Press, “Duterte Won’t Bring Up South China Sea Arbitration
Victory at Southeast Asia Summit”, Dow James Institutional News (27
April 2017), p. 1. http://0-search.proquest.com.lib1000.dlsu.edu.ph/docview/
1892549455/fulltext/433D30753C8C4331PQ/29?accountid=28547
98. EFE News Service (April 2017), “Duterte to Overlook Territorial Disputes
with China during ASEAN Summit”, p. 1. http://0-search.proquest.com.
lib1000.dlsu.edu.ph/docview/1892212582/fulltext/433D30753C8C4331PQ/
23?accountid=28547
99. Jake Maxwell Watts, “ASEAN Tacks away from Rocky South China Sea Issue:
Final Summit Communique Welcome Beijing’s Cooperation on Issues such as
Framework of Maritime Code of Conduct”, Wall Street Journal (30 April 2017),
p. 1. http://0search.proquest.com.lib1000.dlsu.edu.ph/docview/1893082807/
fulltext/433D30753C8C4331PQ/75?accountid=28547
100. Sutter and Huang, op. cit. p. 53.
101. Raul Dancel, “ASEAN Calls for Peaceful End to Territorial Conflicts: Leaders Take Softer Stance, Despite Pressure to Mention Beijing’s Activities in
South China Sea”, The Straits Times (1 May 2017), p. 1. http://0-search.
proquest.com.lib1000.dlsu.edu.ph/docview/1893541975/fulltext/433D30753C8C4331PQ/44?accountid=28547
102. The Associated Press, op. cit. p. 1.
103. Robert G. Sutter and Huang Chin-Hao, “Beijing Presses Its Advantages”,
Comparative Connections, Vol. 13, No. 3 (September-December 2017), p. 55.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 372

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

South China Journal
Sea: China’s
Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches
International
of Strategic
China Studies
Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017, pp. 373-395

373

The South China Sea Conundrum: China’s Strategic
Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches
Benny Teh Cheng Guan*
School of Social Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM)

Abstract
China is often portrayed as benign and peaceful. Yet, its assertive disposition
on the South China Sea territorial disputes appears to contradict the “peaceful
rise” narrative. China’s relentless quest in strengthening features under
its control and turning them into artificial islands equipped with military
facilities have stoke fear of expansionism among the Southeast Asian
claimant states and threatened the maritime influence and interests of the US
in the region. This paper focuses on China’s strategic culture to explain its
policy considerations and Malaysia’s approach in responding to changing
developments following the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) Tribunal
ruling. The paper argues that firstly, China’s strategic stance is two-fold – to
neutralize US’s regional dominance and to dissuade Southeast Asian states
from their reliance on the US; and secondly, Malaysia’s preference for a nonconfrontational approach that gives precedence to dialogues and consultations
are insufficient in defending its sovereign interests and must therefore be aptly
backed up by a more emphatic strategic posture both on the ground and in its
diplomatic language.
Keywords: China, strategic culture, South China Sea, territorial disputes,
PCA Tribunal ruling, sovereign interests, Malaysia
1. Introduction
The South China Sea disputes involving six claimants of whom Malaysia
is one of them1 continue to remain a major torn in bilateral and regional
relations. Over the course of 15 years since the issuance of the ASEAN
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea in November
2002, practically all claimant states have beefed up their claims to islands
and reefs in the South China Sea by reclaiming land, building structures and
expanding runways, and in the process further strengthening their own control

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 373

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

374

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

over the features that they have occupied. This runs contrary to the spirit of
the Declaration where all the 10 ASEAN member countries and China have
officially declared “to exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that
would complicate or escalate disputes and affect peace and stability” (ASEAN
Website, n.d.).
In recent years, the spotlight has been trained on China owing in part
to its unbending historic claims to the South China Sea and its increasing
assertiveness in ensuring that its territorial sovereignty and maritime rights
are safeguarded. One case in point was the placing of its HS-981 oil rig in
disputed waters with Vietnam in 2014 that later sparked violent anti-Chinese
protests. While Beijing is quick to defend its action and view the area as under
its jurisdiction despite Hanoi’s contestation, it shows intolerance to Vietnam
and the Philippines when they tried to carry out oil and gas explorations
in areas claimed to be within their exclusive economic zones (EEZs).
Tensions flared in 2007 and 2011 when the two countries were pressured
by China to stop their activities including issuing warnings against foreign
energy companies involved (Glaser, 2011). Incidences that went beyond the
overlapping claims have also been recorded of late. In 2015, Malaysia was
shocked to learn from reports that a 4000 ton Chinese vessel was identified
near Luconia Breakers and a Chinese coast guard vessel has been anchored
at Luconia Shoals, about 150 km from the coast of Sarawak, for the past two
years. A year later, Indonesia’s Natuna Island came under the limelight when
China responded to Indonesia’s detaining of Chinese fishermen and trawlers
near the island by claiming the waters around the island as rightfully its
traditional fishing ground.
Escalations of tensions in the South China Sea have been squarely
blamed on China’s increasing assertive and expansionist behaviour. Chinese
vessels have been reported to collude or harass neighbouring coast guard
ships and fishing trawlers as well as the USNS Impeccable surveillance ship,
and have acted on occasions to protect their countrymen’s fishing boats that
have strayed into neighbouring countries’ EEZs from being detained at sea.
Incidences of emboldened Chinese trawlers ramming and sinking foreign
fishing vessels and a 4.5-tonne South Korean coast guard boat in disputed
waters have been reported as well (Perlez, 2014; Williams, 2016). China’s
active pursuit of strengthening reefs and outposts that it occupies through
land reclamation activities and the building of military facilities have not only
stoke apprehension in the other claimant states but also posed a strategic threat
to the maritime influence and interests of the US in the region.
Is Beijing launching an offensive to disrupt the power balance in the
region and substantially reduce the threat that the US has been posing to
Beijing’s strategic ambitions or is it merely interested to exert its claims
and defend its maritime and territorial rights based on historical arguments?

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 374

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

375

Insights to this question lie in deconstructing China’s strategic culture
and understanding how ideational factors play a role in affecting policy
considerations. This is pivotal when discussing appropriate responses and
options for Malaysia as it utilizes bilateral and regional (through ASEAN)
approaches to protect its sovereign interests.
Malaysia, unlike its ASEAN counterparts who have resorted to actions,
some unconventional, to check China’s assertiveness – Vietnam’s violent
clashes with China, Philippines’ unilateral decision to take China to the
arbitration court to seek international legal recourse, and Indonesia’s eccentric
move to blow up foreign fishing vessels, has been by far the quietest and
reserved in expressing its stand against China. What informs Malaysia’s
policy position with regards to the territorial disputes in the South China Sea?
Has the 2016 arbitration court ruling strengthened Malaysia’s position visà-vis China’s? How effective is ASEAN in addressing the issue, preventing
tension from escalating, and sustaining peace in the region?
To address some of the questions raised above, this paper is divided
into six sections. The next section looks at China’s strategic culture and its
significance in explaining the South China Sea conundrum. The third section
examines Malaysia’s policy orientation on the issue, particularly in dealing
with China’s assertiveness. The fourth section analyzes the impact of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) Tribunal’s Award ruling and the role
of ASEAN in managing the issue. The fifth section discusses the implications
of China’s strategic interests and Malaysia’s strategic preferences. The final
section concludes the paper.
2. China’s Strategic Culture in the Context of the South China Sea 		
Dispute
China advocates often portray the Middle Kingdom as a peace-loving nonaggressive nation that can be depended upon to choose nonviolent solutions
over the waging of war in resolving conflicts and its rise as a formidable
economic and military power is therefore peaceful and non-threatening.
This “peaceful rise” narrative is reinforced by formal efforts of the Chinese
government, particularly the “China’s peaceful development” policy promoted
under President Hu Jintao, to allay fears of a “China threat” by proactively
engaging regional countries through economic cooperation initiatives such
as the China-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA). However, is China’s
strategic culture purely defensive in nature?
The “peaceful rise” narrative is also considered by Merriden Varrall of
the Lowy Institute for International Policy as one of her four narratives that
informs China’s strategic culture. She terms it as inherent and unchanging
cultural characteristics (Varrall, 2015). It is often emphasized by Chinese

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 375

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

376

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

leaders in their speeches to the international community. For example,
President Xi Jinping in his speech at the United Nations in Geneva in January
2017 mentioned that,
First, China remains unchanged in its commitment to uphold world peace.
Amity with neighbors, harmony without uniformity and peace are values
cherished in the Chinese culture. The Art of War, a Chinese classic, begins
with this observation, “The art of war is of vital importance to the State. It is
a matter of life and death, a road to either survival or ruin. Hence it demands
careful study.” What it means is that every effort should be made to prevent
a war and great caution must be exercised when it comes to fighting a war.
For several millennia, peace has been in the blood of us Chinese and a part
of our DNA.
Several centuries ago, China was strong and its GDP accounted for
30% of the global total. Even then, China was never engaged in aggression
or expansion. In over 100 years after the 1840 Opium War, China suffered
immensely from aggression, wars and chaos. Confucius said, “Do not do to
others what you do not want others to do to you.” We Chinese firmly believe
that peace and stability is the only way to development and prosperity.
China has grown from a poor and weak country to the world’s second
largest economy not by committing military expansion or colonial plunder,
but through the hard work of its people and our efforts to uphold peace.
China will never waver in its pursuit of peaceful development. No matter
how strong its economy grows, China will never seek hegemony, expansion
or sphere of influence. History has borne this out and will continue to do so.
(Xi, 2017)

Xi’s statement would have been dismissed by Christopher Ford, author
of “Realpolitik with Chinese Characteristics” (2016) and currently a Special
Assistant to the President and US National Security Council Senior Director
for Weapons of Mass Destruction and Counterproliferation, as propaganda.
In an interview, Ford warned against being misled by “Beijing’s selfOrientalizing narrative of benevolent pacifism”, stating that “[a]t a time when
China was weak, it indeed tried to act non-provocatively while working to
build that strength. But this is not real pacifism; it is the prudence of a country
with a clear agenda waiting for a better opportunity to act on it. As China
has become stronger, it has increasingly been abandoning non-provocative
postures, and seems today ever more willing to act like exactly the selfinterested hegemon that official propaganda has denied it is culturally or even
‘genetically’ possible for China to be” (Wan, 2016).
Is Xi’s statement a strategic deception? According to Alastair Iain
Johnston, a professor of China in World Affairs at Harvard University, the
espousing of the ‘peaceful rise’ narrative would be categorized under the
Confucian-Mencian or idealpolitik paradigm where strategic preferences are
defensive or accommodationist. This is in contrast to the other category of

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 376

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

377

hard realpolitik or parabellum paradigm with offensive strategic preferences
(Johnston, 1996). 2 Johnston defines strategic culture as “an integrated
system of symbols (i.e., causal axioms, languages, analogies, metaphors,
etc.) that acts to establish pervasive and long-lasting strategic preferences
by formulating concepts of the role and efficacy of military force in
interstate political affairs, and by clothing these conceptions with such an
aura of factuality that the strategic preferences seem uniquely realistic and
efficacious” and found evidences through his extensive research of a Chinese
tradition of parabellum strategic culture (termed cultural realism) during the
periods of the Ming Dynasty and Maoist China (Johnston, 1995; 1996: 222).
He concludes that far from idealpolitik and contrary to popular belief, “the
predominant Chinese strategic tradition does not differ radically from key
elements in the Western realpolitik tradition” (Johnston, 1995; Johnston, 1996:
256). His findings imply that China is not uniquely different from Western
powers as commonly perceived and is more predisposed to the use of force
than popularly imagined.
Johnston’s study found support from political scientist Andrew Scobell
who defines strategic culture as a “set of fundamental and enduring assumptions about the role of collective violence in human affairs and the efficacy
of applying force interpreted by a country’s political and military elites”
(Scobell, 2015: 48).3 But unlike Johnston who views the presence of Chinese
idealpolitik as essentially symbolic and thus less relevant, Scobell argues that
both realpolitik (offensive) and idealpolitik (defensive) characterize Chinese
strategic culture because of the tendency to rationalize offensive military
operations as defensive pursuits (Scobell, 2002; 2015). Chinese leaders
perceive their strategic culture as defensive in nature while viewing the world
via a realpolitik lens and thus consider the use of force as an instrument
of defence (Scobell, 2015: 49). This view offers an explanation for why
China sees a need to strengthen its control over the features that it occupy
in the South China Sea: to counter what it perceives as US territorial or
maritime threats exemplified by the various freedom of navigation operations
(FONOPS) and joint military drill exercises with neighbouring countries who
are also claimant states.
Varrall’s second narrative of what motivates Chinese behaviour reinforces
Scobell’s argument of how China perceives the outside world. She terms it
the “century of humiliation” where the Chinese are constantly reminded of
the long history of humiliation suffered in the hands of foreign powers and
this narrative is then used to support a national identity construction by the
Party-state to claim political authority and legitimacy (Varrall, 2015: 5-6).
Although China today is far from being weak, it continues to paint foreign
powers in realpolitik terms and thus calls for the need to stay vigilant and
sustain an active defense that includes offensive and preemptive responses

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 377

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

378

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

(Scobell, 2002). The 2015 White Paper on China’s military strategy does not
mention preemptive strike but defines active defence as “adherence to the
unity of strategic defense and operational and tactical offense; adherence to
the principles of defense, self-defense and post-emptive strike; and adherence
to the stance that ‘We will not attack unless we are attacked, but we will
surely counterattack if attacked’” (White Paper, 2015). Applied to the context
of the South China Sea dispute, the fortification of China-controlled features
would therefore fall within the notion of strategic defence but with operational
and tactical offensive capabilities.
Varrall’s third and fourth narratives, namely “history as destiny”
and “filial piety and familial obligation”, lend credence to the “idealized
discourse” within the Confucian-Mencian paradigm mentioned by
Johnston (1996: 220) as they emphasize the importance of cultural symbols
characterized by China’s “right” to claim supremacy (albeit peacefully) as
it once used to do so under the imperial tributary system, and the right to
a “China dream” where China as a state is also a large family (the Chinese
characters for country is made up of 国 – country and 家 – family) (Varrall,
2015: 8-10). This latter observation is not only restricted to mainland China
but encompasses neighbouring regions including Southeast Asia with China
playing the role of an older brother (ibid.: 10), perhaps resembling how
Southeast Asian countries were required to pay tribute to the Middle Kingdom
in recognition of its dominant position. As an older brother, China can be
counted on to defend the interests of ASEAN countries but only if they could
subscribe to the Confucian philosophy of filial piety. Cooperating with the US
to hedge against China would logically contradict this philosophy and earn
the wrath of Beijing.
While Johnston provides a convincing argument on China’s hard
realpolitik culture, there is still a lack of firm evidence to suggest that postMaoist modern China aims to supersede the US, dominate the entire world
and claim the throne of a global hegemon. At the same time, China’s strategic
behaviour does not reflect a benevolent pacifist as often portrayed in its
official language. There is certainly a rich mix of idealpolitik and realpolitik
in its strategic culture and its military posture of active defence would suggest
that it is not reticent in its use of force including offensive tactics to defend
its security interests. China’s actions in the South China Sea issue could
therefore be explained based on the understanding of its strategic culture as
follows. Firstly, Beijing factors Washington’s role in its strategic calculations
even though the disputes are only between the six claimant states. This is
anticipated since China’s constant warning against US’s interference has fallen
on deaf ears and has not stopped the US from thumbing its nose and flexing
its muscles on the issue, at times working with the other claimant states to
bolster their defense capacities. This creates the perception of threats that

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 378

29/12/2017 9:22:15 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

379

could undermine Chinese interests and heightens China’s defensive posture
by postulating a more assertive stance.
Secondly, China is no longer a weak and hapless nation but the second
and third most powerful economy and military respectively in the world.
It has the means necessary to regain its status as a strong and respected
nation. Its actions in the South China Sea should be viewed within this
context instead of being interpreted as steps toward a regional, if not world,
domination. This is in line with Varrall’s “history as destiny” narrative (2015)
and Morton’s related argument of China’s ambition as “primarily driven by
a historic mission to achieve its rightful status as a maritime nation” (2016:
911). But in claiming this historical right by actively defending its control
over contested boundaries, China has undermined the legitimate interests
of other claimants. Therein lays the contention between historical assertion
and the preservation of established maritime order. The recent PCA ruling
clearly challenges the “history as destiny” narrative when it rejects China’s
claims. However, it also attests to the “century of humiliation” narrative as the
People’s Daily, an official newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP),
has called the ruling a “tool of political manipulation” to damage China’s
territorial sovereignty and maritime rights (People’s Daily, 2016).
China’s behaviour further raises the question of how effective has
ASEAN become in socializing China, i.e. persuading it to subscribe to
ASEAN’s established norms specifically on the renunciation of the threat or
use of force, a key principle in the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC)
that China acceded in 2003. Observably, China’s accession to the TAC or its
“socialization” through cooperative processes has neither contributed to the
reduction of tensions in the South China Sea nor prevented the Philippines
from seeing a dire need to seek international legal recourse.
3. Malaysia’s Policy Orientation on the South China Sea Issue
Malaysia’s position on the South China Sea dispute rests on a number of
factors perhaps similar in some respects to other claimant states. They are
the health of Sino-Malaysian relations, the level or degree of the disputes,
and the conditions of its domestic political economy. The historical factor
argument that Malaysia is the first country in Southeast Asia to establish
diplomatic relations with China and therefore Putrajaya enjoys a “special
political relationship” with Beijing unparalleled by other claimant states
has often been noted by some media and scholars in explaining Malaysia’s
cordial relationship with China compared to Vietnam’s and the Philippines’.
However, this narrative is at best a mere proposition. While “the ruling elite
in Kuala Lumpur have been convinced that they have a ‘special relationship’
with Beijing” as remarked by Gregory Poling of US’s Center for Strategic

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 379

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

380

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

and International Studies (CSIS) (quoted in Jennings, 2016), whether Beijing
shares the same belief is anything but clear.
Malaysia maintains a healthy political relationship with China due to the
former practicing a non-antagonistic policy towards the latter. Malaysia is
aware of its status as a small state and understands that its power capabilities
are limited. Political and economic stabilities are important as it aims to
achieve its Vision 2020 of becoming a developed nation by 2020. It thus
takes a more pragmatic approach by exercising a higher tolerance level when
dealing with China’s assertiveness and placing greater emphasis on diplomacy
and the rule of law. The latter point is reflected in a recent op-ed piece by
Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak where he wrote that, “When it comes
to the South China Sea, we firmly believe that overlapping territorial and
maritime disputes should be managed calmly and rationally through dialogue,
in accordance with the rule of law and peaceful negotiations” (Razak, 2016).
Obviously, this pragmatism is largely realized by the lower level or degree of
disputes Malaysia have with China in comparison to its fellow ASEANists
– Vietnam and the Philippines. This pragmatic approach is further supported
by the ability to carry out discussions behind closed doors and away from
public debates that could otherwise fan nationalist emotions like in Vietnam,
the Philippines and China, and “complicate ongoing diplomatic efforts by
hardening positions” (Noor, 2016: 210).4
Geographically, the disputed islands that Malaysia controls are situated
relatively further South and away from mainland China. Land reclamation,
building of civil and military outposts, and the oil rig and Scarborough
shoal incidences as well as reported clashes between coast guards at sea
have yet to involve Malaysia. The issues of harassment of Malaysian
fishermen, surveillance activities by Chinese vessels in Malaysian waters,
and encroachment of Chinese fishing boats into Malaysian waters have
not led to any strong retaliation from Putrajaya beyond the registering of
official protests with Beijing and the summoning of China’s ambassador to
Malaysia.5 Arguably, Malaysia has yet to encounter the level of distress that
beset Vietnam and the Philippines due to their geographical proximity to
China. As Poling observed, “Malaysia has been more hesitant to push back
forcefully against China, partially because the Philippines and Vietnam have
been a useful buffer, soaking up so much of China’s bullying over the last few
years” (quoted in Jennings, 2016). This could well explain Malaysia’s position
of promoting multilateral platforms such as ASEAN as the best avenue to
address and more importantly manage the South China Sea issue in a peaceful
manner. Malaysia has been a strong proponent of the ASEAN code of conduct
and tends to favour collective resolve on security matters.
Economic wise, Malaysia realizes it needs China to maintain its economic
growth. Figures have shown that bilateral trade and investment between

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 380

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

381

the two nations are very strong. China is Malaysia’s number one trading
partner since 2009 with two way trade volume for January to November
2016 totalling RM216.27 billion (USD48.67 billion). Antagonizing China
could cause a backlash on Malaysia’s economy which is already facing weak
currency exchange, lower oil prices and heavy debts owed by its state fund
– 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB). With foreign direct investments
(FDIs) from the West becoming less available due in part to investigations on
the 1MDB scandal being carried out in Switzerland, the US and Singapore,
critics argue that Prime Minister Najib Razak does not have much option
but to turn to cash-rich China for help (Jaipragas, 2016). Najib, however,
registered his displeasure at Western powers when he opined in a Chinese
government owned newspaper that “former colonial powers” should not
“lecture countries they once exploited on how to conduct their own internal
affairs today” (Razak, 2016), a move perhaps to signal to his Western
counterparts that Malaysia can rely on China and need not kowtow to the
self-righteous West in order to receive their investments.
Najib’s remarks came at a time when Chinese state-owned enterprises
have agreed to purchase assets belonging to 1MDB, thus raising the question
of whether China is helping to ease some of 1MDB’s burgeoning debts.
China General Nuclear Power Corporation recently bought 1MDB’s energy
assets under Edra Global Energy Bhd for RM9.83 billion (USD2.25 billion)
and China Railway Engineering Corporation (CREC) will be partnering
with Iskandar Waterfront Holdings (IWH) to purchase a 60% stake in a realestate mega project called Bandar Malaysia from 1MDB for RM7.42 billion
(USD1.7 billion) that will likely serve as the main hub for the proposed
Kuala-Lumpur-Singapore high speed rail project (Zahiid, 2015).6 Najib’s
visit to China in November 2016 has further secured fresh foreign direct
investments totaling RM144 billion (USD33 billion) that included a RM55
billion (USD12.6 billion) deal to build the East Coast Rail Link (ECRL) and
a first ever military purchase of four Chinese littoral mission ships – two to be
built by China and two by Malaysia. China has become a major contributor
to FDI in Malaysia. Chinese investments in 2015 stood at RM1.87 billion
(USD428.4 million) and rose to RM2.50 billion (USD572.8 million) in JanSept 2016 (MIDA Official Website). FDI inflow is an important scorecard for
the government as it needs to continuously generate jobs, maintain growth of
the export-oriented economy, and uplift the population’s standard of living
particularly when the next general election is looming near.
Whether this “pivot” to China, economically and possibly militarily, will
compromise Malaysia’s territorial claims in the South China Sea or affect its
policy vis-à-vis Japan and the US that have called for China to scale back its
activities in the South China Sea remains to be seen. It is, however, a cause
for concern primarily because Malaysia, according to retired Malaysian

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 381

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

382

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

ambassador Dennis Ignatius, does not have a “coherent strategy in place to
deal with [China’s assertiveness]” in the South China Sea (Ignatius, 2017). He
argues that “it does not help that we look to the very country that challenges
our sovereignty to defend it or cozy up to the very navy that intrudes into our
waters and harasses our fishermen” (ibid.). In Parliament, Najib stated that
the government will not compromise and allow the territorial sovereignty of
the country to be trampled upon (The Malaysian Reserve, 2017). But without
a coherent strategy, too much dependence on China could put into doubt the
country’s level of dependability when its support is needed in efforts directed
at pressuring China to back off from its overarching claims.7
4. The Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) Ruling and the Role of 		
ASEAN
The PCA tribunal on the South China Sea case involving the Philippines
and China was as important to the other ASEAN states (claimants and
non-claimants) as it was to the Philippines. From a small state perspective,
international law can serve as a legitimate line of defence against powerful
states who flex their muscles because of its ability to depict the strong state
as a “bully” and be used to rally support from the international community.
Although Malaysia was not a party, its support for the tribunal’s process can
be witnessed from its participation in the proceedings as an observer. Malaysia
is as concerned as the Philippines since the outcome of the ruling will have
implications for the country as well. A nullification of China’s 9-dash line
claim would automatically remove Malaysia’s overlapping territorial and
maritime claims with China.8 So, how did Malaysia view the ruling and its
importance to ASEAN?
Malaysia was careful in wording its official statement released by its
Ministry of Foreign Affairs following the decision of the PCA tribunal on
12th July 2016. Instead of following the Philippines and Vietnam in using
the word “welcome”, the word “notes” was used, as in “to take note”, in
acknowledging the tribunal’s decision; conceivably to take into consideration
the sensitivities of parties involved and to show impartiality. The statement
reiterated Malaysia’s position that “it is fully committed and calls on all
parties to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration
on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) in its entirety; and
the early conclusion of a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC)
as agreed between China and ASEAN countries” (MOFA Malaysia, 2016).
It reflected Malaysia’s cautious and accommodationist behaviour, which is
visibly in accordance with its non-confrontational approach towards China.
The tribunal award9 that ruled in favour of the Philippines is important
for Malaysia for two particular reasons. Firstly, instead of using the ruling to

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 382

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

383

push China into a corner, it saw the verdict as a further boost10 to get Beijing
to return to the negotiation table under the established ASEAN framework,
i.e. to reaffirm the significance of the DOC and speed up the realization of a
COC, and to subsequently downplay China’s insistence on separate bilateral
negotiations. Secondly, the ruling will strengthen ASEAN’s collective position
on addressing the disputes in a peaceful manner. The same statement further
reads, “Malaysia believes that all relevant parties can peacefully resolve
disputes by full respect for diplomatic and legal processes, and relevant
international law and 1982 UNCLOS” (ibid.).
A similar phrase appeared as well in the Joint Communiqué of the 49th
ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) on 24th July 2016 in Vientiane,
although not under the sub-heading of “South China Sea” but in paragraph
two under “ASEAN Community Vision 2025” (AMM, 2016). The phrase
“full respect for legal and diplomatic processes” was likely intended to
remind China to fully respect the international law and established practices.
The repositioning of the phrase was made to accommodate Cambodia who
viewed the tribunal’s ruling as a “political conspiracy” against China and had
blocked any efforts of mentioning the PCA ruling in the communiqué as it
did not want to join its ASEAN counterparts in adopting a common position
(Sokheng, 2016; Mogato, Martina and Blanchard, 2016). Interestingly,
however, it did not join Pakistan, China and Taiwan in officially rejecting the
tribunal’s findings.
ASEAN’s efforts in overcoming internal and external obstacles to
come together and express their joint stand on the South China Sea issue
deserve commendation. Internally, the grouping has failed to issue a joint
statement in 2012 due to Cambodia’s actions in blocking criticisms against
China. Externally, China has tried to drive a wedge into ASEAN by getting
three ASEAN countries, namely Brunei, Cambodia and Laos, to support its
position that the territorial disputes should be resolved among claimant states
through bilateral negotiations (Miller, 2016). Complications also surfaced at
a Malaysian proposed Special ASEAN-China Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
in Kunming in June 2016 that highlighted poor coordination in issuing
statements on the ASEAN side and failed to produce any outcomes on the
South China Sea problem (Tang, 2016).
Following the AMM’s joint communiqué, a few joint statements by
ASEAN and China were issued where both reaffirmed their commitment
to the full and effective implementation of the DOC and the CUES (Code
for Unplanned Encounters at Sea), and agreed to adopt China’s proposal on
guidelines for senior diplomatic officials’ communication hotline platform to
respond to maritime emergencies (which will complement the communication
hotline established by ASEAN defence ministers in 2015) and complete the
COC consultations by the middle of 2017. These steps are no doubt important

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 383

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

384

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

in enhancing confidence, reducing risks of conflicts and clashes at sea,
building political trust among parties involved and setting the stage for more
practical maritime cooperation. They may also give the impression that China
has softened its stance.
However, such developments do not address or alter China’s core
interests. Calling the PCA judgment a “political farce under the pretext of
law” (quoted in Beech, 2016), China still maintains its claim to the South
China Sea based on its 9-dash line and historical arguments as well as its
strong conviction over the islands and reefs that it has so far occupied and
those that it haven’t but deemed as part of China’s territorial sovereignty.
It would be unthinkable that China is prepared to peacefully abdicate its
control over Mischief Reef, for example, that it has heavily constructed and
militarily fortified because the tribunal has ruled the artificial island to form
part of the Philippines’ exclusive economic zone. The recent developments
related to the DOC and COC may help to alleviate some of ASEAN members’
apprehensions especially in light of the PCA award but will do little to change
China’s sovereign claims in any way, shape or form.
China’s position is very clear. Its official policy on maritime cooperation
firmly states that “China has indisputable sovereignty over the Nansha Islands
and their adjacent waters…. No effort to internationalize and judicialize the
South China Sea issue will be of any avail for its resolution; it will only make
it harder to resolve the issue, and endanger regional peace and stability”
(MOFA China, 2017; emphasis added). This is reinforced by on the ground
activities with the construction of military related structures in all seven of
its artificial islands. Satellite images have revealed the presence of aircraft
hangars, missile shelters, point defense structures, radar or communication
facilities and underground storage facilities (AMTI, 2017). These undertakings
are in tandem with its active defence doctrine and display its seriousness in
fulfilling its strategic ambition.
Arguably, the DOC reflects China’s strategy to appease the concerns of
its Southern neighbours and project a more Confucian-Mencian behaviour
by keeping the dialogue channel open and hopefully reduce its neighbours’ reliance on external powers such as the US for support that could
disrupt China’s defense buildup plans in the South China Sea. The DOC’s
significance in managing peace in the South China Sea is dependent on
the COC, which has not been forthcoming. The Philippines, as the current
host of ASEAN, has pledged to make the COC agenda as one of its key
priorities. In May 2017, it was reported that China and ASEAN have agreed
on an initial framework for how the COC document should be structured
(Blanchard, 2017). Considering that the DOC has been in existence for over
a decade, the exceptionally slow progress is disappointing. Yet, even if the
COC is finally realized, it is doubtful that it will resolve the territorial rights

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 384

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

385

or claims in ways that the PCA has done. ASEAN should have capitalized on
the tribunal’s ruling by issuing a joint statement to express its solidarity and
support for the Philippines’ unilateral action and the importance of upholding
international law, which is in line with its Charter. This would have improved
ASEAN’s bargaining power vis-à-vis China’s. In addition, a shift in the
Philippines’ position on the South China Sea due to a change in presidency
has further diluted the effects of the ruling with President Rodrigo Duterte
setting aside the award in favour of closer economic ties with – and support
for his war on drugs from – China.
Hence, it is highly unlikely that ASEAN or more specifically the COC
that Malaysia is pushing for is capable of constraining China’s strategic
ambition since Beijing will readily oppose any efforts that hamper it from
exercising its claims. The regional organization’s inability to project a united
front and continues to be subjected to external power-play speaks volume of
its ineffectiveness in dealing with critical security concerns like the South
China Sea issue. The fact remains that none of the international laws and
norms such as UNCLOS, the 2002 DOC or the specific PCA ruling have
stopped China from further solidifying its control and strategic interests in the
South China Sea. Observers such as Sir Angus Houston, former chief of the
Australian Defence Force, have opined that it is too late to do so (Fernando,
2017). It is hence apprehensible that Indonesia, a non-claimant small state,
has unilaterally renamed part of the South China Sea as the North Natuna Sea
and in so doing joins Vietnam and the Philippines in exerting its sovereignty
against China’s historic claims (Allard and Munthe, 2017).11
5. The Implications of China’s Strategic Interests and Malaysia’s 		
Strategic Preferences
China’s strategic position on the South China Sea issue premises on a “dualtrack approach” as reiterated by its Foreign Minister Wang Yi, whereby
any overlapping claims ought to be addressed peacefully through bilateral
channels only by the claimant states, and the regional role in maintaining
peace in the South China Sea should fall on China and ASEAN under the
guidance of the DOC (MOFA China, 2016). It is a strategy that aims to
prevent the issue from being internationalized by allowing Beijing to maintain
an upper hand and keep external powers, primarily the US, Japan, Australia
and India, out of the issue. Although these countries do not have any territorial
claims in the dispute, they have keenly voiced concerns over China’s active
land reclamation activities and militarization of its occupied features as a
threat to the freedom of navigation on the seas and in the air. China has
maintained that it is not against the freedom of commercial navigation but
military operations that aim to challenge China’s sovereign claims.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 385

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

386

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

With the South China Sea serving as critical sea lines of communication,
these countries do not share China’s view but see the dispute as an
international concern. The PCA ruling was thus instructive for them with
Tokyo and Washington describing the outcome as “final and legally binding”
(Rappler, 2016). This came on top of an unprecedented joint statement
by India and Japan in December 2015 calling states to “avoid unilateral
actions that could lead to tensions” in the South China Sea and an official
statement on maritime security issued by the G7 Foreign Ministers in April
2016 expressing their “strong opposition to any intimidating, coercive or
provocative unilateral actions that could alter the status quo and increase
tensions…” (G7, 2016).
Criticisms from external powers should therefore be viewed within a wider
context where China’s actions in the South China Sea undermine established
international laws and norms. It is not only about violations of another
country’s sovereign rights but more importantly of the concern that China
will seek to unilaterally alter the current world order that the Western powers
have painstakingly built and greatly benefited. This is reflective in Japanese
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s 2013 address on the “Five New Principles for
Japanese Diplomacy” at the 40th Year of Japan-ASEAN Relations in Jakarta,
mentioning “that the seas, which are the most vital commons to us all, are
governed by laws and rules, not by might” (MOFA Japan, 2013). A major
purpose of these powers in engaging ASEAN and its member countries is
hence to build capacity, instill shared values and counter China’s influence, in
order to uphold the existing international norms and practices.
China’s active defence culture and its preparedness to use force to defend
its strategic interests in the South China Sea as well as the severe limitations
of the DOC and the PCA ruling in impacting Chinese behaviour do leave very
few strategic options for Malaysia to pursue. Malaysia’s strategic preference
has always been to push for a concerted effort under the banner of ASEAN.
Putrajaya subscribes to the notion that an ASEAN with a united stance on
the South China Sea issue will prevent Sino-US power rivalry from tearing
the region apart or use its member countries as pawns in a zero-sum game.
Malaysia is reluctant to take sides, preferring instead to subscribe to the rule
of law and the ASEAN process to deal with China’s assertiveness.
Unless China launches a military invasion to wrest control of Malaysia’s
controlled features, Putrajaya will unlikely make a major shift from its nonconfrontational approach. This means that; firstly, Malaysia will continue
to champion multilateral cooperation through regional and international
platforms, especially the significance of ASEAN in realizing the COC.
Malaysia is aware that the COC may not fully resolve the long-standing
dispute but strongly believes in its importance in providing badly needed
regional governance. Secondly, Malaysia will stay clear from aligning or

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 386

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

387

bandwagoning with the US or China. Malaysia’s foreign policy is premised
on non-alignment and enduring friendship with both the US and China (Noor,
2016: 216). Thirdly, Malaysia will continue to give precedence to diplomacy
as the ineffectiveness of the PCA ruling in affecting a positive change
highlights legal recourse as an unattractive option.
Putrajaya is however concerned with recent reports about China’s
militarization activities. It is firmly against any moves to further militarize
the South China Sea. Apart from China, reports have also indicated that
Vietnam could be discreetly fortifying a few of its occupied features with
“new mobile rocket launchers capable of striking China’s runways and
military installations” and carrying out new dredging works on its controlled
Ladd Reef (or Riji reef in Chinese) as a possible step to the construction of an
artificial island to bolster its claims (Torode, 2016; Feast and Torode, 2016).
Malaysia’s objection to an increase in militarization activities is therefore
premised on the concern that it will not only threaten Malaysia’s territorial
sovereignty but also create a downward spiral effect where other claimant
states are forced to follow suit. Malaysia’s Defense Minister Hishammuddin
Hussein acknowledges that his two main concerns are “accidental and
unintended incidents in the high seas and the increase in militarisation from
any country” (The Straits Times, 2016b).
Hishammuddin Hussein’s keynote speech at the International Institute for
Strategic Studies Fullerton Forum in January 2017 encapsulates Malaysia’s
strategic thinking.
Malaysia for its part, firmly and unequivocally believes that this dispute can
only be resolved through diplomacy and via multi-lateral institution such as
ASEAN. We must also look beyond tired and childish notions of “winners”
and “losers” for the simple fact that peace is a universal good and not a
zero-sum game.
There has been as of late, a regrettable tendency to pigeon hole foreign
relations in Asia Pacific as a series of false dichotomies. We are apparently
being forced to choose the East or West, between China or the United States,
between liberalism and populism. However, this goes against Asia’s unique
tradition of pluralism where different cultures, faiths and belief systems were
able to co-exist and thrive for centuries. Securing the peace in our time, will
require us to regain and enshrine this tradition in everything we do. Malaysia
– whose DNA bears the best trace of moderation and pluralism – will always
champion these sentiments in our dealings with the world. (Hussein, 2017)

The absence of a unified ASEAN position means that Malaysia still needs
to consider the roles played by external powers, predominantly the US, as
important in balancing against China. Hussein has reportedly stated that he
welcomes US’s FONOPS in the South China Sea as long as it does not cause
an increase in tension (Moss, 2015). US FONOPS is important and should be

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 387

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

388

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

supported if its role is to uphold the PCA ruling and ensure that the sovereign
rights of the other claimant states are equally protected. Nevertheless, the
actual intention of FONOPS remains ambiguous. Are FONOPS meant to
preserve the right of innocent passage as provided for under UNCLOS or to
monitor China’s military development? Some scholars have argued that US’s
real concern has been with the perceived threat to its freedom to conduct
military operations in China’s EEZ (Bateman, 2015; Valencia, 2016). Remarks
from US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson at his Senate confirmation hearing
in January 2017 that he wants China to stop the island construction and be
denied access to the features it occupy further reaffirms China’s long held
suspicion over US’s FONOPS. Tillerson’s assertion is logically only possible
with the use of force, which will undoubtedly trigger a retaliatory response
from China.
Moreover, US’s unclear policy on East and Southeast Asia under the
new Trump administration has not instilled confidence in ASEAN countries.
An online survey conducted by the ASEAN Studies Centre at ISEAS-Yusof
Ishak Institute in Singapore in April 2017 found that 43.4 per cent of the
respondents see the US as “disinterested” in Southeast Asia and 51.4 per
cent think that the US has lost strategic ground to China since Trump took
office (ASEAN Focus, 2017: 12-13). President Trump’s decision to withdraw
the US from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement has further
disappointed Malaysia and other TPP member countries and put into question
the permanence of US’s pivot to Asia. The US under Trump’s leadership is
increasingly viewed as unreliable.
US’s tilt towards a more confrontational approach in dealing with
China does not bode well for Southeast Asian countries who are against
Washington’s move to antagonize Beijing. The Philippines, under Duterte’s
leadership, has distanced itself from its overreliance on the US in favour
of stronger dialogue and diplomacy with China while Malaysia considers
military actions provoking China as counterproductive and will be very
concerned if a confrontational attitude takes shape in Washington designed
to contain China. None of the Southeast Asian claimant states appears to be
advocating a zero-sum game in resolving the territorial dispute.
In moving forward, Malaysia should carefully reassess its defence
capabilities and take necessary steps to reinforce its defences over the
features that it currently occupies. A non-antagonistic approach that maintains
a strong active defence coupled by a non-aligned policy while working with
the US and China through joint military exercises should inform Malaysia’s
strategic posture. A rigorous patrol and surveillance capabilities will not
only prevent embarrassing incidents like the Luconia Shoals from repeating
but also the encroachment of foreign fishing vessels into Malaysian waters.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 388

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

389

Bilateral and regional dialogues, the rule of law, and the realization of a
unified ASEAN position and the COC are long term efforts that Malaysia
should continuously stress.
6. Conclusion
The South China Sea issue is unquestionably complicated. The challenge is
on how to uphold the rule of law, avoid conflict and work with China to find
an amicable solution. Complications arise due to China’s strategic culture
that informs its strategic preference for active defence, which does not rule
out the use of offensive tactics. This “defence-offensive” posture is motivated
by its strategic ambition to reclaim its “rightful” place on one hand and the
perceived threat from US interference on the other. The perceived US hostility
that bent on thwarting Beijing’s ambition is aptly factored into its strategic
calculations. It is even prepared to discredit the PCA ruling as a Western
ploy in order to defend its historic claims and counter any efforts aimed at
suppressing and containing its rise. China’s assertiveness and its militarization
plans in the South China Sea are therefore a necessity to neutralize US’s
long-held hegemonic power in the region and demonstrate to the Southeast
Asian states the undesirability of aligning with external powers to frustrate
Beijing. Beijing is beyond doubt resolute in protecting its strategic interests
and achieving its stated ambition.
This understanding of China’s strategic interests explains why ASEAN
has been ineffective in finding a regional solution to the issue. The DOC has
contributed little to lessen tensions and the COC, even if realized, will not
reverse the damages caused by the unlawful construction of artificial islands
and facilities for military purposes. The COC will at best provide governance
to the management of the high seas by establishing agreed mechanisms to
manage incidences. Malaysia has been a strong advocate of this and should
continue to work for its realization. Rallying ASEAN countries to stand united
with a single voice is unfortunately much tougher to achieve due in part to
vested national interests overshadowing collective regional good.
Malaysia cannot afford to be complacent or believe to enjoy “special
treatment” from China. Putrajaya must instead take cognizance of changes
in the South China Sea and project a more emphatic behaviour in protecting
its strategic interests and preserving its sovereign integrity. Increased
activism should be characterized by more advanced surveillance and
intelligence systems, improved coordination between enforcement agencies,
the deployment of military assets and more frequent patrolling around its
controlled features. Malaysia should at the same time remain heedful of
China’s economic diplomacy and ensure that it does not affirm Varrall’s fourth

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 389

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

390

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

narrative by unwittingly subordinating its interests to China’s or falling into
Beijing’s sphere of influence.
Notes
* 		 Benny Teh Cheng Guan is Associate Professor at the School of Social Sciences,
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia. His research interests include East
Asian regionalism, ASEAN community building, traditional security, human
security and the politics of free trade agreements. He is the editor of Human
Security: Securing East Asia’s Future (Springer, 2012) and Foreign Policy and
Security in an Asian Century: Threats, Strategies and Policy Choices (World
Scientific, 2014). He can be reached at <ben@usm.my>.
1. 		 The other five claimants are China, Taiwan, Philippines, Brunei and Vietnam.
2.		 Accommodationist, defensive and offensive form the three dimensions of
Johnston’s central paradigm and are ranked strategic preferences instead of mere
options (Johnston, 1996: 224).
3.		 Other scholars who support Johnston’s analysis of China’s strategic culture
include Warren Cohen, an emeritus professor of American diplomatic history at
University of Maryland. Cohen (1997) believes that a powerful China in the 21st
century will likely be aggressive and expansionist.
4.		 This, however, should not imply that the absence or lack of public debate results
in the softening of position. As an example, the Indonesian government has been
steadfast in defending its interests in the South China Sea despite the lack of
active public discourse.
5.		 In March 2016, it was reported that the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency
(MMEA) detected about 100 Chinese fishing boats accompanied by Chinese
coast guard vessels encroached into Malaysian waters off the state of Sarawak
(The Straits Times, 2016a).
6.		 The Bandar Malaysia deal has unfortunately collapsed. The likely reasons were
the imposition of capital controls by China, Beijing’s perceived outlook towards
the rail project, and the increased worth of the land parcel (Naidu, 2017).
7.		 Former Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad recently voiced his concerns that
huge loans from China for large scale infrastructure projects will adversely
affect Malaysia’s sovereign claims in the South China Sea (The Straits Times,
2016c).
8.		 China claims the South China Sea area within the 9-dash line as its traditional
fishing ground.
9.		 The tribunal found, among others, no legal basis for China’s claim to historic
rights within the 9-dash line area, all of the high-tide features in the Spratly
Islands are “rocks” and therefore do not generate an exclusive economic zone,
and China’s claim to several features were unlawful and thus violated the
Philippines’ sovereign rights. For details of the award, see PCA (2016).
10. Both Putrajaya and Beijing have already agreed to address concerns in the South
China Sea through the DOC prior to the verdict (The Sun Daily, 2016).
11. Vietnam refers to the South China Sea as the East Sea while the Philippines
renamed part of the South China Sea as the West Philippine Sea.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 390

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

391

References
Allard, T. and B.C. Munthe (2017), “Asserting Sovereignty, Indonesia Renames Part
of South China Sea”, Reuters, 14 July, available at <http://www.reuters.com/
article/us-indonesia-politics-map-idUSKBN19Z0YQ> (accessed on 15 July 2017).
AMM (ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting) (2016), “Joint Communique of the
49th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting”, Vientiane, Laos, 24 July, available at
<https://www.asean2016.gov.la/kcfinder/upload/files/Joint%20Communique%20
of%20the%2049th%20AMM%20(ADOPTED).pdf> (accessed on 9 February
2017).
AMTI (Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative) (2017), “China’s Big Three Near
Completion, 29 June, available at <https://amti.csis.org/chinas-big-three-nearcompletion/> (accessed on 6 July 2017).
ASEAN Focus (2017), “ASEAN 1967-2017: Celebrating Five Decades of Regional
Cooperation”, Issue 2/2017, available at <https://www.iseas.edu.sg/images/pdf/
ASEANFocusMarApr17.pdf> (accessed on 5 July 2017).
ASEAN Website (n.d.), “Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea”, available at <http://asean.org/?static_post=declaration-on-the-conduct-ofparties-in-the-south-china-sea-2> (accessed on 10 January 2017).
Bateman, S. (2015), “Why Australia Shouldn’t Join the U.S. FONOPs in the South
China Sea”, Australian Naval Institute, 16 December, available at <http://
navalinstitute.com.au/why-australia-shouldnt-join-the-u-s-fonops-in-the-southchina-sea/> (accessed on 11 February 2017).
Beech, H. (2016), “China Slams the South China Sea Decision as a ‘Political Farce’”,
Time, 13 July, available at <http://time.com/4404084/reaction-south-china-searuling/> (accessed on 12 January 2017).
Blanchard, B. (2017), “China, ASEAN Agree on Framework for South China Sea
Code of Conduct”, Reuters, 18 May, available at <http://www.reuters.com/article/
us-southchinasea-china-philippines-idUSKCN18E1FS> (accessed on 6 July 2017).
Cohen, W.I. (1997), “China’s Strategic Culture”, The Atlantic, March, available
at <https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1997/03/chinas-strategicculture/376815/> (accessed on 4 July 2017).
Feast, L. and G. Torode (2016), “Exclusive: Risking Beijing’s Ire, Vietnam Begins
Dredging on South China Sea Reef”, Reuters, 9 December, available at <http://
www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinasea-vietnam-idUSKBN13X0WD> (accessed
on 11 February 2017).
Fernando, G. (2017), “Former ADF Head Says China’s Military Rise in South China
Sea is Almost Complete”, News, 2 February, available at <http://www.news.com.
au/world/asia/former-adf-head-says-chinas-military-rise-in-south-china-sea-isalmost-complete/news-story/59d13eeb7339b9b3988b9f33f210135d> (accessed
on 6 July 2017).
Ford, C.A. (2016), “Realpolitik with Chinese Characteristics: Chinese Strategic
Culture and the Modern Communist Party-state”, in Ashley Tellis, Alison
Szalwinski and Michael Wills (eds), Strategic Asia 2016-17: Understanding
Strategic Cultures in the Asia-Pacific. Washington: The National Bureau of Asian
Research, pp. 29-62.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 391

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

392

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

G7 (Group of Seven) (2016), “Foreign Minister’s Statement on Maritime Security”,
11 April, available at <https://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquartershomepage/2897/g7-foreign-ministers-statement-maritime-security-april-11-2016hiroshima-japan_en> (accessed on 10 February 2017).
Glaser, B. (2011), “Tensions Flare in the South China Sea”, Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS), available at <https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/
s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/110629_Glaser_South_China_Sea.pdf>
(accessed on 5 July 2017).
Hussein, H. (2017), “Keynote Address”, Fullerton Forum, International Institute for
Strategic Studies (IISS), 23 January, available at <https://www.iiss.org/en/events/
shangri-la-dialogue/archive/fullerton-forum-2017-35a9/keynote-address-1fb7>
(accessed on 6 July 2017).
Ignatius, D. (2017), “Why China is Different”, Personal Blog, 3 February, available
at <https://dennisignatius.com/2017/02/03/why-china-is-different/> (accessed on
10 February 2017).
Jaipragas, B. (2016), “Has China Offered to Bail Out Malaysia’s 1MDB? At What
Cost?”, South China Morning Post, 7 December, available at <http://www.scmp.
com/week-asia/politics/article/2052636/has-china-offered-bail-out-malaysias1mdb-what-cost> (accessed on 12 January 2017).
Jennings, R. (2016), “Why Malaysia Stays Quiet About Its Claims in the South China
Sea”, Forbes, 2 June, available at <http://www.forbes.com/sites/ralphjennings/
2016/06/02/why-malaysia-stays-quiet-about-its-claims-in-the-disputed-south-chinasea/#34545ec31beb> (accessed on 11 January 2017).
Johnston, A.I. (1995), Cultural Realism: Strategic Culture and Grand Strategy in
Chinese History, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Johnston, A.I. (1996) “Cultural Realism and Strategy in Maoist China”, in Peter J.
Katzenstein (ed.), The Culture of National Security: Norms and Ideas in World
Politics, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 216-268.
MIDA (Malaysian Investment Development Authority) Official Website, available
at <http://www.mida.gov.my/home/facts-and-figures/posts/> (accessed on 10
February 2017).
Miller, M. (2016), “China Says Brunei, Cambodia, Laos Agree Sea Dispute Must Not
Hurt Ties, Reuters, 24 April.
MOFA (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) China (2016), “Wang Yi: Stick to ‘Dual-track
Approach’ When Dealing with the South China Sea Issue”, 24 July, available at
<http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/zxxx_662805/t1384511.shtml> (accessed on
11 February 2017).
MOFA (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) China (2017), “China’s Policies on Asia-Pacific
Security Cooperation”, 11 January, available at <http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_
eng/zxxx_662805/t1429771.shtml> (accessed on 5 July 2017).
MOFA (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Japan (2013), “The Bounty of the Open Seas:
Five New Principles for Japanese Diplomacy”, Address by H.E. Mr. Shinzo
Abe, Jakarta, 18 January, available at <http://www.mofa.go.jp/announce/pm/abe/
abe_0118e.html> (accessed on 11 February 2017).
MOFA (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Malaysia (2016), “Statement by Malaysia –
Following the Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal on the South China Sea Issue”, 12

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 392

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

393

July, available at <http://www.kln.gov.my/web/ukr_kiev/ps2016/-/asset_publisher/
ME2g/blog/statement-by-malaysia-following-the-decision-of-the-arbitral-tribunalon-the-south-china-sea-issue?redirect=%2Fweb%2Fukr_kiev%2Fps2016>
(accessed on 10 February 2017).
Mogato, M., M. Martina and B. Blanchard (2016), “ASEAN Deadlocked on South
China Sea, Cambodia Blocks Statement”, Reuters, 25 July, available at <http://
www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinasea-ruling-asean-idUSKCN1050F6>
(accessed on 9 February 2017).
Morton, K. (2016), “China’s Ambition in the South China Sea: Is a Legitimate
Maritime Order Possible?”, International Affairs, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 909-940.
Moss, T. (2015), “Support Grows for U.S. Approach in South China Sea”, The Wall
Street Journal, 3 November, available at <https://www.wsj.com/articles/supportgrows-for-u-s-approach-in-south-china-sea-1446545714> (accessed on 5 July
2017).
Naidu, S. (2017), “Capital Controls, High-speed Rail Behind Collapse of Bandar
Malaysia deal?”, Channel NewsAsia, 6 May, available at <http://www.
channelnewsasia.com/news/business/capital-controls-high-speed-rail-behindcollapse-of-bandar-8823716> (accessed on 5 July 2017).
Noor, E. (2016), “The South China Sea Dispute: Options for Malaysia”, in Ian Storey
and Lin Cheng-yi (eds), The South China Sea Dispute: Navigating Diplomatic and
Strategic Tensions, Singapore: ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 205-227.
PCA (Permanent Court of Arbitration) (2016), “In the Matter of the South China Sea
Arbitration Before an Arbitral Tribunal Constituted under Annex VII to the 1982
UNCLOS between the Republic of the Philippines and the People’s Republic of
China, Award, PCA Case No 2013-19”, available at https://pca-cpa.org/wp-content/
uploads/sites/175/2016/07/PH-CN-20160712-Award.pdf (accessed on 9 February
2017).
People’s Daily (2016), “People’s Daily Slams South China Sea Arbitration Tribunal
for Being Political Tool”, 14 July, available at <http://en.people.cn/n3/2016/0714/
c90000-9085753.html> (accessed on 6 July 2017).
Perlez, J. (2014), “Vietnamese Vessel Sinks in Clash Near Oil Rig”, The New York
Times, 26 May, available at <https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/27/world/asia/
vietnam-boat-sinks-in-clash-near-oil-rig.html> (accessed on 5 July 2017).
Rappler (2016), “Japan, US: PH-China Dispute Ruling Final, Legally Binding”, 12
July, available at <http://www.rappler.com/world/global-affairs/139506-westphilippine-sea-south-china-ruling-world-reactions> (accessed on 11 January
2017).
Razak, N.T. (2016), “Fruits Harvested from Seeds of Trust”, China Daily, 2
November, available at <http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/opinion/2016-11/02/
content_27245852.htm> (accessed on 12 January 2017).
Scobell, A. (2002), “China and Strategic Culture”, Strategic Studies Institute, available
at <http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/2002/ssi_scobell.pdf>
(accessed on 5 July 2017).
Scobell, A. (2015), “China’s Real Strategic Culture: A Great Wall of the Imagination”,
in Jeffrey S. Lantis (ed.), Strategic Cultures and Security Policies in the AsiaPacific, Oxon: Routledge, pp. 46-61.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 393

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

394

Benny Teh Cheng Guan

Sokheng, V. (2016), “Kingdom Reiterates Stance on South China Sea”, The Phnom
Penh Post, 11 July, available at <http://www.phnompenhpost.com/national/
kingdom-reiterates-stance-south-china-sea> (accessed on 9 February 2017).
Tang, S.M. (2016), “Fallout from the ASEAN-China Special Foreign Ministers’
Meeting, Commentary 2016/22”, ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, available at
<https://www.iseas.edu.sg/medias/commentaries/item/3298-fallout-from-theaseanchina-special-foreign-ministers-meeting> (accessed on 9 February 2017).
The Malaysian Reserve (2017), “PM: Nothing Unusual in China’s Rising Investment”,
3 April, available at <https://themalaysianreserve.com/2017/04/03/pm-nothingunusual-in-chinas-rising-investment/> (accessed on 5 July 2017).
The Straits Times (2016a), “Malaysia Summons China Ambassador Over Alleged
South China Sea Encroachment”, 31 March, available at <http://www.straitstimes.
com/asia/se-asia/malaysia-summons-china-ambassador-over-alleged-south-chinasea-encroachment> (accessed on 11 January 2017).
The Straits Times (2016b), “Malaysia, Vietnam Concerned About Reports of China’s
Military Deployment in South China Sea”, 17 December, available at <http://www.
straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/malaysia-to-seek-clarification-from-china-on-reportsof-military-deployment-in-south> (accessed on 10 February 2017).
The Straits Times (2016c), “Najib Has Hurt Malaysia’s Sovereignty: Mahathir”,
3 November, available at <http://www.straitstimes.com/world/najib-has-hurtmalaysias-sovereignty-mahathir> (accessed on 11 February 2017).
The Sun Daily (2016), “Malaysia, China Agree to Settle South China Sea Issues via
DOC”, 10 May.
Torode, G. (2016), “Exclusive: Vietnam Moves New Rocket Launchers into Disputed
South China Sea – Sources”, Reuters, 10 August, available at <http://www.
reuters.com/article/us-southchinasea-vietnam-idUSKCN10K2NE> (accessed on
11 February 2017).
Valencia, M.J. (2016), “Deceit and Hypocrisy in the South China Sea”, The
Japan Times, 15 February, available at <http://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/
2016/02/15/commentary/world-commentary/deceit-hypocrisy-south-china-sea/#.
WW2RUYSGPIX> (accessed on 11 February 2017).
Varrall, M. (2015), “Chinese Worldviews and China’s Foreign Policy”, Analysis, Lowy
Institute for International Policy.
Wan, M. (2016), “Behind the Official Narrative: China’s Strategic Culture in
Perspective, An Interview with Christopher A. Ford”, The National Bureau of
Asian Research, available at <http://www.nbr.org/research/activity.aspx?id=718>
(accessed on 4 July 2017).
White Paper (2015), “China’s Military Strategy, The State Council Information Office
of the People’s Republic of China”, May, available at <http://www.chinadaily.com.
cn/china/2015-05/26/content_20820628.htm> (accessed on 6 July 2017).
Williams, S. (2016), “Keep Calm and Sail On: Beijing tells Seoul to Stay ‘Coolheaded’ After Chinese Fishermen Sank a 4.5-tonne South Korean Coast Guard
Vessel”, Mail Online, 13 October, available at <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/
article-3835996/Beijing-tells-Seoul-stay-cool-headed-Chinese-fishermen-rammedsank-South-Korean-coast-guard-boat.html> (accessed on 5 July 2017).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 394

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

South China Sea: China’s Strategic Culture and Malaysia’s Preferred Approaches

395

Xi, J. (2017), “Work Together to Build a Community of Shared Future for Mankind”,
Speech at the United Nations Office at Geneva, 18 January, available at <http://
iq.chineseembassy.org/eng/zygx/t1432869.htm> (accessed on 6 July 2017).
Zahiid, S.J. (2015), “1MDB Sells Bandar Malaysia Land to Johor, Chinese
Consortium”, Malay Mail Online, 31 December, available at <http://www.
themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/1mdb-sells-bandar-malaysia-land-tojohor-chinese-consortium> (accessed on 11 January 2017).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 395

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 396

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

China and
Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia
International Journal of China
Studies
Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017, pp. 397-421

397

Geopolitics, Real and Imagined Spaces: China and
Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia
Daniel Lemus Delgado* and José Jesús Bravo Vergara**
Asia Pacific Center, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico
Pacific Studies Department, Universidad de Guadalajara, Mexico

Abstract
This article analyzes the relationship between the People’s Republic of China
in East Asia and real and imagined spaces as key factors for understanding
the rise of China on the international stage. To this end therefore we propose
that spaces, both real and imagined, play a fundamental role in the design
and implementation of Chinese foreign policy. We propose that Chinese
interests in East Asia are the result of both material and intangible aspirations,
which in turn are the result of a dynamic and intersubjective processes
between the physical and imaginary worlds. In this world both physical and
imagined geography have a fundamental role. Finally, we conclude that the
international system is a world comprising not only physical but also mental
representations which give form and meaning to the physical entity, as
demonstrated by Chinese foreign policy in East Asia.
Keywords: People’s Republic of China, East Asia, foreign policy, geopolitics,
imagined spaces
1. Introduction
East Asia is one of the most dynamic regions on earth. In this space countries
such as the People’s Republic of China,1 Japan, Russia and South Korea are
the largest economies, although the United States also has an undeniably
significant presence in the region. East Asia also hosts the important nuclear
powers (China, Russia and the U.S.), with the danger that North Korea at
some point might become the fourth nuclear power in the region, despite its
significantly smaller economic capacity.
The international relations of the states in the region are marked by a
series of conflicts derived from the constant inter-state clash of interests
between these nations and the United States. Territorial disputes such as

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 397

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

398 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

those arising between China and Japan over the Senkaku Islands or Diaoyu,
Japanese protests to Russia over the Kuril Islands, the continuing state of war
which exists between North and South Korea, and the Chinese insistence of
sovereignty over Taiwan are just some examples of this reality. For its part,
the United States has been a significant regional player for over a century.
In effect, even though it is not an East Asian country, the global reach of
US power has assisted in the establishing of a status quo which favours US
interests. As the world’s second-largest economy, China is set to gradually
shape and reconstruct the international order (Zheng and Lim, 2017). What
we actually see today is the increasing significance that China has attached
to its interests in the region as a result of its foreign policy agenda, although
on occasion these interests inevitably clash with those of the United States.2
Different perspectives evidence the competition between China and
the United States in East Asia. For example, North Korean provocations
emerged as a result of the post Cold War era Sino-US strategic competition
in the region, where such variables as the rise of China, the increasing US
focus on Asia and growing Sino-ROK economic ties are driving the strategic
choices of major states (Kim, 2015). Regarding security, the United States is
seeking to increasingly isolate China, by striking regional alliances, off-shore
balancing, and shifting towards air-sea confrontations. In terms of trade, the
United Sates continues its effort to reduce Asian mercantilism by tying Asian
traders to neoliberal rule sets. Despite this however, the “Beijing Consensus”
is a growing challenge to US soft power (Kelly, 2014), with China starting
to affirm its military power in East and Southeast Asia. For example, a
two-week standoff between Japan and China over a boat collision in 2010
underlined the growing propensity of China to adopt a more aggressive
political approach against rivals and US allies. This incident happened near
a chain of islands in the East China Sea, and Chinese claims of ownership of
the archipelago and that the South China Sea was a “core interest”, increased
fears in Taiwan, the Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia and Malaysia. These
countries perceive that China is seeking to dominate a vital space in the
region (Pant, 2012).
It should also be taken into account that sovereignty, along with territorial
integrity and national unity, are indisputable values of identity to the Chinese
nation-state (Xinbo, 2012; Khong, 2013). In addition, they are a fundamental
part of the development of Chinese international relations (Kang, 2007: 81).
With this vision, the Beijing regime believes that it needs to safeguard at
all costs what it considers its territorial integrity and the legitimacy of the
Chinese Communist Party, and by doing so, strengthen the existence of the
Chinese state (Xinbo, 2012).3
Chinese-U.S. rivalry also affects both multilateral and mini-lateral
regional institutions in East Asia. China believes the Association of Southeast

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 398

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

399

Asian Nations (ASEAN) + 3 to be a primary vehicle for the consolidation of
cooperation in East Asia, while maintaining a broader vision of a regional
institution, the East Asia Summit (EAS), as a forum for talks. A similar
scenario is present in the trilateral cooperation between China, Japan and
Korea versus Korea, Japan and the U.S. Finally, regarding the economic
panorama, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)
and Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is another element of Chinese-U.S.
competition (Park, 2013).
Lanteigne (2016) argued that China´s foreign policy is comprised of two
processes. First, China is a rising power with a strong position that determines
its actions and decisions in the international arena. Second, its foreign policy
is in a stage of transformation and reconstruction. Nowadays China is a nation
with significant aspirations of power (Li, 2009), and although the specific
interests and approach vary according to geographic region, in the end,
China’s main focus is the search to contribute to constructing a multipolar
world in order to reaffirm political stability and ensure the rule of the Chinese
Communist Party (Saunders, 2014b). The core of this strategy is actually to
obtain prominence in East Asia (Zhao, 2014).
Given this complex situation, this article analyzes the relationship
between physical and imagined spaces and how external politics reflects the
aspirations of states to consolidate their interests. To this end, we examine
the interests of China in East Asia from the classic geopolitical standpoint
and complement this analysis with an approximation of these imaginary
spaces. We propose that both real and imaginary spaces are fundamental to
Chinese foreign policy. The central proposition is that the focus of classic
geopolitics is insufficient to allow understanding of the dynamics of conflict
and cooperation in the region; it is necessary therefore to complement this
vision with an approximation that considers the paradigmatic concepts of
an imaginary space which determines the place that each one of the actors
occupies within it. This paradigmatic concept has its roots in a particular
interpretation of Chinese history and civilization.
Thus, we suggest that to understand Chinese foreign policy in East Asia
it is necessary to consider the geographical factor from two dimensions. The
first is the classic vision of geopolitics in which physical space is relevant to
Chinese interests.
The second aspect considers an imaginary space. This idealized space
encourages the aspirations of the Chinese bureaucratic elite to recreate a world
based on certain historical paradigmatic concepts.4 In this way, this article
contributes to understanding the rise of China in East Asia from a perspective
which not only considers geography as a power-defining factor but which goes
further than the classic vision of geopolitics in highlighting the relevance of
ideational structure in the process. Using a paraphrase from Alexander Wendt

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 399

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

400 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

(1992), space is what states make of it. In other words, space is given not only
by nature but socially constructed.
This article has six sections. In the next section, we introduce the
emergence of geopolitics and the major theoretical proposals utilized to
understand how state interests in the international arena have their origin in
distinct geographic spaces. In the third section, we show how physical space
is a factor which determines the interests of China. In the fourth section,
we analyze the paradigmatic concept of space inherent in classic Chinese
civilization, and we explore the impact of this idea on the perception of
China as the centre of the world to the contemporary political elite. In the
next section, we present the rise of China and what this signifies for the East
Asian region. Finally, in the conclusion we discuss how it is that both material
and imaginary factors have come to be the two elements which allow us to
understand the current rise of China and its impact in East Asia.
2. Geopolitics and the Quest for Power
Geopolitics encompasses the study of the exterior spatial relationships of
states, and refers particularly to the geographical aspects of these external
relations and the problems of particular states which impact the rest of
the world (Cairo, 1993). According to Robert Kaplan, geography plays a
central role in the relationships of each nation-state, as it governs the way
in which the individual challenges which arise are tackled and thus affects
outcomes. Natural characteristics such as rivers, seas, hills, mountains as well
as climatic differences mark both culture and ideology and also the way in
which historical challenges are confronted (Kaplan, 2012). For example, ideas
about control of oceans have always played a fundamental role in politics,
diplomacy, and the military, and in part explain the current disputes in the
South China Sea (Ren and Liu, 2013).
Rudolf Kjellen, who is believed to have coined the term “geopolitics”,
understood the concept as the link between the geographical and the political
(Tuathail, 1998). In his key work The State as a Life-Form, Kjellen signalled
that the state could be considered as an individual human, as it was subject
to the law of natural growth. That is to say, as a living organism it is born,
grows, develops and dies, although in some cases it simply transforms. In the
same way, Kjellen argued that the two principal influences on the state are
geographic environment and race (Rosales, 2015).
Halford Makinder (1904) reaffirmed the relevance of geopolitics by highlighting the existence of the significant influence of geographical conditions on
human activity and how these influences are regarded by humans. Mackinder
developed his theories during the heyday of the British Empire. His most
significant contribution was the Heartland theory, and he identified Eurasia,

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 400

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

401

more specifically Eastern Europe and Central Asia, as a “pivotal region” of the
world, a huge landmass inaccessible to maritime powers, but with sufficient
riches to allow the country which controlled this area to dominate the world.
Geopolitics as a discipline was enriched thanks to the contributions of
diverse theories influenced to a large extent by military strategy and by the
identification of the importance of resources to the objectives of survival and
dominance. The most outstanding of these theorists included, amongst others,
Alfred Thayer Mahan, Karl Haushofer and Nicholas Spykman. In the case of
Mahan, his time in the navy led to him concentrating his geopolitical vision
on the relevance of maritime power. He was the first author to recognize the
importance of maritime dominance on the history of humanity. The effect of
his work The Influence of Naval Power in History urged the most important
leaders of the time to produce battleships and establish bases which would
give them key points of control to protect trade routes and strengthen outlying
military outposts (Cropsey and Milikh, 2012).
For his part, Karl Haushofer concentrated on the relationship between
access to and possession of resources and the significance of this relationship
to the survival of the “great nations” (Haushofer, 2009). He indicated that
politicians should not only have an understanding of jurisprudence and
political science, but an understanding of geopolitics was also essential,
an idea which, according to his viewpoint, was particularly important for
Germany, his native country. The central theory of this argument was that
space was the defining element which ruled the history of humanity:
Only a nation with sufficient space is capable of providing both spiritual
and material necessities. Our leaders must learn to use the tools available to
continue the fight for the existence of Germany, a fight which is becoming
increasingly difficult due to the mismatch between food production and
population density (Haushofer, 2009).

According to Augusto Rattenbach (1975), Haushofer affirmed that
geography will become the defining factor in world politics and was therefore
of particular importance to the analysis of the distribution of available living
space: in other words, the space required for nations to feed their respective
populations. He also mentioned the importance of complete integration of
geographical space (Haushofer, 2009). In this sense, Haushofer alluded
to the consideration of geographical space as a transcendent political and
economic factor, but also as an element of great importance militarily. Kaplan
(2012) subsequently argued that geography is a constant impulse behind the
development of nation-state actions, particularly with reference to the military
and economic areas.
Finally, Nicholas Spykman, influenced by both Mackinder and Mahan,
proposed a scenario in which geography was identified as the most important

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 401

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

402 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

factor in the formulation of state foreign policy, due to its status as the most
permanent identifying element (Cairo, 1993). Spykman’s theory put forward
the objectives that he argued should guide US foreign policy both during and
after the Second World War (WWII). His theory was based on the premise that
as the US had insufficient resources to compete with the combined resources
of Eurasia, it therefore had to ensure a balance of power in both Europe and
Asia. The danger was that the German-Japanese alliance could be continued
after the end of the war by countries such as China and Russia (Dougherty
and Pzaltzgraff, 2001).
Spykman referenced Mahan’s ideas relating to the importance of maritime
power and used the theories of Mackinder as part of his own proposal in the
same way, emphasizing the importance of maritime strength over terrestrial
power. It may well be argued that Mackinder created a model based on
European history, believing that the state that occupied the Heartland would
enjoy decision-making power over world politics, while Spykman, without
gainsaying the relevance of the Heartland in obtaining world power, argued
that in actuality the control of the “continental rim” or Rimland (Spykman,
2008) was actually of more relevance for states.
From this standpoint it was essential for the United States to acquire,
as much for peacetime as for wartime, a global strategy based on the
implications of geographical location, this considering that the US was in
fact a considerable maritime power and that its intervention in WWII resulted
from a desire to avoid the appearance of a dominant power in the Rimland
surrounding Eurasia (Peritone, 2010). In this way Rimland was considered a
perspective of particular relevance in the development of US foreign policy
post-WWII.
To conclude, according to the perspective of the classic authors of
geopolitics, the development of the great powers has been determined by the
relevance of the relationship existing between the geographic factors which
surround them and the deployment of their foreign policy. Nevertheless,
according to Tuathail (1996), these approximations are constrained by the fact
that in the search for specialization a Eurocentric view of understanding the
relationship between power and states is the norm. He furthermore maintains
that this view of the existence of important regions, identities and perspectives
is the natural one. In this way, geopolitics in its classic dimension has justified
state expansionism and militarism, and left to one side the fact that these
processes are marked by specific social and historical contexts.
The theoretical review of the most critical approach to understanding the
relationship between geography and foreign policy shows how ideas about the
values of space has changed over time, with the significance of physical space
and the conceptual framing of physical elements determining perceptions of
geography. This perception generates the practices, norms and discourse of

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 402

29/12/2017 9:22:16 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

403

how a nation should conduct foreign policy. The evolution of various theories
of geopolitics reflects that the importance of particular space is shaped by
many forces of the international system in a specific historical context. At
the same time, the concept of space is a continuous construction of meanings
that influences the norms of how both real and imaginary space are perceived.
Geopolitics therefore is the result of how a singular way of thinking embeds
into civilization.
It can be seen therefore how the traditional vision of geopolitics
corresponds to a Western perspective. However, it is possible to find other
ways in which the relationship between physical space and international
politics can be understood. As John Agnew (2012) suggests, nowadays the
way of thinking about China’s “place in the world” is based on the use of
analogies and interpretations of how China’s past practices and geographical
forms inspire contemporary and future directions in Chinese foreign policy.
Different venues within China are therefore producing interpretive geopolitical
frames to assist in the conduct of foreign policy. Within these narratives,
it is possible to distinguish four distinct strands of thought: Pacific Rim,
orientalism, nationalist geopolitics, and international relations with Chinese
characteristics, with each strand placing a different emphasis on Chinese
history. However, these interpretations about space as a historical and social
construct have their roots in real, physical space. In the following section we
analyze the physical space that frames the possibilities for Chinese action on
the international stage.
3. Physical Space and Chinese Interests
Firstly it is necessary to state that geographical space plays a defining role
in Chinese foreign policy for diverse reasons. In the first place, when one
thinks of China one also considers its not insignificant territory. China is
a nation with an area of approximately 9,500,000 square kilometres and a
population of over 1,360 million people. China shares over 20 thousand
kilometres of land border with 14 countries: North Korea, Russia, Mongolia,
Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Nepal,
Bhutan, Myanmar, Laos and Vietnam (Anguiano, 2008). Within this immense
territory are four distinctly different forms of political administration. It has
22 provinces, 5 autonomous regions, 4 municipalities administrated directly
by the Communist Party and 2 special administrative regions. In terms of
population, China recognizes 55 different ethnic minorities, which comprise
approximately 6-8% of the total population. The dominant ethnic group, the
Han, actually have significant regional linguistic variations, but the existence
of a written language since the second century B.C.E. has been a culturally
unifying factor in the midst of this diversity (Starr, 2010).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 403

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

404 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

Secondly we find the urgent need for economic development. From
the inception of the reform program, the Chinese economy has grown at
an average rate of 9.8% annually for over three decades (Song, 2013). The
current imperative for China remains as it was at the beginning of the reform
program: guaranteeing economic growth with the intention of improving the
life chances of its citizens. Nevertheless, the fallout from the economic crisis
of 2008 has forced China to revise its growth forecast downwards and impose
a “new normal” where the aspiration was moderate and balanced growth.
In spite of the adverse circumstances presented by the international context
and the need for balanced and more environment-friendly growth, economic
success continues to be an imperative for the Chinese state. It should
not be forgotten that growth increases the legitimacy of the regime, and,
simultaneously, contains all the elements for possible social unrest resulting
from the social inequality that, paradoxically, this growth has generated.
The third factor refers to the Chinese geopolitical context. As Anguiano
(2008) has argued, due to its contiguous coastline and military reach China
has important links with the great archipelagos of the region. It is in this
vast theatre that China’s relations with Japan, a developed-world economic
and technological power, take place. It is also the environment in which it
maintains relations with the following nations: Australia and New Zealand,
countries viewed as advanced economies; Russia, a nuclear and military
power; India, a rising power, and the countries of South-East Asia which make
up the Association of South-East Asian Nations. China has similarly played
a fundamental part in the complex relationship between the two Koreas. This
geopolitical context delineates the foreign policy decisions implemented by
the bureaucratic elite.
From the perspective of geopolitics the rise of China can be identified
as a natural result of the search for an area of influence which will provide
the resources necessary to continue its heady economic rise and guarantee a
natural security buffer. This buffer corresponds to the territorial reach of the
Chinese state. For this reason, the Chinese government has directed a great
deal of attention towards gaining access to control of its immediate geographic
space, and deployed significant resources to begin ensuring such control.
Nevertheless, without downplaying the influence of space in Chinese
foreign policy, it is necessary to consider that this vision is in fact incomplete
and that it is necessary to take a broader view which also considers the
imaginary aspects of space. In this sense, as the previous section has
demonstrated, the beliefs of the current Chinese bureaucratic elite about what
the nation should be are based on an imaginary concept of space derived from
a particular interpretation of Chinese civilization and the tax system. These
ideas about the centrality of China are in fact widely shared by other countries
in the region (Kang, 2003).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 404

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

405

4. Imagined Space: A World View According to the Heritage of 			
Classical Chinese Civilization
Evidently, the manner in which bureaucratic elites decided and implemented
the foreign policy of a state was conditioned by the material structures of the
international scene and by the individual abilities of each state to implement
its foreign policy. However, the perception that these elites had of the
international scene was of equal importance. This perception encompassed
beliefs about values and norms as well as behavioral expectations that each
state and other actors on the international scene should assume (Onuf, 1998).
In the same way these perceptions were based on a particular understanding
of history and of the identities that each international player possessed, given
that state identity in large part determined state interests (Epstein, 2013).
These perceptions are the lens through which international reality is seen
and they act in accordance with the understanding which colours this reality
(Onuf, 1998).
The case of China is no exception. The foreign policy which the political
elite has followed over the last six decades has been related to both tangible
and intangible factors. Different events in foreign policy have been moulded
not only by the physical space occupied by China, but also by the particular
vision of an imagined space. This suggests that the space China is desirous of
occupying in the world corresponds to an interpretation that the bureaucratic
elite has constructed about the past. At the same time, this interpretation has
constituted a fundamental part of the identity of the Chinese state, and in
this way, maybe as in no other case, the weight of history, imagined space
and the identity of the Chinese people are particularly significant elements
which help to explain foreign policy. It is also true, according to Barabantsev
(2009), that Chinese international relations cannot be understood by simply
projecting Chinese history onto the present, as the past is only one way to
confirm an imagined identity that drives and guides the role that China must
play in the international arena. In addition, there is the existence of a Chinese
bureaucratic elite who perceive themselves as the heirs and custodians of
Chinese civilization.
Out of this perception arises the classical vision of China as the centre of
the world. It should not be forgotten that the international context in which
we find ourselves today is the result of the Treaty of Westphalia, signed in
1648 (Kennedy, 1989). This agreement created the basis for the establishment
of the modern international system. In this way fundamental elements of the
relationship between states were established, elements such as the principles
of territorial sovereignty, of not meddling in the internal affairs of sovereign
nations and the equal treatment of states independent of their material
capacities or religious beliefs. This treaty permitted an end to be put to the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 405

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

406 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

religious wars that had plagued Europe in previous years. It is important to
understand that this vision came out of the European context and was judged
to be the best way of organizing interstate relations: it was gradually expanded
across the globe along with European imperialism in the same way as the
capitalist system (Wallerstein, 2004).
The world vision described above however contrasted significantly with
the Sinocentric view. In his seminal work John King Fairbank put forward the
“Chinese world order” theory, with the intention of understanding the nature
of Chinese imperial relations. Fairbanks’ thesis postulated a “Sino-centric
hierarchical world order”, in which China had a lord-vassal relationship
in vertical terms with neighbouring political units. According to Fairbank,
this relationship functioned as part of a tribute system. In East Asia it was
this system which would mould international relations before the arrival
of western powers. Fairbank argued that the tribute system permitted the
direction of diplomatic and commercial matters between foreign governments
and the Chinese Emperor. In sum, the Chinese Emperor awarded both official
titles and influence to neighbouring governments, thus giving them a form of
legitimacy. In exchange, these foreign powers adopted a submissive position,
thus confirming the superiority of Chinese civilization and legitimacy of the
Chinese Emperor (Fairbank, 1969). Imperial China was therefore governed
by a unified system of rituals that promoted the ideology of Great Unity
(Callahan, 2010).
In effect, in the 16th century Chinese governments considered, without
the slightest doubt, that China possessed the biggest political structure and
was, in effect, the centre of the world. China was a universe unto and in
itself. In this context, the Confucian approach was the paradigm of the world
(Levenson, 1971), which was protected by natural frontiers in which Chinese
influence spread to Korea, Japan, the Ryukyu islands and Southeast Asia.
In this autonomous world of East Asia, China was the only power (McNall,
1971), and in this scenario the relationship between states was asymmetrical
and notable for its benevolent nature: “the dominant state is essentially
benign, the smaller state would prefer an accommodating stance that allows
it to benefit from warm relations with its neighbor” (Kang, 2007: 19).
This vision paradigmatically dominated the relationship between the
Chinese empire and neighbouring states. The relationship between China and
its neighbours which resulted from this paradigm had been in place for over
two thousand years when the Europeans forced China to open to the world
in the 19th century (Fairbank, 1969). The imposition, by blood and fire, of a
western inter-state structure was one reason which explained the situation of
weakness, backwardness and poverty in which China was mired in the middle
of the twentieth century. Mao Zedong expressed it thusly in the founding
discourse of the Communist Republic: “The Chinese have always been a

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 406

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

407

powerful and hardworking nation and only in recent times have we fallen
behind. This delay is exclusively due to the oppression and exploitation of
foreign imperialists and of the reactionary government of the country” (Mao
in Cornejo, 2010: 300-301).
The Sinocentric world vision represented the most noteworthy, consistent,
and important dimension of the imperial discourse (Zhang, 2011), as it was
based on Chinese imperial history. The first element is the idea of China as
a Central Kingdom (Zhang, 2013). In actuality the name of China in the
Chinese language is Zhōngguó 中国, derived from guó “kingdom” and zhōng,
“central” or “in the middle of”. From the Chinese point of view, relations
between states take place in an ordered and hierarchical world, in which each
state must assume a specific and appropriate role according to the position
that it occupies in the hierarchy and in relationships. In this way, Chinese
leaders ascertained that China occupied a unique position in the historical and
geographical context due to its hierarchical vision of the world and evaluation
of itself as the Central Kingdom (Reed, 2006).
The Chinese Empire was established in the year 221 BCE, when the state
of Qin unified the Chinese world following years of intense interstate warfare
(Gernet, 1996). Along with the empire was established a monarchical political
system, a powerful bureaucracy, a strongly hierarchical social structure
alongside considerable and generalized social mobility, an extended-family
system, a uniform system of writing and the idea of education as a route to
achieving power (Lewis, 2010). Despite the differences present at distinct
stages of the Chinese dynastic age, all these characteristics continued to
be valid as much for the unifying dynasties as for regional regimes during
periods of political fragmentation. Similarly these characteristics were present
in dynasties headed by ethnic Chinese as well as those founded by different
ethnic groups such as the Mongols or the Manchu. In this concept of power
the Emperor is regarded as omnipotent, with his law being universal. The
bureaucracy must be in the hands of men of proven talent and merit. The
common people must be well treated but must remain outside the sphere of
political influence. These ideas marked the conduct of those who governed
China for centuries (Pines, 2012).
As Pines (2012) has maintained, the Chinese Empire was an extraordinarily powerful ideological construction. In other words, the particular historical trajectory of the Chinese Empire has not been one of indestructibility,
in fact it has suffered various collapses throughout its trajectory. What is
singular about Chinese history is its repeated resurgences. These occur in
the same general geographical vicinity and give rise to a similar functional
structure to those seen in previous periods prior to dynastic collapse. It is
worthy of note that these resurgences were not casual; on the contrary, they
reflect the conscious efforts of the principal political actors to restore what

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 407

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

408 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

they considered to be the natural world order, that which was normal and
must be the normative standard of sociopolitical conduct: the imperial order.
It could be argued that the most important element of this world view
in Ancient China was the unanimous agreement between different schools
of philosophy that Chinese political unification was the only way to put
an end to the state of perennial warfare (Pines, 2012). In the same way, it
was considered that Chinese territory, known as Tiānxià 天下 – “all-underheaven” – should be ruled by one, all-powerful monarch (Kang, 2003). These
premises of unity and a sole political authority became the ideological basis
of the empire and remained unquestioned for centuries. The basic ideological
premise of the imperial structure was shared by all politically-significant
social groups, including immediate neighbours. No other alternative political
structure was considered either legitimate or appropriate (Pines, 2012). In
addition, imperial China utilized a specific ideology based on the Tiānxià
concept that attracted rather than conquered its neighbours (Callahan, 2010).
In its most basic sense, Tiānxià is a geographical term (Callahan, 2008),
with the concept being created during the Zhou dynasty, approximately
3,000 years ago. According to Zhao (2009), the Zhou concept of “all-underheaven” had different elements. First, it was a monarchal system, including
certain aristocratic components. Second, it was an open network, consisting
of a general world government and sub-states. Third, the world government
was in charge of universal institutions, laws and world order; however,
the world government lost its legitimacy if it betrayed justice or abused its
responsibilities, and revolution is then justified. Four, the sub-states were
independent in their domestic economy, culture, social norms and values.
Five, an institutionally-established balance played a key role in maintaining
long-term cooperation. Finally, people had the freedom to migrate and work in
any state. This was crucial because it implied a non-nationalistic philosophy:
“The system, characterized by its global perspective and the principle of
harmony amongst all nations, created long-term peace which lasted for
centuries in China, thought to be the whole world as a result of the limited
geographical knowledge at that time” (Zhao, 2009: 9).
The Zhou dynasty inherited a vision of Tiānxià as a timeless, threedimensional way of governing. One is these dimensions was the material
and geographical area, and in this sense, it is almost equivalent to ‘the
universe’ or ‘the world’ in western language. However, Tiānxià also has
two other significant meanings. It alludes to all people, the people’s heart
(minxin 民心), the people’s will. Tiānxià is also seen as the world institution
(Zhao, 2005), constituting the Chinese pre-modern cosmological view of
the world, a view significantly different from the world order created by the
European civilization (Barabantsev, 2009). Tiānxià was a powerful idea that
encompassed the civilized world blessed by Heaven and presided over by the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 408

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

409

Chinese emperor: “No political control was involved. It was later invoked
to refer to imperial lands but it could also be used with different ideas about
territory governed by non-Chinese rulers, like those in Vietnam, Korea and
Japan, for the purposes of the empire (Wang, 2013: 14)
Given these suppositions, it was believed therefore that China was the
only civilized country in the world. The rest of the world was land dominated
by barbarians, an uncivilized place (Terrill, 2003). In consequence, the further
away people were from the political and cultural boundaries of China the
further away they were from civilization. This overarching paradigm of the
centrality of China therefore formed the basis of the beliefs upon which the
relationships between China and other states in East Asia were founded. The
main reason for Chinese superiority lay in its moral superiority, in virtue,
from which material superiority originated. The supreme values of Chinese
civilization guaranteed the supremacy of the Chinese state in every respect
(Pines, 2012).
The primary belief was that the traditional world was hierarchical and not
egalitarian. The concept of legal equality or individual political sovereignty
was non-existent. All political entities were arranged in accordance with the
centrality of China. All forms of what today are referred to as international
relations, including political, cultural and economic relations had their place
within the framework of the taxation system. This taxation system was
divided into two parts: those who paid and those who received. This system
permitted the legalization of long-distance commerce and preserved the myth
of the self-sufficiency of the Chinese civilization (Pines, 2012).
The centrality of China to the international order was due to its civilization and its virtue, particularly the virtue of the ruler. From this perspective,
world order was much more an ethical phenomenon than a political one.
Harmony on the international scenario, as well as the harmony present
inside China itself, was more than anything a product of the virtue of the
emperor. This virtue was apparent in the capacity to preserve Confucian
values (Pines, 2012).
This hierarchical world was considered a universal world. No other
hierarchies existed. Nor was it possible to conceive of other sources of power.
As a result, there was no need to consider other concepts, such as a power
equilibrium. State power therefore was seen as a reflection of virtue. By
definition power was primarily more moral than material, because it resulted
from the possession of virtue. In this way duty and power were regarded as
synonymous (Kang, 2010).
International society was understood as an extension of internal society.
Concepts such as “nation-state”, “international” or “interstate” were unknown,
nor did clear boundaries exist between jurisdiction and power. The only
apparent limits were solely the result of culture. An example would be the

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 409

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

410 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

construction of the Great Wall of China, which actually resulted from the
need to mark limits between nomads and barbaric northern peoples and the
agricultural and bureaucratic society of China. The Great Wall was never
about a political or jurisdictional frontier (Kang, 2010).
In this context therefore the inability of Chinese monarchs to understand
the ideas of a western international scene built on state sovereignty as the
basic element of equality between nations was hardly surprising. A perfect
example would be the case of George McCartney, who was appointed by the
British government to facilitate commerce between Britain and China and
establish a permanent base in Beijing to further diplomatic relations based
on western concepts, an idea which seemed ridiculous to the then Chinese
Emperor, Qianlong. The Emperor sent a missive to King George III which
stated that “if you assert that your reverence for Our Celestial dynasty fills
you with a desire to acquire our civilization, our ceremonies and code of laws
differ so completely from your own that, even if your Envoy were able to
acquire the rudiments of our civilization, you could not possibly transplant our
manners and customs to your alien soil. Therefore, however adept the Envoy
might become, nothing would be gained thereby” (Qianlong in Bonhomme
and Boivin, 2009: 833). In fact, as Lin (2009) suggests, in the case of the
Hunza tribal state of Central Asia, it is possible that the tax system was not a
dynastic inheritance which ceased to function after the 1911 revolution, but
rather an instrument of political convenience which continued to be used in
the post-imperial era.
The theoretical conceptualization of the taxation system should however be viewed with caution due to the danger of over-simplification: this
may occur in the absence of specific contexts when there is a failure to
consider the specific nuances of how a relationship is presented within
differing geographical and historical scenarios (Crossley, 1997). Kim (2002)
argues that the preconceived image of the international order in East Asia
is problematic due to representations of the “other” – as much for western
foreigners as for Asians, which are based on generalizations and fundamental
misunderstandings about specific interpretations of Confucian thought which
do not accurately reflect the essence of the system. Nevertheless, the power of
the idea lies not in whether it coincides fully with reality, but rather in whether
the interpretation justifies the design of a very specific Chinese foreign policy.
The perception of China as the centre of the world is important because
it has constituted a reference point from which the governmental elite has
defined the role of the nation in the global sphere. Thus, as highlighted by
Romer Cornejo (2010), the foundation of the People’s Republic foreign
policy for the Chinese has been defined by the search for a space which
reflects their ideas about the achievements of their civilization prior to the
19th century. It is the search for this space based on an aspirational ideal

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 410

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

411

which has moulded Chinese foreign policy from the establishment of the
People’s Republic. In fact, for the Chinese political bureaucracy, the rise of
China on the international scene is simply the recuperation of the privileged
position that China has enjoyed throughout history. The period of humiliation
and under-development of the last two centuries is no more than a historical
anomaly that produced a traumatic experience, one which Chinese officials
must correct. Chinese leaders therefore assume not only the need to protect
their territorial integrity, but also their sovereignty and their national unity
as values of their identity as a nation-state (Xinbo, 2012). In addition, they
have historically paid special attention to seeing China increasingly as a great
ascendant power of the twenty-first century in a way that assumes a more
global perspective (Wang Yi in Byun, 2017). This is exemplified through
assumption of greater global responsibilities and the promotion by Beijing of
new proposals for world order (Stone, 2017).
Obviously, the world and the international system is not and could
not be the same as that of imperial China. However, the imagination and
idealization of a past where China occupied a prominent site is an attractive
idea that foments a particular way of understanding the leadership of China
in the twenty-first century. The bureaucratic elite has viewed this past in two
ways. First, in the creation of a particular narrative that shows the benefits
of a hierarchical international system and the traditional positive values of
Chinese civilization. Second, in the employment of the narrative to argue that
Chinese power in the international arena is distinct due to the way it relates to
its neighbours and the principle of mutual benefit. Today, this idea of the past
is incarnate in the discourse and practice of foreign policy.5 In the following
section, we analyze how physical and imaginary space influences the design
and practice of foreign policy in East Asia.
5. East Asia, the Rise of China and the Role of Space
China’s presence is undoubtedly expanding globally, and its capacity to
mould the international scene in accordance with its own interest demands
a new balance of power (Saunders, 2014a). The formula for this increasing
Chinese influence is simple, and involves a combination of commerce and
investment. To this can be added loans to the governments of developing
nations, principally to assist in the development of infrastructure. In these
cases, the type of loan offered is notable for not being conditional on the
internal affairs of national governments. In this way, questions related to
human rights, transparency in the use of resources and the fight against
corruption, demands which are inextricably linked to loans from organizations
such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, are not taken
into consideration by Beijing (Woods, 2008). The formula behind the growing

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 411

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

412 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

Chinese presence on the international scene is complemented by a strong
media campaign which is linked to the promotion of the Chinese language
and the granting of scholarships for study in the country (Hartig, 2012). In
sum, the motivation behind all these actions is the strengthening of Chinese
presence on the international scene.
East Asia however is particularly unusual because the formula for
economic assistance is unconditional and this development cooperation
does not necessarily fit the individual dynamics of the countries in this
geographical zone. One reason for this is that the perception of space in East
Asia is very important, and therefore the siren-song that China represents
in other parts of the world does not sound so enchanting in this particular
region.
From this perspective, China is not an attractive proposition for traditional
partners in the region, particularly the United States. The formula that the
Chinese government utilizes on the other side of the world can be perceived
as hollow in East Asia. In many aspects, the growing presence of China,
bolstered by military spending, is perceived as a security threat by South
Korea, Japan and Taiwan as well as Southeast Asian nations such as Vietnam
and the Philippines (Chen and Feffer, 2009).
The reason behind the growing Chinese presence is due to the strategic
vision of the Chinese authorities. The government has displayed a more active
diplomatic policy with the intention of moulding the international scene
according to its interests. The rise of China is not a minor issue. This situation
goes further than just a modification of the relationship with neighbouring
countries: it implies a simultaneous displacement of the United States as the
principal actor in this part of the world.
As Yoshihide Soeya (2015) argued, this aspiration does not necessarily
imply that China wishes to compete with the United States over Asian or
indeed word leadership. For Chinese leaders, as President Xi Jinping has
said, the Pacific Ocean is large enough to accommodate both China and the
US. Nevertheless, the Chinese bureaucratic elite is not in agreement with the
dominant role of the US in East Asia and would like to see the eventual retreat
of the US from this part of the world. The concept of a new model in Chinese
relations demonstrates this fact. This model, on one hand, acknowledges the
existence of the United States in the Asia-Pacific and the world stage, and
on the other visualizes a scenario where the US leaves the fate of this part
of the world in Chinese hands. In this new vision of international relations,
Beijing aspires to solidify the dream of this part of the world being centred on
China. In this way what we see in East Asia is the reconfiguration of the core
questions of the international scene through the growth of a new balance of
power. Although this readjustment is taking place in a particular geographical
region, the implications are global.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 412

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

413

Until now this change has taken place gradually and, with a few
exceptions, without significant setbacks. Evidently, however, tension is
building between China and some of its neighbours in East and Southeast
Asia. Nonetheless, in general terms, this is a gradual transition which has
been accompanied by strong economic ties between the countries in the region
which has softened the impact of these changes. Nevertheless, one question
posited by international relations is whether or not the growth and decline of
hegemonic powers can take place peacefully. History teaches us that it has
not always been so, but neither does it determine which historical phenomena
will or will not be repeated in the present.
As Beeson and Li (2015) have highlighted, the US and China are not
only the two great economic powers on the planet but at the same time,
they symbolize, arguably, the two most strategic actors in the design and
implementation of foreign policy. Although the physical capacities and
investments in military spending made by the Chinese government differ
significantly from those of the US, the growing activism of China on the
international scene and its understanding of the meaning of national security
impact significantly the relationship with both China’s neighbours and the
US. In this way the rise of China represents simultaneously an unprecedented
transformation in world economic structures and a direct challenge to US
supremacy. In sum, US-China relations reveal two parallel but equally
important processes: the transformation of the structures of the international
system and, within these structures, the distribution of power between the
diverse actors.
Given the above context, Chinese foreign policy reflects a strong
impulse to establish a regional order centred on China in East Asia. In
order to help achieve this, President Xi Jiping, speaking at the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia in Shanghai in
May 2014 stated: “It is for the people of Asia to run the affairs of Asia,
solve the problems of Asia and uphold the security of Asia. The people of
Asia have the capability and wisdom to achieve peace and stability in the
region through enhanced cooperation” (Xi Jiping, 2014a). In addition, he
suggested that: “Matters in Asia ultimately must be taken care of by Asians,
Asia’s problems ultimately must be resolved by Asians, and Asia’s security
ultimately must be protected by Asians”. That same year, in the APEC
summit hosted by China in Beijing, President Xi suggested that the region
should work towards realizing an “Asia-Pacific dream”, based on the shared
destiny of all the countries in the region, and adding that China would be
in a position to provide “new initiatives and visions for enhancing regional
cooperation” (Xi Jiping, 2014b).6
Arguably the best example in East Asia of how the new foreign policy
direction under Xi Jinping is based on the desire to establish a new order is

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 413

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

414 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

the case of the South China Sea (SCS). Since 2010 the conflict in the SCS
has become more volatile in the context of China’s accelerated rise and the
US “pivot” towards Asia (Fangyin, 2016). This conflict shows the rivalry
between China, the USA, and other ASEAN countries, especially Vietnam
(Roszko, 2015). The dispute between China and the USA in this region results
not only from the competition for local energy resources but also for its value
as a strategic path, particularly the Malacca Strait (Wang, 2006). Control of
the Strait is viewed as essential to the launch of China as a great naval power
(Karim, 2013), and it is for this reason that Chinese tactics to impose its
interests in the SCS include the use of a historical narrative to demonstrate
the legitimacy of its demands. The intentions behind the establishing of such
a narrative are threefold: to take a bilateral approach to the countries of the
region, to drive a wedge between ASEAN and the USA, and to strengthen
naval capabilities in order to resolve the territorial dispute according to
Chinese interests (Cruz De Castro, 2012).
6. Conclusions
Space plays a fundamental role in the process of transforming Chinese foreign
policy. However, this space has two dimensions: real and imaginary. We
consider that both spaces are fundamental for the analysis of Chinese foreign
policy. In this way, it can be understood that it is not only material factors
which govern Chinese actions on the international stage but that the ideas,
values and intangible aspirations derived from an imagined concept of space
have driven the foreign policy decisions of the government elite.
In the analysis of foreign policy, geopolitics is a perspective which
permits the development of a wide-ranging and in-depth explanation of the
relationship between countries. The approach to the struggle for resources,
the development of ways to increase power and survival and the relationship
between states based on the geography which drives geopolitics are all
inextricably linked to the daily consideration that states have of recognition
of their interests. Nevertheless, if we consider only those physical resources
related to the traditional vision of geopolitics such as the power of geography
and leave to one side the imagined representations of spaces, the vision is
incomplete because it does not permit an evaluation of those material or
imagined aspects which are fundamental to international relations, and it is
these which, in fact, determine the interests of the states. The world is not
only comprised of the physical environment but what we believe it to be
intellectually. The interests of the actors on the international scene are not
the result of a cold, objective and calculating way of seeing reality, but rather
the sum of socially-constructed aspirations resulting from a perception of the
spaces in which the imagination develops a fundamental role.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 414

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

415

The case of Chinese foreign policy also shows us that throughout the
existence of the People’s Republic of China the actions taken abroad by the
bureaucratic elite are a combination of tangible and intangible, in which
ideas, perceptions and identities play a fundamental role. In other words we
cannot limit the explanation of Chinese behaviour and the transformation of
East Asia solely to exclusively material factors. In this way, when faced with
an apparent contradiction relating to some of the actions taken in this region
by the communist leadership which could be interpreted as contradictory
or unsound, if we instead consider ideas and perceptions of the Chinese
world based on an imaginary space where all is as it should be, it is easier
to understand the rationale behind the foreign-policy decisions made by the
Chinese elite.
The key question to be answered is how the combination of these mental
and material structures can determine the reconfiguration of the international
scene in the Asia-Pacific and what consequences this could have for the
international community. A clear example would be territorial disputes,
which revolve around the material interests and idealized aspirations of
those involved. In actuality, these disputes are a recurring phenomenon in
international relations and a constant cause of conflict between states (Cruz
de Castro, 2013). Evidently, the manner in which China views these disputes
is related to the material capacities which it has and the idealized aspirations
which it pursues.
In this sense there is a clear sense of purpose towards China recovering
the key position it once held in history. However, in order to achieve the
fundamental proposition of recovering the central role of China on the
international scene, an assertive policy must be imposed, sustained by
multilateral initiatives and a spirit of cooperation based on the win-win
principle; or, on the contrary, we may see a more jealous China, one less
trusting and more aggressive when it comes to defending its interests. Which
scenario actually takes place depends on the capacity of the international
community to understand the reasoning behind Chinese foreign policy. China
has shown a great deal of flexibility in the management of its foreign policy,
and today participates in the principal regional and international organizations.
The Chinese bureaucratic elite tends to view these organizations as a means
of achieving or defending national interests while simultaneously exercising
caution with regard to taking on costs, risks and international commitments
(Saunders, 2014a).
Apparently the key to cementing the rise of Chinese power will depend
on the leaders of western countries having the same degree of flexibility to
enable them, without compromising their specific interests, to find common
ground in the construction of a world big enough to encompass Chinese
aspirations as well as the achievements of western powers. It is therefore

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 415

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

416 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

indispensable to understand the importance of physical and geographic space
in the construction of Chinese interests.
Notes
* 		 Daniel Lemus-Delgado PhD. is a member of the National Research System,
Mexico (Level 1). He is the author of numerous articles covering issues related
to Foreign Policy and International Development Cooperation on East Asia from
a constructivist approach. His recent research projects focus on the relationship
between identity and foreign policy in China. He can be reached at <dlemus@
itesm.mx>.
**		 José Jesús Bravo Vergara PhD. is a candidate for membership of the Mexican
National Research System. He has written several articles related to the identity
of the United States and its hegemonic slope during recent administrations from
a constructivist approach. His current research project is about political relations
between the United States and China. He can be reached at < braverjoje@
hotmail.com>.
1. 		 It is necessary to distinguish between China as a political state and China as a
civilization. Today, the People’s Republic of China, founded after the triumph
of the Communist revolution, includes ethnic groups that do not share the
same values, traditions, beliefs and other elements of Chinese civilization. One
example is the Muslims of the Xinjiang Autonomous Region. In addition, many
Chinese people today do not live in a politically united China, although they
are heirs of Chinese civilization. There are also Chinese diaspora in countries
such as Singapore, Malaysia and some cities in Canada and the United States.
Finally, there is the case of Taiwan, an autonomous state with strong links to
Chinese history and civilization but with a lower international recognition, limited
participation in international organizations, and without representation at the
United Nations.
2. 		 As Lanteigne (2016) has observed, foreign policy can be understood as the
interplay between various political agents – including individuals – and structures
– the State, but also organizations and rules which are commonly constructed, i.e.
formed by social relationships. In the case of China: “the biggest change in the
development of that country’s foreign policy has been the expansion both of the
number of agents involved, directly or indirectly, in Beijing’s foreign policymaker
process, and the number of China’s international interests as well as the globallevel structures with which it can interact” (Lanteigne, 2016: 1).
3. 		 In 2011, the then spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, Hong Lei, pointed
out that although his government has not explicitly outlined its territorial claims
regarding the islands of the South China Sea, the current claims of Beijing are in
fact based on the maps developed by the former Kuomintang government. This
signifies that the territorial claim predates the founding of the People’s Republic
of China (Edward Wong, 14 June 2011).
4. 		 According to Lanteigne (2016), to the extent that China is rising in the international arena, a number of actors, including sectors of the Chinese government
but also non-state actors, participate in the design of foreign policy. However,
in comparison with other nations, the decision-making process in foreign policy

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 416

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

417

is more centralized because the Chinese Communist Party is still the most
important political actor. In addition, since President Xi took power, he has
ended the traditional collective and consensual leadership structure, marginalized
the bureaucracy and put himself at the centre (Blackwill and Campbell, 2016).
Therefore, when we assume that one bureaucratic elite drives the international
issues of the Chinese state, we refer to the political leadership of President Xi
Jinping and his inner circle.
5. 		 One example of the use of the past to design and justify Chinese foreign policy
is the relationship between China and Africa in the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation (FOCAC). Different meetings and action plans support the idea of
mutual benefit, friendship and shared development being justified by an idealized
view of China as an elder brother (Lemus, 2015).
6. 		 The rise of China does not necessarily mean the origin of a new and unique
hegemony, but also the consolidation of Chinese presence in multilateral
mechanisms and in the construction of new mechanisms. This approach is
observed in President Xi’s defence of the current economic globalization model.
Xi was quoted as saying at the 2016 APEC summit: “Since becoming an APEC
member 25 years ago, China has forged ahead with other APEC members.
Together, we have pursued development and shared prosperity. Together, we
have advanced opening-up and deepened integration. Together, we have blazed
new trails and taken bold initiatives. And together, we have pursued shared
development based on mutual respect and assistance. Throughout these years,
China and the economies in the Asia-Pacific have moved increasingly close to
each other. Indeed, China has become a main trading partner and export market
for most of the APEC members” (Xi Jiping, 2016). In a similar fashion China
has gone on to boost new multilateral initiatives such as the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership, the One Belt One Road initiative and the
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.

References
Anguiano, Ernesto (2008), “China como potencia mundial: presente y futuro” [China
as a world power: present and future], in R. Corenejo, China: Radiografía de una
potencia en ascenso [China: Radiography of a Rising Power], México, D.F.: El
Colegio de México, pp. 19-120.
Agnew, John (2012), “Looking Back to Look Forward: Chinese Geopolitical
Narratives and China’s Past”, Eurasian Geography and Economics, Vol. 53, No.
3, pp. 301-314.
Barabantseva, Elena (2009), “Change vs. Order: Shijie Meets Tianxia in China’s
Interactions with the World”, Alternatives, Vol. 34, pp. 129-155.
Beeson, Mark and Li, Fujian (2015), “What Consensus? Geopolitics and Policy
Paradigms in China and United States”, International Affairs, Vol. 91, No. 1, pp.
93-109.
Blackwill, R.D. and Campbell, K.M. (2016), Xi Jinping on the Global Stage,
Columbia, SC: Council on Foreign Relations.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 417

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

418 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

Bonhomme, Brian and Boivin, Cathleen (2009), Milestone Documents in World
History. Hackensack, New Jersey: Salem Press.
Byun, See-Won (2017), “China’s Major-Powers Discourse in the Xi Jinping Era:
Tragedy of Great Powers Politics Revisited”, Asian Perspective, Vol., 40, No. 3,
pp. 493-522.
Cairo, Heriberto (1993), “Elementos para una geopolítica crítica: tradición y cambio
en una disciplina maldita” [Elements for a Critical Geopolitics: Tradition and
Change in a Damned Discipline], Eria, Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 195-213.
Callahan, William (2008), “Chinese Visions of World Order: Post-hegemonic or a New
Hegemony?”, International Studies Review, Vol. 10, pp. 749-761.
Callahan, William (2010), The Pessoptimist Nation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chen, Sean and Feffer, John (2009) “China´s Military Spending: Soft Rise or Hard
Threat?” Asian Perspective, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 47-67.
Cornejo, Romer (2010), “Hacia el Mundo Contemporáneo” [To Contemporary World],
in F. Botton, Historia Mínima de China [China’s Minimal History], México, D.F.:
El Colegio de México, pp. 299-348.
Cropsey, Seth and Milikh, Arthur (2012), “Mahan’s Naval Strategy: China Learned It.
Will America Forget It?”, World Affairs, Vol. 174, No. 6, pp. 85-92.
Crossley, Pamela (1997), “Review of Cherishing Men from Afar: Ritual and the
McCartney Embassy of 1793”, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Society, Vol. 57, No.
2, pp. 597-611.
Cruz de Castro, Renato (2012), “The Risk of Applying Realpolitk in Resolving the
South China Sea Dispute: Implications on Regional Security”, Pacific Focus, Vol.
27, No. 2, pp. 262-289. doi: 10.1111/j.1976-5118.2012.01084.x
Cruz de Castro, Renato (2013), “Territorial Disputes, Realpolitik, and Alliance
Transformation: The Case of Twenty-first Century Philippine-U.S. Security
Relations”, Issues & Studies, Vol. 49, No. 1, pp. 141-177.
Dougherty, James and Pzaltzgraff, Robert (2001), Contending Theories of International Relations: A Comprehensive Survey, New York, NY: Longman.
Epstein, Charlotte (2013), “Constructivism or the Eternal Return of Universals in International Relations: Why Returning to Language is Vital to Prolonging the Owl’s
Flight”, European Journal of International Relations, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 499-519.
Fairbank, John K. (1969), “China’s Foreign Policy in Historical Perspective”, Foreign
Affairs, Vol. 47, No. 3, pp. 449-463.
Fangyin, Zhou (2016), “Between Assertiveness and Self-restraint: Understanding
China’s South China Sea Policy”, International Affairs, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 869-890.
Gernet, Jacques (1996), A History of Chinese Civilization, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Hartig, Falk (2012), “Confucius Institutes and the Rise of China”, Journal of Chinese
Political Science, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 53-76.
Haushofer, Karl (2009), “Why Geopolitik?”, in Klauss Dodds (ed.), Geopolitics, New
York: Sage Publications, pp. 151-154.
Kang, David C. (2003), “Hierarchy and Stability in Asian International Relations”,
in J. Ikenberry and M. Mastanduno (eds), International Relations Theory and the
Asia Pacific, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 162-189.
Kang, David C. (2007), China Rising: Peace, Power, and Order in East Asia, New
York: Columbia University Press.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 418

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

419

Kang, David C. (2010), East Asia: Before the West, New York: Columbia University
Press.
Kaplan, Robert D. (2012), The Revenge of Geography: What the Map Tells Us About
Coming Conflicts and Battle Against Fate, New York: Random House.
Karim, Mohd Aminul (2013), “The South China Disputes: Is High Politics Overtaking?”, Pacific Focus, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 99-119.
Kennedy, Paul (1989), The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and
Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000, New York: Vintage Books.
Kelly, Robert E. (2014), “The ‘Pivot’ and Its Problems: American Foreign Policy in
Northeast Asia”, The Pacific Review, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 479-503.
Khong, Yuen Foong (2013), “Primacy or World Order?: The United States and China’s
Rise”, International Security, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 153-175.
Kim, Bongjin (2002), “Rethinking of the Pre-modern East Asian Region Order”,
Journal of East Asian Studies, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 67-101.
Kim, Min-hyung (2015), “Why Provoke? the Sino-US Competition in East Asia and
North Korea’s Strategic Choice”, Journal of Strategic Studies, Vol. 39, No. 7, pp.
979-998.
Kjellen, Rudolph (1916), The State as a Life-Form, Leipzig, Germany.
Lanteigne, Marc (2016), Chinese Foreign Policy: An Introduction, London: Routledge.
Li, Rex (2009), A Rising China and Security in East Asia: Identity Construction and
Security Discourse, London: Routledge.
Lemus, Daniel (2015), “Discourse, Identity and International Development Cooperation: China, Africa and FOCAC”, Asia-Pacific Social Science Review, Vol.
15, No. 2, pp. 1-18.
Levenson, Joseph R. (1971), “The Past and the Future of Nationalism in China”,
in J.R. Levenson (ed.), Modern China: An Interpretive Anthology, London:
MacMillan, pp. 3-16.
Lewis, Mark Edward (2010), The Early Chinese Empires: Qin and Han, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Belknap Press.
Lin, Hsiao-Ting, (2009), “The Tributary System in China’s Historical Imagination:
China and Hunza, ca. 1760–1960”, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. 19,
No. 4, pp. 489-507.
Mahan, Alfred Thayer (1890), The Influence of Naval Power in History, 1660-1783,
Boston, MA: Little, Brown & Co. Available at <http://www.gutenberg.org/
files/13529/13529-h/13529-h.htm>.
Makinder, Halford (1904), “The Geographical Pivot of History”, The Geographical
Journal, Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 421-437.
McNall, M. (1971), “The Persistence of Tradition in Foreign Policy”, in J.R.
Levenson (ed.), Modern China: An Interpretive Anthology, London: MacMillan,
pp. 26-33.
Onuf, Nicholas (1998). “Constructivism: A User´s Manual”, in V. Kubálková, N. Onuf
and P. Kowert (eds), International Relations in a Constructed World, Armonk,
New York: M.E. Sharpe, pp. 58-78.
Pant, Harsh V. (2012), “Great Power Politics in East Asia: The US and China in
Competition”, China Report, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 237-251.
Park, Jae-kyung (2013), China-U.S. Relations in East Asia: Strategic Rivalry and
Korea’s Choice, Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 419

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

420 Daniel Lemus Delgado and José Jesús Bravo Vergara

Peritone, Natalia (2010), La política exterior de los Estados Unidos desde la visión de
Nicholas Spykman [US foreign policy from vision of Nicholas Spykman], Buenos
Aires: Centro Argentino de Estudios Internacionales.
Pines, Yuri (2012), The Everlasting Empire: The Political Culture of Ancient China
and Its Imperial Legacy, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Qianlong (2009), “Letter to George III”, in B. Bonhomme and C. Boivin (eds),
Milestone Documents in World History, Hackensack, New Jersey: Salem Press,
pp. 833-836.
Rattenbach, Augusto Benjamin (1975), Antología Geopolítica [Geopolitics Antology],
Buenos Aires: Editorial Pleamar.
Reed, James (2006), “China on Our Minds: History and Policy in the Asia Pacific”,
World International Journal, Vol. 61, No. 2, pp. 453-467.
Ren, Huai-Feng and Liu, Fu-Kuo (2013), “Transitional Security Pattern in the South
China Sea and the Involvement of External Parties”, Issues & Studies, Vol. 49,
No. 2, pp. 103-145.
Rosales, Gustavo (2005), Geopolítica, Geoestrategia, Liderazgo y Poder: Ensayos
[Geopolitics, Geostrategy, Leadership and Power: Essays], Bogotá: Universidad
Militar Nueva Granada.
Roszko, Edyta (2015), “Maritime Territorialisation as Performance Sovereignty and
Nationhood in South China Sea”, Nation and Nationalism, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp.
230-249.
Saunders, Phillip C. (2014a). “China’s Role in Asia: Attractive or Assertive?”, in
D. Shambaugh and M. Yahuda (eds), International Relations of Asia, Lanham,
Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, pp. 147-172.
Saunders, Phillip C. (2014b), “China’s Rising Power, the U.S. Rebalance to Asia, and
Implications for U.S.-China Relations”, Issues & Studies, Vol. 50, No. 3, pp. 19-54.
Soeya, Yoshihide (2015), Middle-power Multilateralism Bringing China into the
Fold, East Asia Forum Economics, Politics and Public Policy in East Asia and
the Pacific, available at <http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2015/07/27/middle-powermultilateralism-bringing-china-into-the-fold/>.
Song, Ligang (2013), “China’s Rapid Growth and Development: A Historical and
International Context”, in Y. Huang and M. Yu (eds), China’s New Role in the
World Economy, London: Routledge, pp. 19-43.
Spykman, Nicholas John (2008), America’s Strategy in World Politics, New Jersey:
Transaction Publishers.
Starr, John Bryan (2010), Understanding China: A Guide to China’s Economy,
History, and Political Culture, New York, NY: Hill and Wang.
Stone Fish, Isaac (2017), “Is China Becoming the World’s Most Likeable Superpower?”, The Atlantic, 2 June, available at <https://www.theatlantic.com/
international/archive/ 2017/06/china-jinping-trump-america-first-keqiang/ 529014/
Terrill, Ross (2003), The New Chinese Empire and What It Means for United States,
New York: A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book.
Tuathail, Gearóid Ó. (1996), Critical Geopolitics, Minnesota: University of Minnesota
Press.
Tuathail, Gearóid. Ó. (1998), “Introduction: Thinking Critically About Geopolitics”,
in Gearóid. Ó Tuathail, Simon Dalby and Paul Routledge (eds), The Geopolitics
Reader, London: Routledge, pp. 1-12.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 420

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

China and Foreign Policy in the Context of East Asia

421

Wallerstein, Immanuel (2004), World System Analysis: An Introduction, Durham:
Duke University Press.
Wang, Gungwu (2013), Renewal: The Chinese State and the New Global History,
Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press.
Wang, Yiwei (2006), “Rethinking the South China Sea Issue: A Perspective of SinoU.S. Relations”, Pacific Focus, Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 105-135.
Wendt, Alexander (1992), “Anarchy is What States Make of It: The Social Construction of Power Politics”, International Organizations, Vol. 46, No. 2, pp. 391-425.
Wong, Edward (2011), “China Navy Reaches Far, Unsettling the Region”, The New
York Times, 14 June 2011, available at <http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/15/
world/asia/15china.html>.
Woods, Ngaire (2008), “Whose Aid? Whose Influence? China, Emerging Donors and
the Silent Revolution in Development Assistance”, International Affairs, Vol. 84,
No. 6, pp. 1205-1221.
Xi, Jiping (2014a), “Remarks at the Fourth Summit of the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence Building Measures in Asia”, 21 May, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of China, available at <http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_
eng/zxxx_662805/t1159951.shtml>.
Xi Jiping (2014b), “Keynote Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping at the
APEC CEO Summit, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of
China”, 11 November, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic
of China, available at <http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/topics_665678/
ytjhzzdrsrcldrfzshyjxghd/t1210469.shtml>.
Xi, Jiping (2016), “Keynote Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping at the APEC
CEO Summit”, 20 November, Global Times, available at <http://www.globaltimes.
cn/content/1019023.shtml>.
Xinbo, Wu (2012), “Forging Sino-US Partnership in the Twenty-First Century:
Opportunities and Challenges”, Journal of Contemporary China, Vol. 12, No. 75,
pp. 391-407.
Zhang, Feng (2011), “The Rise of Chinese Exceptionalism in International Relations”,
European Journal of International Relations, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 305-328.
Zhang, Jian (2013), “China’s New Foreign Policy under Xi Jinping: Towards Peaceful
Rise 2.0?”, Pacifica Review: Peace, Security & Global Change, Vol. 27, No. 1,
pp. 5-19.
Zhao, Quansheng (2014), “US-China Relations and New Dual Leadership Structure
in the Asia Pacific”, in Y.W. Lee and K. Son (eds), China’s Rise and Regional
Integration in East Asia: Hegemony or Community?, London: Routledge, pp. 17-39.
Zhao, Tingyang (2005), “Rethinking Empire from a Chinese Concept ‘All-underHeaven’ (Tian-xia)”, Social Identities, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 29-41.
Zhao, Tingyang (2009), “A Political World Philosophy in Terms of All-under-heaven
(Tian-xia)”, Diogenes, Vol. 221, pp. 5-18.
Zheng, Yongnian and Lim, Wen Xin (2017), “The Changing Geopolitical Landscape,
China and the World Order in the 21st Century”, China: An International Journal,
Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 4-23.

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 421

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 422

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

Book Review

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 423

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 424

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

International Journal of China Studies
Vol. 8, No. 3, December 2017, pp. 425-428

Book Review
Ghulam Ali, China-Pakistan Relations: A Historical Analysis. Oxford
University Press, 2017, 278 pages. ISBN 978-0199402496.
The shifting sands of power being transformed from the West to the East
appears to be in favour of China. The changing regional dynamics coupled
with China’s economic rise; China being the “Factory of the World” and
growing global inter-connectivity through the Maritime Silk Route and Belt
and Road Initiative have given rise to a growing trend towards China studies
among the China watchers. There is a profound influence of China around its
periphery. Therefore, Pakistan is no exception. There is a growing scholarship
on China and China-Pakistan relations from the Chinese, American or Indian
perspective, yet it lacks a Pakistani scholarship over China and Pakistan-China
relations. Thus, the current study on Pakistan-China relations can contribute
to an existing body of literature.
The underlined study dilates upon the formative phase that begins from
1950-60; informs about how these relations were strengthened; looks into
China’s modernization agenda and relations with Pakistan; indicates how
China has kept balance and stability through its policy. He further identifies
China’s renewed interests in Pakistan in the wake of post-9/11 horrendous
terrorist attacks. It also sheds light on the recent China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor and interestingly identifies various factors in Pakistan-China durable
relations.
This book examines the relations between Pakistan and China with
a historical perspective. Ghulam Ali, the author, begins his study with an
argument that divergence in political, economic, social cultural and ideology
could not deter China-Pakistan relations to strengthen further since the
early 1960s. Ghulam Ali, while quoting John W. Garver, stated: “There is a
consensus among analysts who have studied Sino-Pakistan relations that this
partnership has consistently been of a truly special character” (p. 1).
Similar views were also given by William Brands and Rajshree Jetly. For
example, Jetly opined that: “Sino-Pakistan relations stand out as one of the
few enduring friendship that have withstood the pressures of time and shifting
geostrategic conditions” (p. 2). The author’s main argument is that previous
studies on China-Pakistan relations have shown that the Indian factor was the
dominant element that paved the way towards Pakistan-China ties. The author
also shows the merits and demerits of this argument (p. 3).

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 425

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

426

Pervaiz Ali Mahesar

His study adopts the qualitative approach. He has selected samples for his
study from Pakistan, India and China. His chosen sampling size is: ten experts
from Pakistan, five Indian experts and eleven Chinese experts. The author
has interviewed scholars in 2011, 2014, 2015. More importantly, this study
contributes to an existing scholarship on China-Pakistan relations by exploring
the genesis of the alliance that is deeply intertwined by the domestic, regional
and international factors.
This book consists of seven chapters. The first part reflects on the
formative phase in Pakistan and China relations (p. 8). This part of the
study concludes that sustained relations were partly due to lack of historical
enmity and conflict of interests. The second part dilates upon strengthening
and deepening of relations (1963-77) (p. 53). This study helps the readers to
understand how China-Pakistan relations were strengthened. The author finds
that the China-Pakistan entente cordial strengthened partly due to common
factors like India. The author further finds that even after the normalization of
India-China ties, it could not stop both Pakistan and China from cultivating
friendly ties with strong economic and military support to the former in the
difficult period.
The third chapter is about China’s reforms and modernization and
relations with Pakistan (1978-89) (p. 99). This part of the study identifies
that in the post-Mao era of reforms and modernization, China expanded its
scope of relations with its South Asian neighbours. This period also witnessed
India-China rapprochement. China began its neutral policy as far as South
Asian affairs were concerned. The author further points out that in the
backdrop of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, US-Pakistan-China alliance
became inevitable. However, this alliance could not last long due to Russian
withdrawal from Afghanistan in May 1989. However, Pakistan became a
strategic ally of China besides growing economic cooperation. Both Pakistan
and China have mutually driven interests but Pakistan suffered in the postRussian withdrawal from Afghanistan. The US-Pakistan-China alliance ended
but resulted in more security and economic woes for Pakistan due to refugee
influx from Afghanistan.
The fourth chapter explores how China has maintained its balance and
stability through its policy in the 1990-2001 period (p. 134). The author
finds that despite hardships, Pakistan-China friendship remained traditionally
strong. Unfortunately, Pakistan could not reap the fruits of its friendly
economic reforms, modernization and cooperation due to the lack of economic
activism, frequent changes in governments, and India-centric policies. China
maintained its neutrality in South Asian matters and Pakistan was sanctioned
by the US due to its nuclear tests, yet these ups and downs could not deter
Pakistan-China relations. The author finds that respect for each other’s

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 426

29/12/2017 9:22:17 PM

Book Review

427

policies, frequent exchange of visits and non-intervention policies further
strengthened Pakistan’s relations with China.
The fifth chapter explains China’s renewed interests in Pakistan in the
post-9/11 episode (p. 162). The author explores that with the change in
security dynamics in the wake of 9/11 incident, relations between Pakistan
and China remained stronger that before. In order to address issues related to
terrorism, Pakistan shared its important information, conducted joint military
exercises and consequently China supported Pakistan in counter terrorism
efforts. In this way, Pakistan was able to provide security to Chinese workers
and stronger measures were taken against the Uighur sanctuaries in Pakistan’s
tribal belt.
Pakistan’s active support for China on the issues like Tibet, Taiwan
and human rights, was reciprocated by China in the shape of FTA signing,
establishing of JIC (Joint Investment Company), establishment of economic
and industrial zones and joint economic ventures. This reciprocity resulted in
an economic boom in Pakistan which in the long run culminated in the ChinaPakistan Economic Corridor.
The sixth chapter explains the CPEC (China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor) (p. 203). The author finds that the CPEC project is one of the
largest investment by China in Pakistan. This mega investment shows that
China has high stakes in Pakistan. This project, though part of OBOR, could
complement China’s Western region’s modernization agenda. Consequently,
Pakistan would be able to generate revenue through the royalties it earns.
Further, the author argues that CPEC project has potential to increase
Pakistan’s stature and credibility in regional politics and increases integration
of Pakistan with China. The author warns that the success of the project would
determine the future course of Pakistan’s relations with China.
The seventh chapter focuses on factors of durability in Pakistan and China
relations (p. 213). The author finds different but important factors. Among
these are geographical proximity, Pakistan’s geostrategic location, the Indian
factor, China’s place in Pakistan’s security strategy, early and mutually agreed
border settlement, Islamic world factor, the US factor, trust and reliability,
expansion of cooperation, two-way relationship, the role of armed forces,
regular exchange of visits, and the role of media. The author finds that China’s
support for Pakistan in terms of diplomatic, economic and military has been
remarkable in laying the foundation of Pakistan-China relations. Interestingly,
Pakistan’s reciprocal response to Beijing in terms of playing an important role
in procuring a seat in the United Nations, breaking its isolation, and helping
China to improve its relationship with the USA and the Muslim world have
been widely acclaimed in China.
Ghulam Ali’s conduct of qualitative data analysis and a historic approach
in understanding China-Pakistan relations are important but they are not new

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 427

29/12/2017 9:22:18 PM

428

Pervaiz Ali Mahesar

in Pakistan, China, and India. For instance, his argument that the “Indian
factor is dominant in the context of China-Pakistan relations” (p.236).
However, this argument is obvious even without the significant analysis done
by the author in his book. The more interesting parts of his study are factors
which have resulted in the durability of Pakistan and China relations in
which the author has identified a few important factors which I have already
mentioned above.
The author in his concluding chapter proposes a holistic approach
in tackling issues and creating more understanding of China-Pakistan
relationship (p. 241). Given the trajectory of regional dynamics, the ChinaPakistan Economic Corridor is taken as a test case of how strong ChinaPakistan friendship could remain in the future.
This study in fact helps us understand China-Pakistan relations in a
historical perspective. However, this study is far from getting an entire picture
of overall relations. There is little reference to civilization linkages in China
and Pakistan relations as it begins with the 1950s. There is also less Pakistani
perspective in a sense that those scholars from Pakistan chosen for interview
for this study are not experts on China and China-Pakistan relations. Out of
ten interviewees from the Pakistani side, one or two have expertise on ChinaPakistan relations while the rest are out of this field. Moreover, there is an
unequal sampling from the Indian, Pakistani and Chinese sides. I find less
quotes from interviewees taken for this purpose. However, dragging India as
a factor of strengthening Pakistan-China relations does not necessarily justify
relations being historical. Therefore, in order to understand relations, it is
important to conduct an in-depth study on China and China-Pakistan relations.
Pervaiz Ali Mahesar
PhD Candidate
Department of International and Strategic Studies
University of Malaya

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 428

29/12/2017 9:22:18 PM

ns,
of,

ce
hy
ry,

International Journal of China Studies

nal

RM
ce)
de
n).

to:

International Journal of
China Studies
Volume 8

Number 1

April 2017

ISSN 2180-3250

Research Articles
The People’s Republic of China and European Union
Security Cooperation in Africa: Sino-EU Security
Cooperation in Mali and the Gulf of Aden
Niall Duggan

1

China’s Secular Ruler’s Pragmatic Re-appropriation of
Traditional Chinese Sacred Resources: A Critical Assessment
Peter T.C. Chang

25

The Role of Trust in China-ASEAN Relations – Towards a
Multi-level Trust Building for China and ASEAN
Huang Haitao

45

Behind the Invisible Wall: What Determine Wage Differentials
between Urban and Migrant Workers in China
Yih-chyi Chuang and Eric Yan

61

Volume 8, Number 1, April 2017

Research Note
Chinese System of Science & Technology and Cooperation in
Science & Technology between Thailand and China
Tang Zhimin

95

Book Review
Stephen FitzGerald, Comrade Ambassador: Whitlam’s
Beijing Envoy
Reviewed by Lee Kam Hing

119

26/5/2017 12:14:54 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 429

29/12/2017 9:22:18 PM

International Journal of China Studies

International Journal of
China Studies
Volume 8

Number 2

August 2017

ISSN 2180-3250

Special Issue
Great Fall or New Normal: China’s Economic
Restructuring and its Impact on Southeast Asia
Guest Editors: Zhang Miao and Li Ran

Volume 8, Number 2, August 2017

Introduction: Southeast Asia and China’s Growth Deceleration
Zhang Miao, Li Ran and Cheong Kee Cheok

125

The Logic of Long-term Growth of China: From New Normal to
Supply-side Reform
Li Ling and Quan Heng

139

The Changing Pattern of China’s Trade and Implications for
Southeast Asia
Sarah Y. Tong and Tuan Yuen Kong

161

The Impact of China’s Economic Restructuring on Southeast Asia:
An Investment Perspective
Zhang Miao and Li Ran

183

China’s Growth Deceleration – A New Normal for Malaysia too?
Cheong Kee Cheok and Wang Qianyi

199

The Impact of China’s New Normal on the Philippine Economy
Joseph Anthony Lim

221

The Impact of Chinese FDI on Economy and Poverty of Lao PDR
Phouphet Kyophilavong, Xiong Bin, Bounlert Vanhnala,
Piya Wongpit, Alay Phonvisay and Phanhpakit Onphanhdala

259

Book Review
Michael Useem, Harbir Singh, Neng Liang and Peter Cappelli,
Fortune Makers: The Leaders Creating China’s Great Global
Companies
Reviewed by Zhang Chen

279

22/9/2017 1:24:45 PM

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 430

29/12/2017 9:22:18 PM

Call for Papers

ISSUES & STUDIES (ISSN 1013-2511), published quarterly
by the Institute of International Relations, National Chengchi
University, Taipei, Taiwan, is an internationally peer-reviewed
journal dedicated to publishing quality social science
research on issues—mainly of a political nature—related to
the domestic and international affairs of contemporary
China, Taiwan, and East Asia, as well as other closely related
topics. The editors particularly welcome manuscripts related
to China and Taiwan. Authors may submit via e-mail an
original manuscript copy, a half-page summary, and five
keywords in Word format to <issues@nccu.edu.tw>. In
order to ensure the anonymity of the review process, we ask
that all correspondence regarding submissions be direct to this
e-mail account.
Subscription: annual subscription rate is US$40.00, plus
postage of US$12.00 (surface mail) or US$28.00 (air mail).
Please pay in advance by check payable to National Chengchi
University.
Issues & Studies
Institute of International Relations
National Chengchi University
64 Wanshou Road, Wenshan District 116
Taipei, Taiwan (ROC)
TEL: 886-2-8237-7377 FAX: 886-2-2939-7352
E-mail: issues@nccu.edu.tw
Website: http://is.nccu.edu.tw

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 431

29/12/2017 9:22:18 PM

Call for Monographs: Book Series on East-West Cultural Encounters in Literature & Cultural Studies
This Series seeks scholarly works on intercultural encounters in literature, particularly East-West
precolonial, colonial, or postcolonial contacts that expose, problematize, or re-create the sense of
locality, historicity, and subjectivity. The Series especially welcomes monographs written in English or
other languages translated into English. Conference volumes or edited volumes by multiple authors
will not be considered at this time. Volumes of essays with a thematic focus written by a single author,
however, are welcome. We also encourage the submission of revised doctoral dissertations which
employ innovative concepts related to our topics. Suggested topics include but are not limited to the
following:
 Colonial literature in the countries of the Asian Paciﬁc Rim
 Transpaciﬁc or transatlantic cultural or literary routes/roots
 New cultural identities in literature in neocolonial and global Asia
 The relationship between Asia and Oceania
 The contacts between Asia and Europe or the Americas
 Theoretical paradigms of globality and worlding
 Convergences and divergences of exile, diaspora, and expatriation
 Asian diasporic writing in the new millennium
 Canons and genres
 Classics in modern contexts
 Cultural translations of Sinophone, Anglophone, Francophone and/or Hispanophone literatures
A leading university in the world, National Taiwan University is striving for more international
collaborations and scholarly exchanges. NTU Press, playing an important role in disseminating
top-notch research and scholarship in the Chinese-speaking academy, is now expanding its scope of
publication in English. All submissions will be assessed by the Editors and reviewed by anonymous
readers. Once the book project is approved, the author(s) will receive a contract from NTU Press.
Please send a book prospectus, the author’s CV, and a sample chapter to the Editors. The manuscript
should employ the MLA format and style, and only a completed manuscript will be considered.
Series Editors
Dr. Bennett Yu-Hsiang Fu (bennettfu@ntu.edu.tw)
Dr. Chi-She Li (jisheli@ntu.edu.tw)

IJCS V8N3 combined text 29-12-17.indb 432

29/12/2017 9:22:18 PM

