THE PACIFIC REVIEW, 2018
https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2018.1470556

Asia’s competing multilateral initiatives: quality versus
quantity
Mark Beeson
School of Social Science, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia

ABSTRACT

East Asia has many distinctive features that set it apart from other comparable regions,
not least attitudes to regional development and cooperation. Despite a growing
number of regional initiatives in East Asia, however, they are generally distinguished
by their ineffectiveness. It is entirely possible that ‘institutional balancing’, like its more
well-known power balancing counterpart, is designed not to facilitate but to prevent
something from happening. The sort of ‘multilateralism 1.0’ developed by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has a lot to answer for in this regard:
having established its own pattern of institutional effectiveness ASEAN’s ‘leadership’
has caused it to be replicated under the new wave of ‘multilateralism 2.0’.
Consequently, I suggest that not only is China very comfortable with the idea of a
rather feeble and ineffective institutional architecture, but the USA is also unlikely to
do anything to change this picture, especially under a Trump administration that is
highly skeptical about the efﬁcacy of multilateral institutions at the best of times.

KEYWORDS Multilateralism; East Asia; ASEAN; regionalism; institutions

Introduction
East Asia has many distinctive features that set it apart from other comparable regions.
Indeed, for students of comparative politics and the growing ﬁeld of comparative
regionalism (Acharya, 2012; Sbragia, 2008), what we now think of as ‘East Asia’ offers a
veritable treasure trove of different political forms, economic structures and strategic
perspectives. Attitudes to regional, as opposed to national, development and cooperation are equally varied, and this helps to account for the distinctiveness of East Asian
institutions, their multiplicity and ultimately, I shall suggest, their ineffectiveness. The
simple underlying regional reality in East Asia is that despite – or perhaps because of –
the surprisingly large number of regional initiatives, none of the resultant institutions
are especially effective (Beeson, 2016). In this regard, it is entirely possible that ‘institutional balancing’, like its more well-known power balancing counterpart, is designed not
to facilitate but to prevent something from happening.
If we put East Asia’s regional institutions in their speciﬁc and unique historical circumstances it becomes easier to understand their distinctive trajectories. The question
posed by this symposium is especially important in this context: is there something
CONTACT Mark Beeson

mark.beeson@uwa.edu.au

© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

2

M. BEESON

about the nature of the internal and external dynamics of regional development that
helps to account for the particular style and – I argue – ineffectiveness of regional
institutions? The short answer to this question, I shall suggest in what follows, is yes. The
sort of ‘multilateralism 1.0’ developed by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) has a lot to answer for in this regard: having established its own pattern of institutional effectiveness ASEAN’s leadership has caused it to be replicated under the new
wave of ‘multilateralism 2.0’, or the more comprehensive, great power-driven that exists
in tandem with earlier initiatives. Unlike some of the other contributors to this collection,
I remain skeptical about the difference that ‘great powers’ have made in redeﬁning the
way regional institutions operate. On the contrary, I suggest that not only is China very
comfortable with the idea of a rather feeble and ineffective institutional architecture
(Beeson, 2015), but the USA is also unlikely to do anything to change this picture, especially under a Trump administration that is highly skeptical about the efﬁcacy of multilateral institutions at the best of times (Wagstyl, Beesley, Barker, & Politi, 2017).
To develop this argument, I initially make some brief observations about the conceptual and theoretical debates that have emerged around East Asian institutions, before
providing a sketch of their historical development. The subsequent claims are twofold:
ﬁrst, some of theoretical literature underestimates historically generated ‘structural’
obstacles to cooperation and simultaneously overestimates the importance of norms
and ideas in transforming them. Second, both East Asia’s distinctive institutions and
their limited impact are best explained by the speciﬁc, contingent circumstances from
which they emerged. This legacy continues to inﬂuence the course of institutional
development in the region; effective institutions remain an unlikely prospect as a
consequence.

Making sense of multilateralism at the regional level
Given East Asia’s remarkable social, political and economic heterogeneity it is unsurprising, perhaps, that observers come to such very different conclusions about what is
going on in the region. Adding to the complexity is the fact that the status of ‘the
region’ itself is contested both ontologically, and as the basis of actual diplomatic, economic and strategic activity. The various regional initiatives considered in more detail
below invariably have different memberships, goals, rationales and purposes. As a result,
the status of East Asia, or alternatives such as the Asia-Paciﬁc, the Indo-Paciﬁc, NorthEast Asia and South-East Asia, is a matter of debate and generally determined by the
political and strategic actions of potential members – or even non-members and their
concomitant ability to actually institutionalize their potentially competing regional
visions. Signiﬁcantly, the institutional development of East Asia and associated regions
has often been a consequence of extra-regional actors, rather than the exclusive efforts
of indigenous states themselves (He, this volume; Cumings, 2009). In this regard, multilateralism 2.0 is not entirely novel, even if some of its speciﬁc organizational manifestations are.
The institutional architecture of Western Europe, against which other regional institutions are still frequently judged, emerged in a very different historical milieu and helps
to illustrate and explain what is distinctive about Asia (Katzenstein, 2005). Signiﬁcantly,
‘American hegemony’ played a major role in encouraging a process or reconciliation,
reconstruction and ultimately deep regional institutionalization in Western Europe that
is unparalleled anywhere else in the world or in history, for that matter. The European

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

3

experience may have been sui generis in many regards (Diez, 2004), but for the purposes of the current discussion the key feature of Europe’s postwar development was
that the United States encouraged a process of multilateral cooperation that eventually
led to the emergence of the European Union (EU) (Milward, 2003). Even if the EU were
to succumb to its current crop of crises, it would still stand as an important exemplar of
the possibility of highly effective, deeply institutionalized regional cooperation.
No such similar development has occurred in any other part of the world. By comparison, under South-East Asia’s ‘multilateralism 1.0’, regional integration, cooperation and
institutionalization has been shallow and limited in its impact. Effectiveness in this context is relatively easy to deﬁne: have the institutions in question made a decisive, discernible difference in achieving stated goals and inﬂuencing the behavior of members?
The rather grandiose and underspeciﬁed objectives of the ASEAN grouping in particular
make this somewhat challenging (see ASEAN, 2007), but it is clear that it has had far less
impact on its members than the EU has on its. This is unsurprising. From the outset, and
despite similar geopolitical pressures and drivers to those that obtained in Europe, EUstyle levels of sovereignty-pooling and inter-state coordination have been studiously
avoided by ASEAN. The South-East Asian political elites who oversaw the development
of ASEAN may also have been concerned with an unforgiving, threatening and unpredictable geopolitical environment, but the imperatives of the Cold War were mediated
differently in South-East Asia (Narine, 2002).
Multilateralism 1.0 of the sort pioneered by ASEAN was a pale imitation of the European variety and this was no accident. On the contrary, the establishment of a small,
ineffective and unthreatening ASEAN secretariat was precisely the intention of ASEAN’s
architects (Beeson, 2009). Likewise, the development of the so-called ‘ASEAN Way’ of
voluntarism, consensus and informality may have been inﬂuenced by some bygone
regional cultural values, but it was also rather an accommodating vehicle in which the
potentially conﬂicting and fractious goals of South-East Asia’s prickly state leaders could
be accommodated (Jones & Smith, 2001). The glue that united ASEAN’s disparate elites
was the perception that they were relative minnows in shark-infested waters.

Why is the scholarly debate so inconclusive?
One of the reasons that the scholarly debate about South-East Asia in particular and East
Asia more generally is so inconclusive is that the subject matter is so heterogeneous. It is
possible to ﬁnd evidence to support a variety of, often competing, claims and theses in
the region’s bewildering array of political practices, economic structures and strategic
relations. There are consequently deep methodological, epistemological and even ontological divisions and differences in the way scholars approach the region (Huotari &
R€
uland, 2014). On the one hand, the very region under discussion remains contested
and unclear. On the other, the signiﬁcance of some of the ideas and institutions that
seemingly shape – if not actually bring into being – regionally based patterns of interaction remains a subject of heated dispute.
For constructivists such as Amitav Acharya (2009), for example, the entire process of
regional development in East Asia has been a social, discursively realized process in
which particular norms, cultural legacies and ‘cognitive priors’ have played a key role in
determining the speciﬁc form of regional diplomacy and institutionalization. The smaller
states of ASEAN have, the argument goes, a surprising degree of autonomy and even an
ability to inﬂuence the behavior of their more powerful neighbors and extra regional

4

M. BEESON

powers. It is this sort of claim that has given theoretical support to the idea that ASEAN
is ‘in the driving seat’ as far as regional leadership and institutional development are
concerned.
Realists take a very different view. There is, of course, a well-known skepticism on the
part of realists about the capacity of institutions to signiﬁcantly impact on the calculations of autonomous states (Mearsheimer, 1994/1995), especially powerful ones, under
any circumstances. In an East Asian context realists have drawn attention to the limited
efﬁcacy of, and even the nullifying impact of the very diplomatic practices and norms
that constructivists take to be so important. Exhibit A in this context is the so-called
‘ASEAN Way’ of consensus, voluntarism and face-saving agreement that distinguishes
South-East Asia, and which has been adopted by a range of other pan-Asian organizations, such as the Asia Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation (APEC) grouping, the ASEAN
Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit (EAS), among others. What constructivists
take to be a vital set of facilitating practices in a region with little history of cooperation,
realists take to be a convenient mechanism for ‘issue avoidance’ (Jones & Smith, 2007).
These sorts of inconclusive debates are likely to continue given the fundamentally
different assumptions observers make about what is actually happening in the region
and the sorts of forces and dynamics that are actually likely to determine consequential
diplomatic and strategic outcomes. Before trying to assess just how multilateral processes and institutions are likely to be affected by recent geopolitical developments in
the region, and by the rise of the Trump regime, it is worth making a couple of general
observations. First, both realists and constructivists have important points to make, and
one potential step forward is to take a more ‘eclectic’ view of both the subject matter in
question and of the best way to make sense of it (Sil & Katzenstein, 2010).
In this context, as I have argued elsewhere in more detail (Beeson, 2017), realists are
too deterministic and neglectful of contingent circumstances, including the ideational
and cultural contexts in which organizations develop and operate. Constructivists, by
contrast, indulge in a good deal of wishful thinking about the impact and nature of
norms, and are similarly neglectful of the importance of material reality and the pursuit
of national interests, even if they are right to claim that such interests are ultimately discursively realized. What is needed, I suggest, is recognition of the constraining impact of
inherited social structures and the possibilities such structures consequently both foreclose and permit. The possible relevance of this claim can be seen in the actual operation of East Asia’s growing array of multilateral institutions.

Multilateralism with Asian characteristics
Regions have become a focus of scholarly attention because they remain an important
and distinctive feature of what has long been seen as an otherwise increasingly ‘global’
system (Coe, Hess, Yeung, Dicken, & Henderson, 2004; Hurrell, 2010). In reality, even in a
supposedly global era economic processes – arguably the driver and principal manifestation of ‘globalization’ – remain highly uneven. Institutional development is even more
marked in this regard, and there are consequently signiﬁcant differences in the style,
depth and impact of regional organizations in different parts of the world as a consequence. In Europe – until recently, at least – the EU has been distinguished by a deeply
institutionalized, powerful and effective inter-governmental capacity, and an ability to
develop innovative responses to governance challenges (Sabel & Zeitlin, 2010). Member
states were not only willing to ‘pool sovereignty’ and trade off autonomy for collective

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

5

gains, but such efforts were facilitated by a ‘thick’ layer of private sector organizations,
inter-governmental agencies and a complex array of non-state actors.
This is a crucial consideration and important difference between Europe and Asia:
Asian states are much more cautious about compromising national autonomy and there
is nothing like the same number of non-state actors to help with the process of overall
governance. In short, certain relationships and initiatives simply cannot be undertaken
in quite the same way in Asia and they can (or could) in Europe. Some observers, such
as Luk van Langenhove (2010, p. 267), think that in the current era there is the increased
political space afforded to non-governmental actors operating outside of state auspices
‘is perhaps the most revolutionary aspect of Multilateralism 2.0 but also the most difﬁcult one to organise’. If this claim is correct, which I think it is, this is plainly a major difference between regions and a potential problem for the states of Asia: the ability of
states to cooperate and implement policy is constrained by the absence of a facilitating
institutional architecture (Beeson, 2001). As Gill and Green (2009, p. 3) argue, the overall
implication of attitudes toward institutionalized cooperation in Asia is that ‘multilateralism is still at a stage where it is best understood as an extension and intersection of
national power and purpose rather than an objective force in itself.’
Such important caveats notwithstanding, however, this has not stopped policy-makers from coming up with a plethora of initiatives revolving around the idea of regional
cooperation in some form or other. Paradoxically enough, for a region that is arguably
synonymous with limited and/or ineffective multilateral cooperation, there is no shortage of regional bodies in existence, on the drawing board, or in the imagination of one
prominent regional leader or another. Indeed, it seems to be almost de rigueur for
regional elites to come up with their preferred ‘vision’ for the region. Among the various
initiatives that are currently vying for the limelight and policy relevance are APEC, the
EAS, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), ASEAN Plus 3,
the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI)/Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralized (CMIM), the Asian
Bond Market Initiative (ABMI), the Asia Europe Summit (ASEM), the Indian Ocean Rim
Association (IORA), the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), the Free
Trade Area of the Asia Paciﬁc (FTAAP), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM+), the Council for Security Cooperation in
the Asia-Paciﬁc (CSCAP), to name only some of the more prominent that have actually
assumed some momentum (see Dent, 2013).
It is also possible to cite a number of initiatives that have fallen by the wayside, such
as Kevin Rudd’s Asia Paciﬁc Community (Lee & Milner, 2014), not to mention others that
trundle on with little evidence of inﬂuence, such as the Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation
Council (PECC). The point should be clear: despite a remarkable number of organizations
and initiatives, their collective impact has arguably been remarkably small. Organizations seem to be neutralizing rather than ‘balancing’ each other as Kai argues in his
introduction. True, economic integration in East Asia has gathered pace, but this has
generally been achieved as a consequence of the efforts of multinational corporations
and their integrated transnational production networks, rather than because of the
impact of regional trade agreements (Ravenhill, 2008). The record of regional organizations in the security arena is even less impressive: despite being the geographic epicenter of some of the world’s most pressing and combustible strategic challenges, regional
organizations have had remarkably little direct inﬂuence on such problems.
The ARF is the most glaring and disappointing example of this possibility. Although
there are equally divided opinions about whether the Asia-Paciﬁc/East Asia regions are

6

M. BEESON

models of stability or about to tip into conﬂict at any moment (Kang, 2007; Kaplan,
2014), there is little question that however the region is deﬁned, it contains some longstanding, unresolved potential ﬂashpoints. If any organization ought to be in exactly the
right place at the right time, therefore, it is the ARF. The status of Taiwan, the destabilizing behavior of North Korea – which is actually a member of the ARF – and most importantly of all, perhaps, the growing friction between the USA and China, are all things
that the ARF looks well placed to consider, if not resolve. In reality, however, all of these
issues are off the agenda as they might prove too discomforting for the member states
concerned and violate the ASEAN principles of facing saving and consensus. As Emmers
and Tan (2011) suggest, it is difﬁcult not to conclude that the ARF was ‘built to fail’.
This claim is a telling indictment of Asian regionalism at the best of times. At a
moment of growing rivalry between the world’s two most consequential powers, it is a
potentially fatal weakness. It has taken the so-called rise of China and the election of an
American administration that sets little store by multilateralism to make this apparent
even to those who might not wish to believe it. This situation has come about in part as
a result of a misreading of the importance and impact of Asian institutions. According
to one inﬂuential thesis about the growing likelihood of outright conﬂict between the
USA and China (Allison, 2017), it is entirely possible that brute historical reality will provide a telling empirical veriﬁcation of this possibility. If so, it will also be a major test of
regional organizations’ ability to inﬂuence the behavior of the great powers. History suggests it is a test they are very likely to fail.

Putting Asian regionalism to the test – and the sword?
There is a widely held belief that ASEAN and its numerous organizational offshoots have
played a unique and decisive role in maintaining the ‘long peace of Asia’ (Kivim€aki,
2014). The argument is that Asian institutions are responsible for a process of socialization and conﬁdence building that has led to a radical decline in the incidence of interstate war. There is one fundamental problem with this argument: inter-state war has
declined everywhere (Pinker, 2012). If Asian institutions really have played such a decisive part in making Asia peaceful, how do we account for similar declines in inter-state
conﬂict elsewhere? By contrast, if the decline of inter-state war is a universal phenomenon, as seems to be the case, why would we attribute any special powers or inﬂuence
to ASEAN or any other regional organization?
This was an important and generally neglected question even before the rise of
China and its subsequent involvement in a series of territorial disputes with some of its
East Asian neighbors. Now, when the possibility of outright conﬂict appears to be growing by the day (Freedland, 2017), such claims are being put to a searching theoretical
and – more importantly, of course – empirical examination. Although it is too soon to
say quite how the growing rivalry and tension between China and the USA will play out,
one thing is already abundantly clear: ASEAN is unlikely to play a major role in deciding
its outcome. On the contrary, ASEAN as a grouping has been effectively divided and
marginalized by China’s skillful diplomacy, as it has simply bought off key ASEAN states
such as Cambodia (Kynge, Haddou, & Peel, 2016). The net result is that ASEAN has been
unable to arrive at a coherent, much less joint position toward what is arguably the
most important security challenge in its history. If ASEAN cannot come up with a collective response to an issue that directly impinges on the sovereignty, security and

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

7

standing of its member states, one may be forgiven for asking what its continuing purpose actually is (Callick, 2016).
The two countries that will actually play a decisive part in determining the course of
geopolitical development in the East Asian or the more broadly conceived Asia-Paciﬁc
region are China and the USA. This is what makes their respective attitudes toward multilateralism, contested or otherwise, so important. Their bilateral ties and potentially
incompatible goals offer a telling test of Multilateralism 2.0. At this stage, it seems as if
the Trump administration does not have the sort of the principled commitment to multilateralism as an idea that former regimes have had, even Republican ones (Daalder &
Kagan, 2016). Given the wild ﬂuctuations in rhetoric and the lack of policy coherence
that have characterized the Trump administration’s ﬁrst period in ofﬁce (Erlanger, 2017),
it is unwise to try and predict what form American engagement with the region will
take. One point has become clear, however: as the USA has pulled back from former
commitments to institutionalized regional and global engagement, China has rapidly
moved to capitalize on this abrupt change in America’s long-standing foreign policy
consensus (Browne, 2017a).
It is equally unclear at this stage whether Xi Jinping’s remarkable suggestion that
China may become the new champion of multilateralism, free trade, climate change mitigation and much else will be realized. To judge by the region’s historical record, and the
ambivalence of China’s leaders about taking on open-ended commitments to provide
the sorts of collective goods that hegemon’s traditionally have been supposed to do, a
healthy degree of skepticism seems warranted. And yet, it is also clear that Xi in particular sees this as a potentially unique opportunity to reposition China and enhance its reputation and ‘soft power’ at America’s expense (Browne, 2017b). If this is to happen,
though, China’s leaders will have to ﬁnd some way of simultaneously reconciling
national goals with regional and possibly global obligations. It was a task that frequently
proved beyond the Americans, especially at moments of crisis (Beeson & Broome, 2010);
there is even less reason to expect a still inexperienced Chinese diplomatic cadre to ﬁnd
it any easier.
Such caveats notwithstanding, it is already evident that China may have both the will
and the wherewithal to at least stake out a claim for a greater leadership role at both
the regional and global levels. On the one hand, China is beginning to establish organizations that reﬂect its preferences and over which it has greater inﬂuence. The SCO was
something of a pioneer in this regard, and one that has been built upon by potentially
even more important initiatives such as the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB).
On the other hand, the AIIB is likely to prove welcome in a region still short on infrastructure, especially if it plays a pivotal role in ﬁnancing China’s hugely ambitious One Belt
One Road (OBOR) project. OBOR may enhance China’s economic leverage over its neighbors and reinforce its importance at the center of deeply integrated regional production
structures (Miller, 2017).
This material transformation may, in fact, ultimately prove more consequential than
any institutional or ideational change. It is important to remember that China’s rapid
economic ascent and concomitant strategic importance has been the basis for its challenge to the extant order that the USA helped create and over which it has enjoyed
unquestioned ascendancy until recently. It is not necessary to be an unreconstructed
realist to recognize that material power will be both an important source of inﬂuence
and the means to underwrite different, potentially competing ‘visions’ for regional order.
In the absence of war, geoeconomics is becoming as, if not more, important than

8

M. BEESON

conventional military power, especially for China (Norris, 2016). The striking feature
about the Trump administration in this context is that the primary expression of material
power is still likely to be geopolitical rather than geoeconomic, at least as far as engagement with East Asia as a whole is concerned (Shear & Steinhauer, 2017). Although the
Trump’s economic advisors seem to believe they can pressure China into behaving in
ways that suit them, this belief seems predicated on an entirely inaccurate reading of
the nature of the economic relationship and the level of economic interdependence
that exists between China and the USA (Mufson, 2017).
Space precludes a detailed analysis of this relationship (see Cohen & DeLong, 2010),
but a few simple points can be made that are germane to the present discussion. First,
however, the relationship plays out between the USA and China multilateral institutions
look likely to play a less, rather than a more important role. Regional security organizations are not capable of, and seemingly not seriously interested in, inﬂuencing the
behavior of the two giants. Similarly, the Trump administration’s emphasis on bilateralism and ‘America ﬁrst’ does not suggest that they are willing to be voluntarily constrained by the very institutions they built, as so many liberals believe and/or hope. On
the contrary, the second point to make is that historically neither China nor the USA has
been willing to be bound by institutionalized rules and norms unless it suited them to
do so. Failing to recognize this historical reality has caused generations of liberals and
especially constructivists to overestimate the inﬂuence of institutions as a consequence.

Concluding remarks
The great question about East Asian institutionalism is: how can so many organizations
and so much diplomatic effort achieve so little? ASEAN is the quintessential embodiment of this paradox. Despite holding more than 1500 meetings in some years on
ASEAN-related affairs, the organization’s actual impact on key economic, political and
strategic issues has arguably been very modest. The limited number of ofﬁcials and diplomats from some of the region’s more impoverished states means that there are fundamental questions about the ability of states to participate meaningfully and effectively,
much less actually implement any initiatives that might emerge. While this limited,
omnipresent group of ofﬁcials may be good for regional ‘conﬁdence building’, it is less
impressive when it comes to actually dealing with speciﬁc problems.
This counter-intuitive outcome, in which much effort and energy is expended for
seemingly little return is unlikely to change for three principal reasons. First, once established organizations are very difﬁcult to kill off. ‘Stakeholders’ develop a vested interested in keeping such organizations going long after their original purposes have been
overtaken by events or – more likely in an Asian context – a competing body emerges
with a similar purpose. In a situation where different organizations vie for authority and
responsibility in similar issue areas, it is all too likely that no one will act decisively – with
or without the additional handicap of the ASEAN Way.
The second reason for being pessimistic about the capacity for regional organizations
to address key problems is the nature of some of the problems themselves and the powerful vested and different interests that are likely to stymie even genuine (rather than
rhetorical) efforts at cooperation. South-East Asia’s inability to address the ‘haze problem’ that afﬂicts the region every year with calamitous impacts on its population is perhaps the clearest example of this possibility (Varkkey, 2012). There are fundamental

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

9

capacity constraints and conﬂicting interests that make agreement, much less effective
cooperation, all but impossible.
The ﬁnal reason for being skeptical about the impact of regional institutions is the
competing aims and agendas of the region’s – in this case the Asia-Paciﬁc region – two
great powers. True, China and the USA may support the development of regional organizations, but they will inevitably be different organizations and the principal motivation
is likely to be the pursuit of national rather than regional interests. China’s support of
ASEAN Plus 3, which it hopes to dominate, and the USA’s support of the EAS, which it
hopes use to nullify Chinese inﬂuence, are important examples of this possibility. This
may be an example of institutional balancing, but it is not one that is likely to lead to a
productive outcome or anything to solve the region’s growing problems, especially in
the security arena.
The point to emphasize is that institutional development in East Asia/the Asia-Paciﬁc
has always been constrained, or even driven by, wider geopolitical concerns that invariably have national rather than regional origins. China’s recent initiatives and its determination to pursue a nationalist agenda of territorial expansion and assertion is a
potentially destabilizing example of this possibility of one the region looks incapable of
addressing collectively. Nor can we derive any conﬁdence or optimism from the behavior of the incoming Trump administration. On the contrary, the dominant discourse
emerging from Washington is one that unambiguously and proudly puts ‘America ﬁrst’
in a way that augurs badly for the future of multilateralism everywhere. In a region
where institutionalized cooperation has always been viewed with a degree of nervousness and/or skepticism, the arrival of Trump, the rise of nationalism worldwide, and the
apparent demise of the EU as the benchmark of successful regionalism may result in
regional cooperation going backwards rather than forwards.

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Mark Beeson is Professor of International Politics at the University of Western Australia. Before joining
UWA, he taught at Murdoch, Grifﬁth, Queensland, York (UK) and Birmingham.

References
Acharya, A. (2009). Whose ideas matter? Agency and power in Asian regionalism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Acharya, A. (2012). Comparative regionalism: A ﬁeld whose time has come?. The International Spectator,
47(1), 3–15.
Allison, G. (2017). Destined for war: Can America and China Escape Thucydides’s Trap? Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. (2007). The ASEAN charter. Retrieved from http://asean.org/wpcontent/uploads/images/archive/publications/ASEAN-Charter.pdf
Beeson, M. (2001). Globalization, governance, and the political-economy of public policy reform in East
Asia. Governance-an International Journal of Policy and Administration, 14(4), 481–502.
Beeson, M. (2009). Institutions of the Asia-Paciﬁc: ASEAN, APEC and Beyond. London: Routledge.
Beeson, M. (2015). Can ASEAN cope with China? Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs, 35(1), 5–28.

10

M. BEESON

Beeson, M. (2016). Multilateralism in East Asia: Less than the sum of its parts? Global Summitry, 2(1),
54–70.
Beeson, M. (2017). Alternative realities: Explaining security in the Asia-Paciﬁc. Review of International
Studies, 43(3), 516–533.
Beeson, M., & Broome, A. (2010). Hegemonic instability and East Asia: Contradictions, crises and US
power. Globalizations, 7(4), 479–495.
Browne, A. (2017a, January 24). A U.S.-China role switch: Who’s the globalist now? Wall Street Journal.
Browne, A. (2017b, February 28). China gloats as Trump squanders U.S. soft power. Wall Street Journal.
Callick, R. (2016, July 27). ASEAN’s future dim after weak statements on China Sea ruling. The Australian.
Coe, N. M., Hess, M., Yeung, H. W., Dicken, P., & Henderson, J. (2004). ‘Globalizing’ regional development: A
global production networks perspective. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 29(4),
468–484.
Cohen, S. S., & DeLong, J. B. (2010). The end of inﬂuence: What happens when other countries have the
money. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Cumings, B. (2009). Dominion from sea to sea: Paciﬁc ascendancy and American power. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Daalder, I., & Kagan, R. (2016). The U.S. can’t afford to end its global leadership role. The Washington Post,
April 22.
Dent, C. M. (2013). Paths ahead for East Asia and Asia – Paciﬁc regionalism. International Affairs, 4, 89963–
89985.
Diez, T. (2004). Europe’s others and the return of geopolitics. Cambridge Review of International Affairs,
17(2), 319–335.
Emmers, R., & Tan, S. S. (2011). The ASEAN Regional Forum and preventive diplomacy: Built to fail?. Asian
Security, 7(1), 44–60.
Erlanger, S. (2017, January 16). As Trump era arrives, a sense of uncertainty grips the world. New York
Times.
Freedland, J. (2017, February 4). First on the White House agenda – the collapse of the global order. Next,
war? The Guardian.
Gill, B., & Green, M. J. (2009). Unbundling Asia’s new multilateralism. In M. Green & B. Gill (Eds.), Asia’s new
multilateralism: Cooperation, competition, and the search for community (pp. 1–29). New York, NY:
Columbia University Press.
Huotari, M., & R€
uland, J. (2014). Introduction: Context, concepts and comparison in Southeast Asian Studies. Paciﬁc Affairs, 87(3), 415–439.
Hurrell, A. (2010). Regional powers and the global system from a historical perspective. In D. Flemes (Ed.),
Regional leadership in the global system: Ideas, interests, and strategies of regional powers (pp. 15–27).
Farnham: Ashgate.
Jones, D. M., & Smith, M. L. (2001). The changing security agenda in Southeast Asia: Globalization, new
terror, and the delusions of regionalism. Studies in Conﬂict and Terrorism, 1, 24271–24288.
Jones, D. M., & Smith, M. L. R. (2007). Making process, not progress: ASEAN and the evolving East Asian
regional order. International Security, 32(1), 148–184.
Kang, D. C. (2007). China rising: Peace, power, and order in East Asia. New York, NY: Columbia University.
Kaplan, R. D. (2014). Asia’s Cauldron: The South China Sea and the End of a Stable Paciﬁc. New York, NY:
Random House.
Katzenstein, P. J. (2005). A World of regions: Asia and Europe in the American imperium. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Kivim€aki, T. (2014). The long peace of East Asia. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Kynge, J., Haddou, L., & Peel, M. (2016, September 8). How China bought its way into Cambodia. Financial
Times.
Lee, S., & Milner, A. (2014). Practical vs. identity regionalism: Australia’s APC initiative, a case study.
Contemporary Politics, 20(2), 209–228.
Mearsheimer, J. J. (1994/1995). The false promise of institutions. International Security, 19(3), 5–49.
Miller, T. (2017). China’s Asian dream: Empire building along the new silk road. London: Zed Books.
Milward, A. S. (2003). The reconstruction of Western Europe, 1945-51. London: Routledge.
Mufson, S. (2017, February 22). Trump unleashes his trade warrior. Australian Financial Review.
Narine, S. (2002). Explaining ASEAN: Regionalism in Southeast Asia. Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
Norris, W. J. (2016). Chinese economic statecraft: Commercial actors, grand strategy, and state control.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

11

Pinker, S. (2012). The better angels of our nature: Why violence has declined. New York, NY: Viking.
Ravenhill, J. (2008). Fighting irrelevance: An economic community with ASEAN characteristics. The Paciﬁc
Review, 21(4), 469–488.
Sabel, C. F., & Zeitlin, J. (2010). Experimentalist governance in the European Union: Towards a new architecture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sbragia, A. (2008). Comparative regionalism: What might it be? Journal of Common Market Studies, 46(s1),
29–49.
Shear, M. D., & Steinhauer, J. (2017, February 27). Trump to seek $54 billion increase in military spending.
New York Times.
Sil, R., & Katzenstein, P. J. (2010). Beyond paradigms: Analytical eclecticism in the study of world politics.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Van Langenhove, L. (2010). The transformation of multilateralism mode 1.0 to mode 2.0. Global Policy,
1(3), 263–270.
Varkkey, H. (2012). Patronage politics as a driver of economic regionalisation: The Indonesian oil palm
sector and transboundary haze. Asia Paciﬁc Viewpoint, 53(3), 314–329.
Wagstyl, S., Beesley, A., Barker, A., & Politi, J. (2017, January 17). Trump ﬂexes muscle against pillars of
postwar order. Financial Times.

