The Paciﬁc Review

ISSN: 0951-2748 (Print) 1470-1332 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpre20

Vietnam: riding the Chinese tide
Do Thanh Hai
To cite this article: Do Thanh Hai (2018) Vietnam: riding the Chinese tide, The Paciﬁc Review,
31:2, 205-220, DOI: 10.1080/09512748.2017.1377282
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2017.1377282

Published online: 15 Sep 2017.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1903

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpre20

THE PACIFIC REVIEW, 2018
VOL. 31, NO. 2, 205–220
https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2017.1377282

Vietnam: riding the Chinese tide
Do Thanh Hai
Centre for Information and Analysis, Bien Dong Institute for Maritime Studies, Diplomatic Academy of
Vietnam, Hanoi, Vietnam

ABSTRACT

Vietnam’s perception of China is nuanced and complex, a mixture of challenge and
opportunity. Given its geographic proximity and overwhelming power, China
represents a permanent strategic challenge Vietnam cannot escape. However, the two
countries are partners in the defence of socialist ideals and communist rule. These
circumstances have clearly shaped Vietnam’s China policy, which is a mixture of
cooperation and struggle. Vietnam’s strategy is not about confronting China directly
but ﬁnding a way to live with and beneﬁt from its power.

KEYWORDS Vietnam; China threat; South China Sea

Introduction
As part of The Paciﬁc Review’s series on The China Threat, this article examines how the
rise of China has been perceived by its southern neighbour Vietnam. The case of Vietnam
is particularly interesting and unique in that it is the country most exposed to the power
of China’s on almost all measures. The two countries share a 1281-kilometre long land
border and a vast expanse of waters in the Gulf of Tonkin and the South China Sea
proper. The headwaters of Vietnam’s most important rivers, the Red River and Mekong
River, are in China. The two nations also share a history of diplomatic and political
exchange punctuated by wars and conﬂicts that is at least two thousand years old. Such
proximity and connectedness makes China a ‘constant feature of political life’ in Vietnam.
In the series’ previous articles, The China Threat has been seen as a more or less temporary and sectoral phenomenon. Goodman (2017) posited that The China Threat was
part of identity politics in Australia, which surfaced occasionally, especially at elections,
to rally popular support but gradually diminished as economic beneﬁts from China
played out after the political dust had settled. In discussing Thailand, Hewison (2017)
pointed out that Beijing was no longer seen as a threat in Bangkok since China withdrew
its support to the Communist Party of Thailand in 1979. Since the end of the Cold War,
Sino–Thai relations have progressed smoothly, and have become even closer since the
military junta took power in Thailand in 2014. In Vietnam, however, the fear of China is
perpetual, wide-ranging and complex. Unlike Australia and Thailand, Vietnam is not an
ally of the United States and has a long history of standing in the shadow of China.

CONTACT Do Thanh Hai

haidt@dav.edu.vn

© 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

206

D. T. HAI

This article builds on the understanding of Vietnam’s strategic traditions and its interactions with China to explain the country’s changing perception of China. The focus is
on the period after 1991, when the two countries normalized relations, and it is structured in ﬁve parts. The ﬁrst presents the puzzle of Vietnam’s response to the challenge
of China. The second seeks hints from the history of Vietnam’s interactions with China.
The third investigates the period from normalization until 2002, where Vietnam saw
China in a larger context as an ideological partner. The fourth discusses Vietnam’s
underlying anxiety at China’s rising inﬂuence over South-East Asia between 2002 and
2009. The ﬁnal part charts how Vietnam has coped with China’s maritime assertiveness
since 2009.

Insecure yet terriﬁed
By all accounts, China represents a conceivable threat to Vietnam. According to Stephen
Walt (1987), a threat is composed of four major elements: aggregate power, offensive
power, geographic proximity and perceived aggressive intentions. From the Vietnamese
perspective, China possesses all of these attributes. Its aggregate power remains overwhelming to Vietnam, which in terms of size and population is equivalent to a middlesized province of China. Living next door to China, Vietnam has reason to be anxious
about its neighbour’s rapid naval modernization, through which its arsenal has been
constantly upgraded with advanced missiles, submarines, ﬁghter jets and aircraft
carriers.
There remain between the two countries a range of unresolved territorial and maritime disputes in the South China Sea. Vietnam’s naval capabilities cannot match those
of China. Vietnamese strategists are convinced that China’s ultimate goal is absolute
control of the South China Sea, a maritime domain rich in hydrocarbons and of strategic
importance in terms of navigation. China resorted to force to gain control of a number
of offshore islets at the expense of Vietnam in 1974 and 1988. Over the last decade
China has acted assertively on many occasions, causing dangerous clashes and serious
stand-offs at sea between the two countries’ maritime forces.
However, it seems that Vietnam has not been as alarmed at the revival of the Middle
Kingdom as many Western scholars may have thought. There are no signs of Vietnam
hastily beeﬁng up its defence at all costs, or falling into the embrace of other powers as
a backstop to China’s rise. Neither have the Vietnamese indicated that they acquiesce to
China’s claims over remote and barren offshore rocks in return for stronger security for
the mainland. There is no doubt that Vietnam feels acutely insecure and vulnerable in
the face of China’s massive economic and military power. Yet, in spite of China’s
increased assertiveness, Vietnam has not turned its back on China but has obstinately
pushed for more dialogue and greater cooperation.
Clearly, the rise of China may be beneﬁcial for Vietnam in many ways. As socialist
countries, Vietnam and China share an interest in safeguarding communist rule. An economically strong China could provide a veriﬁed model of development and plenty of
opportunities for doing business, and thus enhance the position of Vietnam in the eyes
of other major powers. This complicates Hanoi’s interactions with Beijing. Vietnam is
therefore hesitant to challenge Chinese power comprehensively. Vietnam has chosen to
face China not by attempting to redress the asymmetry of capacity between them but
by making the imbalance of power work for its own interest. This indicates that Vietnam’s view of China is more nuanced and complex than has generally been thought.

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

207

Water and the boat
Speaking in a hearing at the National Assembly in November 2014, on the heels of the
crisis over China’s deployment of the Haiyang Shiyou 981 oil rig in an area claimed by
Vietnam, then Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung described Vietnam’s policy towards
China as ‘cooperation cum struggle’ (Thuy, 2014). What this indicates is that the Vietnamese political elite never rule out cooperation and partnership with China even when
relations are under severe stress. During this oil rig confrontation, Vietnam stood ﬁrm
and indicated that it would take every measure possible to defend its territorial sovereignty and integrity. Then, after China withdrew the oil rig, Hanoi held no grudge but
immediately dispatched a senior ofﬁcial to Beijing to mend the broken ties between
them (Spegele & Khanh, 2014). Though this pattern of behaviour would surprise many
observers, it has historical roots in the thousands of years that the Vietnamese have
coped with Chinese power.
Vietnam has a long history of resisting China and has kept detailed and public
records of China’s suzerainty over it lasting about a thousand years. Over the two millenniums when they were two independent feudal empires, the Chinese attempted to
invade Vietnam on at least nine occasions. Womack (2006) argues convincingly that
Vietnamese identity has been shaped through the long struggle to defend its homeland
against foreign aggressors, mostly from the north. In spite of such a bitter history, Vietnam and China lived in peace most of the time. The ‘tyranny of geography,’ a term
coined by Thayer (2002, p. 271) to describe Vietnam’s geographic misfortune, forced the
Vietnamese to ﬁnd a distinctive way to live in harmony with the northern giant without
having its autonomy compromised.
After roughly one thousand years under Chinese domination, the Vietnamese realized they should be watchful of their northern neighbour’s expansionism. While there
was no point in being part of the Chinese kingdom, it was equally untenable to confront
it in long-lasting conﬂicts. Therefore, Vietnamese rulers worked out their own tributary
formula, giving symbolic homage to Chinese monarchs to prevent them interfering in
Vietnam’s internal affairs. Such a tributary relationship cost Vietnam little in terms of formalistic admiration and annual tributes to China but offered it peace, recognition and
support when necessary. Marr (1981, p. 49) described such a form of interaction as
follows:
This reality [China’s overwhelming size], together with sincere cultural admiration, led Vietnam’s
rulers to accept the tributary system. Providing China did not meddle in Vietnam’s internal affairs
… Vietnam monarchs were quite willing to declare themselves vassals of the Celestial Emperor.
The subtlety of this relationship was evident from the way in which Vietnamese monarchs styled
themselves ‘king’ (Vuong) when communicating with China’s rulers, but ‘emperor’ (Hoang de)
when addressing their own subjects or sending messages to other Southeast Asian rulers.

Still, the Vietnamese resisted whenever the Chinese encroached on their sovereignty
and autonomy. From the Vietnamese perspective, stronger hard power did not guarantee domination on the battleﬁeld or ﬁnal victory. The key to winning was the disposition
of forces and will-power, which could allow the weak to defeat the strong, and a small
number of troops to overrun a larger army. Vietnam defeated China in most of their conﬂicts. However, after every conﬂict Vietnamese rulers did all they could to reset the tributary system. Ironically, the victors usually took the initiative to send envoys to Beijing to
offer deference to the losers in exchange for peace and recognition. For the Vietnamese,
it was not always about competing with its colossal neighbour, but about living together

208

D. T. HAI

harmoniously and productively. The logic behind this strategy is that historically the
Vietnamese perceived Chinese power as a ‘force of nature.’ According to Hai and Kim
(2017, p. 197):
Vietnamese have traditionally viewed China like ﬂoods and storms that feed into the deltas. China
is a force of nature, to which Vietnamese, like reeds, must once bend while remaining ﬁrmly
intact. When harnessed, this force can be nourishing and productive. At other times, as recent
incidents in the South China Sea, it is terrifying and destructive.

Today’s Vietnam is on a much better footing with China. The globalized world has
widened the range of options Vietnam has for coping with China. Vietnam is no longer
alone in the face of Chinese power. Hanoi has established a range of partnerships with
major powers and throughout South-East Asia, which has provided it with greater
breathing space vis-a-vis Chinese power. However, traditional perceptions linger in how
the Vietnamese think about China today. Explaining Vietnam’s need to normalize relations with China in the early 1990s, then Minister of Defence Le Duc Anh put it bluntly,
‘For the sake of our national interest, at critical times our ancestors used to actively
establish relations with China, which caused no harm to independence and sovereignty
but opportunities to struggle against their adverse impacts’ (Ninh, 2011). At the same
time, the Vietnamese have shown greater calmness and conﬁdence in dealing with a rising China. After all, China will always be enormous to Vietnam. Talking about how the
rise of China would affect Vietnam, a strategist in Hanoi calmly said, ‘the higher the
water rises, the higher the boat ﬂoats.’ In his metaphor, China is the water, and Vietnam
is the boat.

Ideological partner
In the late 1980s, Vietnamese ideologues rethought the country’s relationship with its
neighbours. After a decade-long confrontation following the short but ruinous border
war in 1979, conservative circles in Hanoi started viewing China more as a fraternal
socialist country than as a hegemonic and expansionist power, as it had been seen in
the early 1980s. There was a growing belief that Vietnam could count on China’s support
to safeguard the communist regime in Vietnam (Co, 2003, pp. 30–36). Consequently,
despite the concerns of Vietnamese realist political elites about China’s territorial ambitions, Vietnam’s party chief Nguyen Van Linh and Defence Minister Le Duc Anh were
looking for ways to approach the Chinese leadership and pushed for reconciliation
between Hanoi and Beijing on the basis of socialist solidarity (Thayer, 1994a, pp. 516–
17).
The shift in Vietnamese leaders’ perceptions about China mostly resulted from
changes in international and domestic contexts in the late 1980s. Its involvement in the
Cambodian conﬂict put Vietnam at loggerheads with ASEAN countries, China and the
West. Turmoil in eastern Europe and the decline of the Soviet Union on the one hand
weakened the socialist camp and on the other hand stimulated concerns in Hanoi about
the danger of popular uprisings in the form of ‘velvet revolutions.’ Even worse, Vietnam
was facing a severe socio-economic crisis at a time when aid from the Soviet Union was
running out. As the global balance of power shifted against Vietnam, conservative leaders in Hanoi started turning to China for help against what they called ‘peaceful evolution’, their term for alleged attempts by Western powers and hostile forces to overthrow
communist rule.

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

209

It should be noted that during that time China’s relations with the West were also
troubled due to its heavy-handed handling of the Tiananmen crisis in 1989. Under
mounting pressure from the West, Beijing attempted to gain some breathing space by
mending relations with the Soviet Union and improving ties with South-East Asia. Chinese ofﬁcials then ﬂoated the idea of ‘an Asian socialist community’, hinting at reviving
an ideological front to resist the West’s demand for democratization (Thayer, 1994a, p.
518). In distress, Vietnamese leaders interpreted China’s proposal as an appeal to international communism and a sign of its intention to mend its broken relations with Vietnam (Thayer, 1994b, p. 353).
As a result, conservative elites in Vietnam approached the Chinese to propose reconciliation between the Hanoi-backed Hunsen government and the Beijing-backed Khmer
Rouge forces as a way to resolve the Cambodian conﬂict and expressed a wish to revive
the earlier ideology-based alliance between Vietnam and China. To the surprise of the
Vietnamese, the Chinese turned down both propositions, perhaps because Beijing no
longer considered ideology the deﬁning factor of their foreign policy. Chinese leaders
told their Vietnamese interlocutors they regarded the two countries as ‘comrades but
not allies’ (Co, 2003, p. 94). Still, conservative leaders in Hanoi were of the view that comradeship mattered in Sino–Vietnamese relations because the two countries faced the
same threat of ‘peaceful evolution.’ Being isolated by the West, China was also interested in rapprochement with South-East Asian countries, including Vietnam.
The normalization that took place in November 1991 opened a new chapter in Vietnam–China relations. As hostilities receded, suspicions gradually lessened and cooperation rapidly expanded. The two countries established party-to-party and state-to-state
dialogues and increased exchanges of delegations at all levels. The expansion of the
party-to-party dialogue was a unique feature of Vietnam’s relations with its nearby
neighbours Laos, China and Cambodia. Between 1991 and 2001, there were at least 18
meetings between senior Vietnamese and Chinese party and state leaders to foster
cooperation and resolve ‘historical differences’ (Ly, 2013, pp. 141–142). Due to their traditional ties, similar political system and ideology, as well as their geographic proximity,
Vietnam’s communist leaders accorded China the status of Vietnam’s most important
partner. In Vietnam’s hierarchy of international partners, neighbouring and traditionally
friendly countries usually rated highest. Though the Vietnamese leadership embraced a
foreign policy of multilateralization and diversiﬁcation, China appeared to be ‘ﬁrst
among equals’ among Vietnam’s partners.
The Vietnam–China border was reopened and cross-border exchange expanded dramatically. China also provided loans for a number of important development projects in
Vietnam. Vietnam wanted cooperation from China not only to maintain the regime but
also to develop its economy. Vietnam–China bilateral trade increased more than 35-fold
in ﬁve years, from US$32.23 million in 1991 to US$1.15 billion in 1996, then increased to
US$2.8 billion in 2001 (Huan, 2002, p. 189). China also offered loans and assistance for
upgrading Vietnam’s China-built factories. China provided Vietnam, as a fast-growing
transitional economy, with practical experience and a model of how to develop a capitalist economy without signiﬁcant detriment to a single-party political system (Ly, 2013,
p. 143). At the same time, Hanoi expected that China would cooperate in resolving ‘historical differences’ through negotiation for the sake of socialist solidarity. Though tensions ﬂared periodically, disputes over the offshore islands and maritime spaces in the
South China Sea were generally well managed (Ramses and Thao, 2005).

210

D. T. HAI

By the turn of the century, Vietnam–China relations reached their peak. Both sides
maintained frequent visits by and meetings among senior leaders and conducted regular exchanges on ideology and party building. In February 1999, Chinese President Jiang
Zemin proposed the motto ‘friendly neighbourliness, comprehensive cooperation, longterm stability, and future-oriented relationship’ for Sino–Vietnamese ties. The idea was
welcomed by Vietnam’s party chief Le Kha Phieu (Chan, 2013, p. 37). In December 2000,
when Chinese President Jiang Zemin visited Hanoi, both sides adopted a Joint Statement for Comprehensive Cooperation. In 2002, Chinese leaders also called Vietnam and
China ‘good neighbours, good friends, good comrades, and good partners’ (Storey,
2011, p. 114). The most remarkable achievement in bilateral relations was that the two
countries managed to settle their long-standing disputes over land borders and maritime boundaries in the Gulf of Tonkin, in 1999 and 2000, respectively.
In the decade between 1991 and 2001, Vietnam clearly had a positive view of China.
Still, there was a widespread and mainstream belief that socialism was in temporary
retreat. Therefore, political elites in Vietnam largely viewed relations with China from
the prism of ideology, considering it a reliable ideological partner and a cooperative
neighbour. China was generally responsive to Vietnam’s concerns and cooperative in
settling disputes over the land border and the boundary in the Gulf of Tonkin. China
was also actively engaged with ASEAN to negotiate a code of conduct as a conﬁdencebuilding measure in the South China Sea. However, unsettled disputes and China’s sporadic assertiveness in the South China Sea proper aroused lingering suspicion among
Vietnamese realists about China’s strategic intentions.

Looming hegemon
Once China became a full dialogue partner with ASEAN in 1996, its inﬂuence quickly
grew throughout South-East Asia. In the second half of the 1990s, Beijing started ‘charm
offensive’ diplomacy, engaging extensively with ASEAN to better its image in the eyes
of South-East Asian nations. Economically, during the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis China
gained ASEAN’s support because it refrained from devaluing its currency and offered
support to distressed nations, in stark contrast to the United States, which turned its
back on the victims, criticising them for what had happened (Halloran, 1998). In November 2002, China and ASEAN signed a Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between China and ASEAN, which laid out the roadmap for a China–
ASEAN Free Trade Area for ASEAN-6 and for the rest of ASEAN in 2010 and 2015, respectively. Trade between ASEAN and China has grown dramatically ever since. In 2003
alone, it increased by 43 per cent to a new high of US$78.2 billion, ASEAN exports rising
by 50 per cent to US$47.3 billion (Yong, 2005, p. 22). China also increased aid to SouthEast Asian countries. In 2003, China’s aid to the Philippines was quadruple that of America’s, its aid to Laos three times greater, and its aid to Indonesia two times greater (Kurlantizick, 2006, pp. 273–274).
In the political and security spheres, China made efforts to dispel the ‘China threat
theory’ and presented a benign image within ASEAN. Beginning in May 1999, China
negotiated with ASEAN to establish a code of conduct in the South China Sea. After
three years, ASEAN and China had been unable to reach consensus on a number of
issues, most controversially the code’s scope of application. In November 2002, China
and ASEAN agreed to sign the Declaration on the Conduct of the Parties in the South
China Sea, basically a watered-down political statement to indicate there was no

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

211

intention of a threat or use of force to resolve existing disputes. China took another step
to reassure its South-East Asian partners of its intention to maintain peace and stability
through applying for admission to the ASEAN Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC). At
the Ninth ASEAN Summit in Bali in October 2003, ASEAN accepted China’s application,
making it the ﬁrst non-ASEAN party to the TAC. On the same occasion, both sides
adopted a Joint Declaration on a Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity (Saunders, 2016, p. 374). Beijing upgraded its public diplomacy, trying to sell the idea of
‘peaceful rise’, which was later changed to ‘peaceful development.’ It organized
museum exhibits, cultural exchanges, and business forums, hosted overseas scholars,
and expanded the international reach of its media, which in one way or another presented China as a peacekeeper and regional leader (Kurlantizick, 2006, p. 273).
Thanks to its charm-offensive policy, China increased its presence and inﬂuence in
South-East Asia at the expense of the United States. Ten years after the China–ASEAN
Dialogue was established, China operationalized 27 separate ASEAN–China mechanisms, as compared to only 7 active ASEAN–US mechanisms (Goh, 2005). In the early
1990s, almost all countries in ASEAN viewed China as a threat. However, this perception
had changed by the early 2000s. One South-East Asian diplomat revealed that by then
South-East Asian leaders no longer questioned the rise of China (Kurlantizick, 2006, p.
274). While disappointed at US military adventures in Afghanistan and Iraq, ASEAN political elites welcomed progress in Sino–ASEAN relations as a ‘deeper political trust and
higher level of cooperation’ (Breckon, 2004, p. 2). Beijing’s growing inﬂuence was manifested in South-East Asia reducing its engagement with Taiwan and banning Falun
Gong activities within their own countries as a show of deference to China (Kurlantizick,
2006, p. 275).
While other South-East Asian nations appeared comfortable with China’s rise, Vietnam watched China’s expanded footprint in South-East Asia with caution. Hanoi had
not been convinced by Beijing’s ‘peaceful development’ thesis (Burghardt, 2005). It was
evident that Vietnam was actually concerned about China’s unchecked rising power,
which would undermine ASEAN unity and the regional status quo. At the same time,
political elites in Hanoi were equally worried about the distraction the war on terrorism
was causing the United States. As a result, they approached US ofﬁcials, urging them to
pay more attention to China’s increased activism in South-East Asia (US Embassy in
Hanoi, 2004). In their view, China’s comprehensive penetration into the region was
‘aggressive’, not simply ‘active’ (US Embassy in Hanoi, 2003). In private, Vietnamese diplomats also criticized the rigid position of the US on Myanmar, arguing that such a
stance would only push Rangoon towards China (US Embassy in Hanoi, 2005a). Clearly,
Vietnam was particularly anxious about China’s rise and the regional imbalance of
power. Other South-East Asian countries’ deference to China undermined ASEAN unity
with regard to the South China Sea dispute. In September 2004, Hanoi was clearly
angered when informed that Manila had quietly worked with China on a joint-development project in the Spratly area, without consulting Vietnam and other South-East Asian
claimants (Storey, 2008, pp. 3–4). Also, the Vietnamese were clearly uncomfortable
€rn Dosch (2006, p.
about China’s outreach to Laos and Cambodia on its western ﬂank. Jo
250) reported a Vietnamese source, which made this clear:
Vietnam is concerned about China’s rising inﬂuence in Laos and Cambodia. China is the strategic
backbone of Cambodia security and China and ASEAN are seen by the Cambodian and Laotian
governments as credible forces to counterbalance Thailand and Vietnam. Though Laos still sees
Vietnam as its closest ally, the former’s generational transfer of political power could lead to a

212

D. T. HAI

preference of China as a security guarantor and an economic partner in the midst of competition
for inﬂuence in Laos between China, and Vietnam, and Thailand to a lesser extent.

All of this indicated that Hanoi no longer viewed China as a purely ideological and
cooperative partner. China’s expansion seemingly re-awakened Vietnam’s innate concerns about China’s hegemonic tendencies. In July 2003, the Eighth Plenum of the Ninth
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam was convened to review the
national defence strategy. At the plenum, Vietnamese political elites introduced two
new concepts: doi tac (object of cooperation) and doi tuong (object of struggle). Doi tac
referred to ‘anyone who respects our independence and sovereignty, and establishes
and expands friendly, equal and mutually beneﬁcial relations with Vietnam.’ Doi tuong
was deﬁned as ‘any force that plans and acts against the objectives we [Vietnam] uphold
in the course of national building and defence.’ Interestingly, the resolution argued
against a simplistic distinction between doi tac and doi tuong, claiming doi tac and doi
tuong can coexist in the one country. It advocated a complex and pragmatic application
of these concepts:
with objects of struggle, we can ﬁnd areas of cooperation; with partners, there exist interests that
are contradictory and different from those of ours. We should be aware of these, thus overcoming
the two tendencies, namely lacking vigilance and showing rigidity in our perception, design, and
implementation of speciﬁc policies. (Thayer, 2008, p. 27)

Setting aside semantic ambiguities, the concepts doi tac and doi tuong were indicative of a signiﬁcant change in Vietnamese thinking about foreign affairs. Hanoi no longer
regarded any country as merely a partner (to cooperate with) or purely an adversary (to
struggle against). This meant that ideology would play a lesser role in deﬁning Vietnam’s
partners and antagonists, while national interest would become a more salient factor in
Hanoi’s calculations. This shift effectively paved the way for cooperation with the United
States in the ﬁeld of security and defence, previously considered quite sensitive topics
in Hanoi. Consequently, in November 2003 Vietnam’s Defence Minister Pham Van Tra
made a historic visit to Washington. Just a week later, the US Navy’s USS Vandegrift
(FFG-48) was permitted to make a landmark visit to Ho Chi Minh City; this was also the
ﬁrst visit of a US Navy vessel to Vietnam since the end of the Vietnam War. Vietnam also
started cooperative programs with the US in the ﬁeld of non-traditional security, such as
counter-terrorism, anti-drug smuggling, de-mining, search and rescue, and disaster
relief.
It was quite clear that Hanoi carefully opted for low-proﬁle and non-combative cooperation with the US to avoid sending the ‘wrong message’ to Beijing. Vietnam assured
China that it had no intention of seeking an alliance with the US to counter China’s rise.
However, Hanoi made it clear to Washington that Vietnam recognized the United States
as a legitimate actor and a key factor in maintaining regional peace and stability. In
other words, what Hanoi really wanted was not so much protection as the steady presence in the region of the United States as a check on China’s behaviour (Burghardt,
2005). In fact, it was not only the US that Vietnam counted on for that job. Between
2001 and 2008, Vietnam also worked to step up security cooperation with Russia, India
and Japan, upgrading relations with those countries to strategic partnership in 2001,
2006 and 2007, respectively (Thayer, 2012). At the same time, it advocated for an
extended version of an East Asia Summit, which included India, Australia and New Zealand, apart from the ASEAN Plus Three countries (US Embassy in Hanoi, 2005b). Perhaps
it was fear of a future in which China dominated the region that prompted Vietnam to

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

213

play a more active role in shaping a state of affairs whereby no single power could dominate the region.
Interestingly, relations between Vietnam and China continued to expand. In 2007, an
important mechanism, a Joint Steering Committee on bilateral relations, was inaugurated. Vietnam engaged extensively with China to complete land-border demarcation
before the end of 2008. In the same year, the countries agreed to designate their relationship as ‘a comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership’ in March 2009, an
upgrade from the ‘strategic partnership’ of June 2008 (Thayer, 2012). In 2009, both sides
agreed to install a hotline for direct communication between senior leaders. However,
the pattern of exchange of high-level visits became noticeably asymmetric. Between
2007 and 2014, top Chinese leaders seldom paid ofﬁcial visits to Hanoi and most of the
high-level exchanges between the countries occurred in Beijing.

Rough seas
For most of the 1990s, the South China Sea problem was just an irritant in the warming
relations between Hanoi and Beijing (Tønnesson, 2003). Tensions at sea arose from time
to time, but were well managed in general. No signiﬁcant clashes occurred between
Vietnam and China, though they exchanged protests against each other’s activities several times every year. As Vietnam integrated into the world economy, Hanoi considered
international law to be in its national interest and gradually adjusted its maritime claims
to conform with the spirit and letter of UNCLOS (Hai, 2015). In 1992, the Vietnamese
were infuriated at China’s assertion of a claim over the Tu Chinh area off the southern
Vietnamese coast, but about 600 nautical miles from Hainan Island (Thayer, 1994b, p.
356). However, Vietnam was committed to resolving disputes through peaceful means
and managing incidents through diplomatic channels. The dilemma facing Vietnam was
that while it was in no way abandoning critical offshore interests, it had no interest in
picking a ﬁght with China.
Consequently, Vietnam consistently pushed for bilateral and multilateral discussions
on the South China Sea disputes. In 1995, Vietnam and China set up a joint working
group at the technical level to discuss marine issues, including sovereignty over offshore
features of the Spratlys and Paracels, and maritime boundaries in the South China Sea
beyond the Gulf of Tonkin. Though the joint working group made no progress, it provided a mechanism to control and defuse tensions when needed. At the same time, in
order to preserve the status quo Vietnam was active in ASEAN–China negotiations on a
code of conduct for the South China Sea aimed at preventing assertive actions and further complications. As mentioned above, in November 2002 ASEAN and China signed
the Declaration on the Conduct of the Parties in the South China, a political statement
that fell short of a binding treaty as had initially been expected. In the end, diplomatic
efforts through bilateral and ASEAN channels yielded no concrete results in resolving
the disputes. It was clear that China did not want to settle its South China Sea disputes
once and for all and the problem remained a permanent headache for decision-makers
in Hanoi.
There is a broad-based consensus in Vietnam that China ultimately wants to monopolize the South China Sea, but whether it can achieve this goal depends on other claimants and powers, most importantly the United States (Quan, 2016). This explains why
the Vietnamese were nervous when the United States became absorbed by the war on
terror, while China became more and more powerful and inﬂuential. Since 2005, the

214

D. T. HAI

Vietnamese have seen signs that China is adopting a more heavy-handed approach
towards Vietnam in the South China Sea (Hai, 2015, pp. 98–99). There has been more
harassment and an increase in seizures of Vietnamese ﬁshing boats and ﬁshermen. The
most serious incident happened on 8 January 2005 when the Chinese coast guard
opened ﬁre on Vietnamese ﬁshing vessels in the Gulf of Tonkin, even though these vessels were ﬁshing in the common ﬁshing area, killing nine Vietnamese ﬁshermen (US
Embassy in Hanoi, 2005a). This atrocity perpetrated by Chinese law enforcement forces
shocked Vietnamese ofﬁcialdom, prompting Hanoi to make strong public protests.
Since 2006, relations between Vietnam and China have also been strained because
the latter stepped up its interference in the former’s hydrocarbon exploration and development activities in the South China Sea. It was reported that between 2006 and 2007
China issued some 18 protests against Vietnam’s joint projects with international oil
consortiums, including such big names as KNOC (Korea), Pogo, Chevron (US), BP, Pearl
Energy, Premier Oil (UK), Gazprom (Russia), Santos (Australia), Idemitsu (Japan) and CGG
Veritas (France) (Fravel, 2011, p. 302). This time the Chinese were more determined to
block Vietnam’s activities by applying signiﬁcant pressures on international oil ﬁrms to
force them to halt their projects with Vietnam. For example, in August 2007, China’s
political councillor in the Chinese Embassy in the United States, Jia Xiudong, summoned
Chevron executives to Washington and demanded a halt to the company’s project in
Block 122 (US Embassy in Hanoi, 2007b). BP representatives also reported Chinese warnings about its gas pipeline project off Vietnam’s southern province of Ba Ria, Vung Tau.
China’s strategy worked this time, as even big oil companies such as BP, Chevron and
Santos feared indemnities to their stakes in China (US Embassy in Hanoi, 2009). It was
later revealed that Chinese vessels even tried to intimidate and drive away Vietnamese
exploration vessels by colliding with and ramming them (Bentley, 2014).
As China became more assertive and ﬂexed its muscles, the South China Sea problem
was no longer an irritant, but became a major security concern for Vietnam. Policy-makers in Hanoi were apparently frustrated with China’s all-inclusive claims and arbitrary
protests, as many blocks on exploration were too close to Vietnamese shores and too
far from the Chinese coast to be virtually ‘beyond dispute’ (US Embassy in Hanoi,
2007a). It should be noted that most of the diplomatic wrangles between Vietnam and
China over oil activities were carried out behind the scenes, making it very difﬁcult for
Hanoi to present its case at ASEAN forums and to the international public. Consequently,
bureaucrats in Hanoi approached US diplomats and ofﬁcials to voice their concerns
about China’s assertiveness and asked for support in persuading US oil ﬁrms to continue
to work with Vietnam in deﬁance of China’s threats (US Embassy in Hanoi, 2007a). Interestingly, Vietnamese ofﬁcials argued that China’s actions were in fact a destabilizing factor and a direct challenge to the US presence in the region.
Since 2009, the South China Sea has no longer been just a problem for Vietnam; it
has emerged as a regional ﬂashpoint. What really drew international attention to this
maritime region was that China openly challenged the current maritime order. In March
2009, Chinese vessels harassed the naval ship USS Impeccable as it conducted surveillance in the vicinity of Hainan Island (Odom, 2010). This confrontation indicated that
China no longer recognized US maritime primacy based on the concept of freedom of
navigation. In May, China protested against Vietnam’s and Malaysia’s submissions to the
United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelves and ofﬁcially formalized the nine-dash-line claim, which had no basis in UNCLOS. The nine-dash line,
which originally had 11 dashes, was drawn in 1933 and published in 1948 by the then

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

215

Republic of China. However, it was never mentioned in ofﬁcial documents of the People’s Republic of China until 2009. With this map attached to the notes verbales to the
United Nations, Beijing clearly showed that UNCLOS was not the only basis for its maritime claims in the South China Sea (Beckman & Davenport, 2010). During the ASEAN
Regional Forum in Hanoi in July 2010, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton declared that
the United States had national interests in the South China Sea, prompting ﬁerce rebuttals from Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi (Pomfret, 2010).
China then tried to show it was the real master of the East Asian seas by sending its
overwhelming ﬂeets of ﬁshing and maritime law enforcement vessels, backed by People’s Liberation Army warships, to exercise de facto control over the waters. Chinese vessels cut cables of Vietnamese survey ships on at least on two occasions in 2011, harassed
a Philippines survey vessel near the Reed Bank, imposed blocks over the Scarborough
Shoal and Second Thomas Shoal claimed by the Philippines, and in May 2014 sent the
giant oil rig Haiyang Shiyou 981, with a cordon of ships to protect it, to waters Vietnam
claimed as its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Chinese ﬁshing vessels protected by Chinese coast guards went further south to ﬁsh illegally in the EEZ of Indonesia and of
Malaysia. Chinese vessels were reportedly not hesitant to engage in violent acts such as
ramming to suppress resistance by vessels from other countries. In addition to ﬂexing
its physical muscles, China used economic leverage to impose its will on its challengers.
In September 2010, amid tensions over the Japanese seizure of the captain of a Chinese
ﬁshing boat, Beijing imposed a ban on rare earth exports to Japan (Bradsher, 2010). In
April 2012, China initiated restrictions on banana imports from the Philippines due to
the confrontation between Manila and Beijing over the Scarborough Shoal (Higgins,
2012).
From the Vietnamese perspective, China is essentially an opportunist revisionist
nation harbouring intentions of taking control of the South China Sea at the expense of
the status quo that Vietnam prefers. Former Foreign Minister Vu Khoan expressed suspicion of China’s intentions, saying ‘they [Chinese] talk of friendship, while ﬁnding ways to
encroach upon our territories’ (Binh, 2016). Beyond that, Vietnamese analysts also
believe that Beijing has a bigger goal: to coerce other countries into its own sphere of
inﬂuence and build a new regional order centred on Chinese power. Beijing thus took
advantage of the US being distracted by the war on terror and perceived the US as
being in decline to expand its inﬂuence. Also, the Chinese strategy was to ‘squeeze the
^ng], that means demanding more from
soft and hand off the hard’ [mềm nắn rắn buo
the appeaser while giving up on the hardliner. In this vein, China deliberately utilized
civilians as covert forces to provoke other countries to be impatient and ﬁre the ﬁrst
shot, so that China would have an excuse to resort to force. Beijing is still not ready to
initiate a large-scale conﬂict to assert its preponderance.
For Hanoi, the key is to send the ‘right messages’ to Beijing, showing its unbroken
resolve to resist unreasonable claims and actions while leaving China no excuse to use
force in a legitimate way. On the one hand, Hanoi has patiently directed tensions and
rows through diplomatic channels. On the other hand, Vietnam has stood ﬁrm against
China’s strategy, staunchly holding the line while resisting any Chinese attempts to
encroach and rallying international pressure to force China to fall back. This was manifested clearly in the Haiyang Shiyou 981 crisis in mid-2014. Vietnam may feel insecure in
the face of a rising China, but it has deﬁnitely not been helpless. Hanoi has invested signiﬁcant resources to develop a capable deterrent, including land-based coastal defence
systems, 6 Kilo-class submarines, Gepard frigates and fast-attack crafts, and advanced

216

D. T. HAI

Sukhoi ﬁghters (Hiep, 2013, pp. 353–356). These platforms have given Vietnam multiple
options for any contingency in which the islands under its control are under attack. It
has gradually built up a strong coast guard and ﬁshery administration ﬂeet, which can
be quickly deployed to handle incidents at sea and stand up to perceived violations by
Chinese law enforcement vessels.
Equally importantly, Hanoi has gradually reduced its vulnerability to Chinese political
and economic power through diversiﬁcation of partners, supplies and markets. Over the
last 10 years, Vietnam has established 15 strategic partnerships and 10 comprehensive
partnerships with major countries that are considered critical to Vietnam’s security and
development. This network of partnerships has apparently provided Vietnam with
ample breathing space in the face of an assertive China, helping it foster cooperation,
communicate concerns and mobilize support when needed. In the same period, Vietnam has become a champion of economic liberalization. Hanoi has actively negotiated
and concluded a range of ASEAN-centred free trade agreements (with China, South
Korea, India, Australia and New Zealand); bilateral free trade agreements with Japan,
Chile and South Korea; free trade agreements with the European Union and the Eurasian
Economic Union; and the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership. Currently, Vietnam is a party to
negotiations on the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. All these are indicative of Vietnam’s vigorous attempts to strengthen its autonomy and meet the challenge
of China through ASEAN multilateralism, strengthened partnerships with major powers
and integration with the world economy.
Though tensions simmer, Vietnam has spared no effort to make progress in its relations with China. Hanoi has clearly avoided ‘tit for tat’ reactions and has focused on
managing and defusing tensions in the South China Sea through bilateral dialogue and
ASEAN meetings. A case in point is that, during the war of words prompted by a cablecutting incident involving Chinese vessels in June 2011, Hanoi sent an envoy to Beijing
to push for easing tension and urge accelerated negotiations on an agreement on basic
principles guiding the settlement of maritime issues. The agreement was signed in October 2011, opening the way for three specialized working groups on delimitation in the
area beyond the Gulf of Tonkin, joint development in this area and maritime cooperation on less sensitive issues such as environmental protection, search and rescue, disaster relief and prevention. As mentioned earlier, during the Haying Shiyou 981 oil rig
crisis in mid-2014, Vietnam persistently called on China to discuss management of the
incident and after China withdrew the oil rig Hanoi moved to reconcile with Beijing.
Between 2012 and 2015, Vietnam and China agreed to install three more hotlines
between their foreign ministries, ﬁshery agencies and defence ministries. Remarkably,
maritime tensions have not estranged Vietnam from China, but have provided incentives for Hanoi to engage more extensively with Beijing. According to statistics put out
by China, between 2011 and 2015 trade volume between Vietnam and China more than
doubled, from US$40 billion to US$96 billion, despite acute strains over the South China
Sea (Changwen, 2016). Vietnam was expected to eclipse Malaysia as China’s largest
ASEAN trading partner from 2016.

Conclusion
Vietnam’s view of China is nuanced and complex, having been shaped by geopolitical
realities, strategic cultures established throughout the course of history and the relationship between the two countries. Traditionally, the Vietnamese viewed a rising China not

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

217

in terms of an imminent threat, but as a natural phenomenon, which could be damaging
at times but could be harnessed to serve their national interest. The basic tenet of Vietnam’s strategic culture was to defer to China’s nuanced regional status while resisting its
excessive claims and making full use of interactions in order to nourish Vietnam. While
this tradition still matters, Vietnam’s current perception of China has also been inﬂuenced
by ideological afﬁnity and the breadth and depth of the bilateral relationship. Accordingly,
since normalization Vietnam has largely considered China as a traditional and ideological
partner, hoping that the latter would help the former defend communist rule in Hanoi. As
China rose economically and militarily to become a dominant power on its doorstep, Vietnam worked to strengthen ASEAN-led multilateral arrangements and facilitate other
powers’ engagement in regional affairs to dilute China’s inﬂuence. Since 2009, as China
has acted like an opportunist expansionist, Vietnam has shown its resolve to resist any
Chinese encroachment. On the one hand, Hanoi has bolstered its self-defence capabilities
and on the other hand it has further increased its international networks to buffer China’s
assertiveness. However, this has not resulted in Vietnam backing off from engaging with
China. Though tensions in the South China Sea have run high for a long while, most of
the dialogue and cooperative mechanisms between Hanoi and Beijing have been maintained. Hanoi has made every effort to quarantine the South China Sea from any spillover that would affect their overall bilateral relations and to conduct its external affairs so
as to create conditions that make it hard for China to resort to armed conﬂict. At the
same time, Vietnam has continued to engage with China to increase the depth and
breadth of their bilateral relationship. The case of Vietnam indicates that riding the Chinese tide can be likened to the art of Judo, which requires toughness, ﬂexibility and
adroitness if one is to transform a foe’s strength into one’s own advantage.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank David Goodman of Xi’an Jiotong-Liverpool University and Shigeto Sonoda
of the University of Tokyo for arranging the workshop where an earlier version of this article was presented. Thanks are also due to anonymous proofreaders who helped improve the quality of the article.

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Do Thanh Hai is a Senior Fellow at the Bien Dong Institute for Maritime Studies of the Diplomatic Academy of Vietnam (DAV). His previous positions include vacation scholar at the University of New South
Wales at the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra and Deputy Director of the Centre for Political and Security Studies of the DAV’s Institute for Foreign Policy and Strategic Studies in Hanoi. He
obtained his doctorate from the Australian National University. He is the author of the book titled Vietnam and the South China Sea: Politics, Security and Legality and published by Routledge in 2017.

References
Beckman, R., & Davenport, T. (2011). Cac de trinh va Yeu sach tai Bien Dong duoc dua len Uy ban Gioi han
Them luc dia CLCS [CLCS submissions and claims in the South China Sea]. In D. D. Quy (Ed.), Bien

218

D. T. HAI

Dong: Huong toi mot khu vuc hoa binh, an ninh va hop tac [The South China Sea: Toward a Region of
Peace, Security and Cooperation], 215–242. Hanoi: The Gioi Publisher.
Bentley, S. (2014, February 12). Vietnam and China: A dangerous incident. The Diplomat [Online].
Retrieved from http://thediplomat.com/2014/02/vietnam-and-china-a-dangerous-incident [Accessed
10 September 2017].
Binh, L. T. (2016, May 10). Ong Vu Khoan: My se khong de Trung Quoc muon lam gi thi lam [Vu Khoan:
The US would not give China free hand] Viet Times. [Online]. Retrieved from http://viettimes.vn/ongvu-khoan-my-se-khong-de-trung-quoc-muon-lam-gi-thi-lam-54997.html [Accessed 12 December
2016].
Bradsher, K. (2010). Amid tension, China blocks vital exports to Japan. The New York Times [Online].
Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/23/business/global/23rare.html [Accessed 30
August 2016].
Breckon, L. (2004). China-Southeast Asian relations: A new strategic partnership is declared. CSIS Comparative Connections [Online], 5. Retrieved from http://csis.org/ﬁles/media/csis/pubs/0304qchina_seasia.
pdf [Accessed 25 May 2015].
Burghardt, R. (2005). US-Vietnam: Discreet friendship under China’s shadow. YaleGlobal [Online].
Retrieved from http://yaleglobal.yale.edu/content/us-vietnam-discreet-friendship-under-china%E2%
80%99s-shadow [Accessed 12 August 2013].
Chan, Y. W. (2013). Vietnamese-Chinese relationships at the borderland: Trade, tourism and cultural politics.
New York, NY: Routledge.
Changwen, X. (2016). Vietnam set to become China’s largest ASEAN trading partner. China Report ASEAN
[Online]. Retrieved from https://chinareportasean.wordpress.com/2016/10/14/vietnam-set-to-becomechinas-largest-asean-trading-partner/ [Accessed 31 December 2016].
Co, T. Q. (2003). Hoi uc va Suy nghi [Memoir and Reﬂection]. Retrieved from http://tailieu.vn/doc/hoi-ucva-suy-nghi-tran-quang-co-560316.html [Accessed 10 September 2017].
Dosch, J. (2006). Vietnam’s ASEAN membership revisited: Golden opportunity or golden cage? Contemporary Southeast Asia, 28 (2), 234–258.
Fravel, T. (2011). China’s strategy in the South China Sea. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 33(3), 292–319.
Goh, C. T. (2005, June 9). Constructing a new East Asia. Address at Asia Society Conference.
Goodman, S. G. D., (2017). Australia and the China threat: Managing ambiguity. The Paciﬁc Review , 30 (5),
769–782.
Hai, D. T. (2015). Vietnam’s evolving claims. In B. Leszek & C. B. Roberts (Eds.), The South China Sea maritime dispute: Political, legal and regional perspectives , (pp. 83–110). Abingdon: Routledge.
Hai, D. T., & Kim, H. (2017). Vietnamese perception of the power transition. In D. Walton & E. Kavalski
(Eds.), Power transition in Asia, (pp. 192–206). London: Routledge.
Halloran, R. (1998, January 27). Chinas’ decisive role in the Asian ﬁnancial crisis. Global Beat Issue Brief, 24.
[Online]. Retrieved from https://www.bu.edu/globalbeat/pubs/ib24.html [Accessed 9 September
2017]
Hewison, K. (2017). Thailand: An old relationship renewed. The Paciﬁc Review. doi:10.1080/
09512748.2017.1357653
Hiep, L. (2013). Vietnam’s Hedging strategy against China since normalisation. Contemporary Southeast
Asia, 35(3), 333–368.
Higgins, A. (2012). The Philippines, banana growers feel effect of South China Sea dispute. The Washington Post [Online]. Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_paciﬁc/in-philippinesbanana-growers-feel-effect-of-south-china-sea-dispute/2012/06/10/gJQA47WVTV_story.html?utm_
term=.3a6ad4080b3b [Accessed 31 December 2016].
Huan, V. D. (2002). Ngoai giao Viet Nam hien dai, vi su nghiep Doi Moi [Modern Vietnamese Diplomacy in
support of Doi Moi]. Hanoi: Institute for International Relations Publishing House.
Kurlantizick, J. (2006). China’s charm offensive in Southeast Asia. Current History,, 105(692), 270–276.
Ly, D. X. (2013). Qua trinh doi moi duong loi doi ngoai va hoi nhap quoc te cua Viet Nam [Innovating Vietnam’s foreign policy and international integration]. Hanoi: Vietnam National University Press.
Marr, D. G. (1981). Sino-Vietnamese relations. The Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, 6, 45–64
Ninh, V. V. (2011). Tuong Viet Nam ke chuyen binh thuong hoa quan he voi Trung Quoc [Vietnamese
General Recalling normalization of relations with China]. Vietnamnet [Online]. Retrieved from http://
tuanvietnam.vietnamnet.vn/2011-12-20-tuong-viet-nam-ke-chuyen-binh-thuong-hoa-quan-he-voitrung-quoc [Accessed 24 October 2012].

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

219

Odom, J. G. (2010). The true “lies’ of the impeccable incident: What really happened, how disregarded
international law, and why every nation (outside of China) should be concerned. Michigan State Journal of international Law, 18, 1–41.
Pomfret, J. (2010, July 30). U.S. takes a tougher tone with China. The Washington Post. Retrieved from:
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/07/29/AR2010072906416.html
[Accessed 9 September 2017].
Quan, N. H. (2016). Doc chiem Bien Dong cua Trung Quoc va Doi sach cua ASEAN [China’s attempt to
monopolise the South China Sea and ASEAN’s responses]. Nghien cuu Bien Dong [Online]. Retrieved
from http://nghiencuubiendong.vn/nghien-cuu-vietnam/5928-muc-do-doc-chiem-bien-dong-va-doisach-cua-asean [Accessed 30 September 2016].
Ramses, A., & Thao, N. H. (2005). The management of Vietnam’s border disputes: What impact on its sovereignty and regional integration? Contemporary Southeast Asia, 27 (3), 429–452.
Saunders, P. C. (2016). China’s role in Asia: Attractive or assertive. In D. Shambaugh (Ed.), China Reader: Rising Power, (pp. 368–383). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spegele, B., & Khanh, V. T. (2014, August 28). China, Vietnam try to repair ties after South China Sea dispute. The Wall Street Journal. [Online]. Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-vietnamtry-to-repair-ties-after-oil-rig-dispute-in-south-china-sea-1409200670 [Accessed 9 September 2017].
Storey, I. C. (2008). Conﬂict in the South China Sea: China’s relations with Vietnam and the Philippines. The
Asia-Paciﬁc Journal: Japan Focus, 6, 1–9.
Storey, I. C. (2011). ASEAN and the rise of China: The search for security. New York, NY: Routledge.
Thayer, C. A. (1994a). Sino-Vietnamese relations: The interplay of ideology and national interest. Asian Survey, 34, 15 pages.
Thayer, C. A. (1994b). Vietnam: Coping with China. Southeast Asian Affairs, 21, 351–367.
Thayer, C. A. (2002). Vietnamese perspectives of the “China threat.” In I. Storey & H. Yee (Eds.), The China
threat: Perceptions, myths and reality, (pp. 270–292). London: Routledge.
Thayer, C. A. (2008). Upholding state sovereignty through global integration: Remaking of Vietnamese
national security policy. Paper presented at the Workshop on Vietnam, East Asia and Beyond, Hong
Kong.
Thayer, C. A. (2012). Vietnam on the road to global integration: Forging strategic partnership through international security cooperation. Paper presented at the Fourth International Vietnam Studies Conference, Hanoi.
Thuy, H. (2014). Thu tuong: ‘Quan he Viet Nam-Trung Quoc la vua hop tac vua dau tranh [Prime Minister:
’Vietnam-China relations mixed of cooperation and struggle’]. Vnexpress [Online]. Retrieved from
http://vnexpress.net/tin-tuc/thoi-su/thu-tuong-quan-he-viet-nam-trung-quoc-la-vua-hop-tac-vuadau-tranh-3109351.html [Accessed 4 January 2017].
Tønnesson, S. (2003). Sino-Vietnamese rapprochement and the South China sea irritant. Security Dialogue,
34, 55–70.
Us Embassy in Hanoi. (2003). Following up on DPM Khoan Visit with VFM Bang. Cable (released by Wikileaks) [Online]. Retrieved from http://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/03HANOI3351_a.html [Accessed
3 December 2013].
Us Embassy in Hanoi. (2004). Final thoughts from Hanoi. Cable (released by Wikileaks) [Online]. Retrieved
from http://wikileaks.org/cable/2004/09/04HANOI2438.html [Accessed 12 August 2013].
Us Embassy in Hanoi. (2005a). Chinese missteps in Vietnam are a U.S. opportunity. Cable (released by Wikileaks) [Online]. Retrieved from http://wikileaks.org/cable/2005/01/05HANOI247.html [Accessed 12
August 2013].
Us Embassy in Hanoi. (2005b). Vietnam unenthusiastic about East Asia summit. Cable (released by Wikileaks) [Online]. Retrieved from http://wikileaks.org/cable/2005/01/05HANOI42.html [Accessed 13
August].
Us Embassy in Hanoi. (2007a). Foreign ministry summons ambassador to discuss Sino-Vietnam South
China sea dispute. Cable (released by Wikileaks) [Online]. Retrieved from http://wikileaks.org/cable/
2007/09/07HANOI1623.html [Accessed 14 August 2013].
Us Embassy in Hanoi. (2007b). Sino-Vietnam territorial dispute entangles multiple multinational energy
ﬁrms. Cable (released by Wikileaks) [Online]. Retrieved from http://wikileaks.org/cable/2007/09/
07HANOI1599.html [Accessed 14 August 2013].
Us Embassy in Hanoi. (2009). 2008 Recap of the Sino-Vietnam South China Sea territorial dispute. Cable
(released by Wikileaks) [Online]. Retrieved from https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/09HANOI52_a.
html [Accessed 20 July 2014].

220

D. T. HAI

Walt, S. M. (1987). The origins of alliances. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Womack, B. (2006). China and Vietnam: The politics of asymmetry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yong, O. K. (2005). Securing a win-win partnership for ASEAN and China. In S. Swee-Hock, S. Lijun, & C. K.
Wah (Eds.), ASEAN-China relations: Realities and prospect, (pp. 19–26). Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies.

