Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245
___
DOI 10.2478/
CIRR-2022-0013
___
UDC 327 (4-6 EU:
73:55)

Competitive Strategy of India and China in
Southeast Asia and Its Impact on the Region
Nguyen Anh Chuong

Faculty of History, College of Education, Vinh University, Vietnam
Email: chuongna@vinhuni.edu.vn

* Tran Xuan Hiep
Institute of Socio-Economic Research, Duy Tan University, Vietnam
Email: tranxuanhiep@dtu.edu.vn
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5236-993X

Nguyen Tuan Binh

Faculty of History, University of Education, Hue University, Vietnam
Email: nguyentuanbinh@hueuni.edu.vn

Nguyen Hoang Hue

Faculty of Management Science, Thu Dau Mot University, Vietnam
Email: huenh@tdmu.edu.vn

Nguyen Thi Phuong Thao

Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, Duy Tan University, Vietnam
Email: nguyentphuongthao@dtu.edu.vn

225

Abstract
Key words:
Southeast Asia,
ASEAN, China,
India, Strategy

Due to Southeast Asia's geopolitical, economic, and commercial significance,
world powers have focused on this region. China and India, the two
neighboring nations of Southeast Asia, both with aspirations to become the
dominating force in the Indo-Pacific region, have been employing all means
to draw Southeast Asia into their sphere of influence. Controlling Southeast
Asia would confer immense strategic gains on both nations. The goal of this
study is to assess the policy of India and China toward Southeast Asia utilizing
pertinent data and documents, official comments from the respective
governments, and the research of Vietnamese and foreign researchers. The
analysis reveals that India and China seek benefits by promoting close ties
with Southeast Asia, but their methods for achieving this objective are
distinct. Suppose India employs flexible diplomatic measures to develop its
good relations with Southeast Asia. In that case, China has the upper hand
when pursuing a diplomatic strategy that is both flexible and assertive to
advance its objectives, particularly in East Sea-related problems. This
provides Southeast Asia/ASEAN with difficult choices and decisions about
India and China to balance their respective interests and, more significantly,
to maintain ASEAN's central position in regional and international concerns.

Introduction
In recent years, the world and the region have witnessed the substantial
rise of both India and China. As neighboring countries that share a border
of about 4,056 km and are the largest economies of the Indo-Pacific region,
the fierce competition between these two powers will significantly impact
the region's general situation. China's robust and substantial rise has
dramatically changed the regional and world power structure.
As the globe prepares to enter the third decade of the 21st century, the
geopolitical competition between China and India, the two Asian
superpowers, intensifies. According to Delatolla et al. (2021), "a significant
aspect in China's perspective is the notion of becoming the 'big man,' the
solitary growing power, while from the Indian perspective, this notion is
recognized and respected by the world community". China and India have
devised grand regional and global plans to attain their overall strategic
objectives. As for the region of Southeast Asia, which holds an important
strategic position, China and India have both expanded their close ties,
seeking ways to incorporate this region into their calculations in a more
substantial manner. China and India have territorial conflicts, borders, and
global ambitions today. Both are significant markets with a strong interest
in safe, inexpensive trade routes and energy security. In addition, China
and India have a long-standing bilateral connection, particularly in
commerce and investment cooperation. However, prolonged border
clashes, disputes, and economic and security concerns compel these two
neighbors to adopt a strategic approach to rivalry instead of more
collaboration. In terms of the nature of their relationship, India and China
are ideologically opposed, in conflict over strategic ambitions and
226

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

objectives, do not trust each other but must cooperate to some extent, have
limited access to each other, and head-to-head competition dominates the
bilateral relationship. In terms of the strategic interests of the two
countries, China employs a competitive strategy to prevent a powerful
India and makes every effort to stifle India's development and prevent the
expansion of cooperation between India and other countries in the region,
particularly the close economic, political, security, and defense ties
between the United States, Japan, India, and Australia. In the meantime,
India considers China as the primary danger to its security and prosperity.
India, which has always been in a weak position relative to China, has never
relaxed its guard, mistrusted China, and dealt passively with it. In a sense,
the Indo-China relationship in Southeast Asia is a "mirror" of the more
significant strategic relationship between these two nations, incorporating
features of cooperation, coexistence, and competition.

Literature Review
With its important geo-strategic location, Southeast Asia has become one
of its power competition centers. This topic has become of interest to
Vietnamese and foreign historians. Strategic competition between India
and China in Southeast Asia is a new issue that has been studied in Vietnam
and is only mentioned in general in the literature on the relations between
India or China with South East Asian countries or in books specifically on
Southeast Asian history Nguyen and Truong (2022); Thu (2012); Vinh
(2020); Vinh, Hiep, and Hung (2021); Vo (2017). Besides, since
independence until now, India and China have constantly been competing
for influence in Southeast Asia, a strategically crucial for countries' security
and development. However, the foreign policies of India and China since
independence have only been mentioned in several general works on each
country's foreign policy and are still somewhat sketchy Daly and Vo
(2013); Dang, Pham, Bui, and Van Le (2020); Eberstadt (2002); Le (2019);
E.-Y. Lee and Park (2019). In addition, the East Sea issue in the policy of
China and India has recently become the focus of research by Vietnamese
scholars (Singh, 2005; Vinh et al., 2021; Vo, 2017).
If Vietnam's study on the competition between China and India in general,
and between the two countries in Southeast Asia in particular, is still highly
restricted. In contrast, this subject is of significant interest to numerous
researchers in other nations. Numerous studies on the foreign policy of
India or China address this problem. Brewster (2010); Das (2018); Li
(2020); Pal (2016); Xavier et al. (2020). Other publications provide an
overview of India-ASEAN and China-ASEAN ties in the sectors of
cooperation, emphasizing the impact of India and China on the security
situation and the politics and economy of Southeast Asia.(Bello, 2010);
Hong (2007); Keling, Shuib, and Ajis (2009); Pant and Deb (2017); Sinha
(2009) Meanwhile, the relations between India and China are also said
quite a lot Jain (2004); Mansingh (1994) show that these powers have their
own calculations when implementing foreign policies in the new period.
Moreover, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
227

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

increasingly plays a prominent role in regional concerns and international
relations, with India and China paying increased attention to the
organization due to its expansion.(Anwar, 2020; Harnandez; C. Lee &
Fukunaga, 2014; Principles, 2012; Secretariat, 2007; Y. Wang, 2008).
However, the concerns connected to this paper's topic described in the
abovementioned studies are still general and incomplete. With this
method, foreign scholars primarily focus on the evolution of relations
between India, China, and ASEAN in general or bilateral interactions in
several specific periods, highlighting Southeast Asia's vital signs in the
foreign policies of India and China. Since the two nations' independence,
the problem of competition between India and China in Southeast Asia has
been discussed in each work in a hazy, imprecise, and disorganized
manner. Nonetheless, it is essential to rely on the results of Vietnamese and
international scholars, which provide a foundation for processing the
research content of this study.
Southeast Asia in India's Competitive Strategy
In recent times, India has faced a massive challenge from the increasing
influence of China, primarily through large infrastructure loans under the
framework of the Belt and Road Initiative. BRI) for New Delhi's neighbors
in South Asia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Maldives, and Nepal. India also expressed
concern about China's increased naval presence in the Indian Ocean region
Frankel (2011); Hong (2013). In addition, India and China now have many
issues of territorial disagreements that have persisted in the past. Despite
signing the "Joint Statement on Principles of Comprehensive China-India
Relations and Cooperation" and declaring that they do not view each other
as enemies or threats, they will build and develop a long-term partnership,
aiming to create a long-term partnership while maintaining the policy of
friendly neighborliness. However, they have not yet been able to resolve
the border issue to their satisfaction. Due to mutual suspicion, any action
by either nation in the border areas, including infrastructure construction,
development, and usage of raw materials, will generate significant
challenges for Indo-China bilateral relations in particular and regional
peace and stability in general (Pradhan, 2021).
In contrast, India's rapid economic expansion renders it susceptible to
Chinese influence. India has a greater motivation to compete with China in
South Asia and Southeast Asia, where India's national interests are
intertwined with China's, given that the United States views India as a
regional superpower and a partner in its efforts to restrain Beijing. To
implement the "Look East" policy, India also actively participates in
cooperation mechanisms in the region, especially with Southeast Asia,
which India has long identified as a "common civilization" and "attached to
the destiny" of India. Therefore, over the past two decades, India has
created many cooperation mechanisms with Southeast Asia at diverse
levels, such as the India-ASEAN Summit, the ASEAN-India Joint Declaration
on cooperation in counter-terrorism, the General Agreement on
228

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between India and ASEAN, India's
participation in the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, the
India-ASEAN Vision and more.
In addition, the significant developments in the ASEAN-China strategic
alliance prompted India to be more active in implementing the "Look East"
strategy, which eventually evolved into the "Act East" policy, with the
primary objective of bolstering cooperative relations with ASEAN and AsiaPacific nations. India shares the concerns of other major countries
regarding China's expanding influence in this region. India could lose its
interests in Southeast Asia if it does not increase its presence there, but
China could use Southeast Asia as a springboard to rule India and intervene
profoundly in South Asia, India's traditional sphere of influence. The official
use of the term "Look East Policy" began in the 1995-1996 Annual Report
of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs.
However, it was not until the 2006-2007 annual report that India's
Ministry of Foreign Affairs affirmed that the "Look East Policy" was born in
1992, associated with the event that India became a partial dialogue
partner of ASEAN. The "Look East" policy aims to turn India into an
economic and military power in Asia and the world. In his speech to the
ASEAN Business Advisory Council on December 12, 2005, Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh stated that India's "Look East" policy is not simply a
foreign economic policy but also a shift in India's global perspective and its
role in the emerging global economy. "I have always viewed India's destiny
to be intertwined with these countries, especially Southeast Asia, due to its
outreach to its civilized neighbors in Southeast and East Asia." (Singh,
2005).
In the first two decades of the twenty-first century, India's key foreign
policy priority is to increase its influence in Asia. This policy was developed
more favorably when the Congress Party returned to power in May 2004,
replacing the role of Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee's People's Party
(1998 - 2004). With China's increasing presence, India is becoming more
and more pragmatic by developing relations with major powers such as the
US, Russia, and Japan and actively implementing the "Act East" policy. This
policy has found a positive resonance from the US policy of "Asia
rebalancing" as well as Japan's "return to Asia" policy or Russia's "Eurasian
balance," arousing great potential for cooperation between the largest
country in South Asia and other powers. In particular, the closer
relationship between India and the US stems from the similarities in the
foreign policies of these two countries, with the common goal of countering
China's growing influence. To strengthen its presence in Southeast Asia,
India has no better way than to enhance ties with ASEAN, the standard
regional cooperation organization of all Southeast Asian nations. At the end
of 2003, India signed a Framework Agreement with ASEAN to build a Free
Trade Zone between the two sides in 2011.

229

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

The ASEAN - India Free Trade Agreement was signed on August 7, 2008,
after the efforts of both parties. The agreement's implementation has
resulted in a significant increase in trade between the two parties. The
value of India-ASEAN commerce reached $79.3 billion in 2011-2012,
representing 30.42 percent of the overall value of trade between India and
the Asia-Pacific region Daly and Vo (2013). ASEAN's general merchandise
trade with India climbed from US$10 billion in 2000 to US$58.5 billion in
2015, a rate of growth of 13 percent per year, which was significantly
greater than ASEAN's total trade growth of 8 percent. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) flows from India into ASEAN ranged between $1.9 billion
and $6.6 billion Athukorala (2009). In 2018, bilateral trade volume reached
80,8 billion USD, and FDI from India to ASEAN nations reached USD 1.7
billion. In 2015, India was ASEAN's sixth-largest trading partner and
eighth-largest country in foreign direct investment.
It can be seen that the relationship with India acts as a catalyst and a
driving force for ASEAN's economic growth. In a world that is drawing
closer together under globalization and regionalization, the relationship
between India and ASEAN will be challenging to separate. ASEAN needs
India and vice versa. During the 35th ASEAN Summit in Bangkok, Thailand,
on November 3, 2019, ASEAN leaders welcomed India's implementation of
the Act East Policy L. Lee (2015), actively supporting ASEAN's central role
and efforts in regional integration and community building. Prime Minister
Narendra Modi affirmed India's strong commitment to ASEAN and
emphasized that ASEAN is at the heart of India's Act East Policy and IndoPacific Vision, actively supporting the relationship between the two
countries. ASEAN Points on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP) (Agastia, 2020).
Regarding the importance of this relationship, Indian Secretary of State
Anil Wadhwa pointed out: "Strengthening connectivity with Asian
neighbors is one of our strategic priorities, turning ASEAN into a bridge
with wider Asia-Pacific region. Increasing connectivity brings many
benefits to all countries in the region. In particular, connectivity holds the
potential to bring significant positive developments to our Northeast
region" (Spry, 2019). ASEAN and India have also intensified their
collaboration in politics- security. India has joined a range of regional
cooperation procedures established by ASEAN to stress its importance.
India joined the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) in 1996; in 1997, India
became an ASEAN conversation partner. The first India-ASEAN summit
was conducted in 2002. Since that summit, the ASEAN + 1 process with
India has been formally created. India signed the TAC in 2004 and
participated in the East Asia Summit process, which was founded in
December 2005 in Kuala Lumpur. India has made significant contributions
to the establishment of this forum (Downey et al., 2017).
Southeast Asia is the "heart" and "central pole" of India's "Look East"
policy, according to the Narendra Modi government (Ministry of External
Affairs, Government of India, 2017). In the Indo-Pacific strategy of New

230

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Delhi, Southeast Asia continues to play a vital role. Moreover, the emphasis
on ASEAN centrality enables India to pursue its goal of an open, accessible,
and inclusive Indo-Pacific, displaying the independence of New Delhi's
foreign policy. At the same time, India is anticipated to profit more from
expanding economic connections with Southeast Asia, particularly the
expansion of bilateral trade and investment exchanges. The development
in connectedness between ASEAN and India is also reflected on the political
and security fronts by strengthening defense collaboration between New
Delhi and Singapore and oil and gas cooperation in the East Sea with
Vietnam.
In diplomacy, Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited most ASEAN nations
except Cambodia and Brunei and invited all ASEAN leaders to attend
India's annual independence celebrations in January 2018. Limaye (2016).
The preceding acts highlight the significance of ASEAN for India's IndoPacific strategy in particular and foreign policy in general. It also
demonstrates New Delhi's willingness to aid ASEAN politically to balance
relations with China's expansion in the area. It should be highlighted again
that expanding relationships with ASEAN helps India maintain a balance in
its dealings with other powers. In particular, in the face of China's power
expansion, especially China's East Sea strategy, India is concerned about
China's growing influence that may threaten India's maritime security in
the region. Fearing that China's expanding influence from the "South China
Sea" pearl will spread to the Indian Ocean, India has increased its exercise
activities with the navies of countries such as Singapore, Japan, the
Philippines, and South Korea.
The convergence points of India's "Look East" policy and China's
"Southward" policy in the South China Sea. Consequently, the contradiction
between India and China about the maintenance of strategic influence is
also readily apparent. If China can control the South China Sea, it will
undoubtedly turn its attention to the Indian Ocean. Notably, in 2005, when
the search for Chinese presence in the Indian Ocean was highlighted by the
grand memorial ceremony for Zheng, He, the Ming Dynasty explorer who
frequented the waters between China and Indonesia, Sri Lanka, the Persian
Gulf, and the Horn of Africa in the early fifteenth century. This
demonstrates China's assertion that these waterways remain within its
area of influence. Therefore, more than ever, India understands that
deepening and improving relations with Southeast Asia through arms
trade and building maritime cooperation capacity between India and
ASEAN will be vital to maintaining the good relations between the two
sides, and it will also boost the spirit of India is competing equally with
China in this region.
Amid the complicated context of multi-dimensional international relations,
and fierce competition among regional powers, India increasingly realizes
the strategic position of Southeast Asia. India's regular and stable presence
in all aspects, especially politics and security in the Asia-Pacific region, will
help ensure India's national interests and bring peace and regional peace
231

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

and stability. Rajiv Sikri, Secretary of State for India's Ministry of External
Affairs in charge of Look East Policy (2002 - 2006), emphasized: "India was
not able to emerge on the international stage until it had an authentic
relationship with ASEAN... of which the India-ASEAN summits provided the
most useful opportunity" (Asher, Sen, & Srivastava, 2003).
India became one of eight ASEAN partners at the ASEAN Defense Ministers'
Meeting Plus (ADMM+) in October 2010, marking a step toward a broader
engagement in Asia-Pacific security problems. Binh Duong. Since 2010,
India's involvement in ADMM+ has allowed it to participate in security
cooperation and rivalry for influence with other powers. India is an active
and responsible participant in security dialogue mechanisms or promoting
regional cooperation, such as the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), the
Southeast Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN - India Summit, Shangri-La Security
Dialogue... In addition, India also signed cooperation agreements or
Memorandum of Understanding on defense cooperation with nine AsiaPacific countries, including six ASEAN member states, namely Malaysia,
Myanmar, Indonesia, Singapore, Laos, and Vietnam. As Indian Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh once affirmed: "We (India) are attached to the
importance of our relationship with ASEAN, which plays a central role in
India's Look East Policy" (Singh, 2005).
The South China Sea is an issue that has traditionally been considered
sensitive, and India usually takes a restrained stance, but recently India has
begun to criticize China. The spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of India expressed India's support for US Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo's statement rejecting most of China's sovereignty claims in the
South China Sea, a significant change in US policy towards the South China
Sea, on July 16, 2020, by emphasizing that the South China Sea is a global
common property and that India has binding interests in peace and
stability in this sea Scott (2013). Additionally, the frequency and quality of
the Indian Navy's visits to Southeast Asia are on the rise. In June 2016, four
of the Eastern Fleet of India's most modern warships were docked at Cam
Ranh (Vietnam), Subic Bay (Philippines), and Port Klang (Malaysia)
(Malaysia). China has expressed "concern" over India's first deployment of
naval ships carrying anti-ship weapons to Pacific nations. However, this
action demonstrates that India is prepared to protect its economic and
trade interests in the region and ensure freedom of navigation in the face
of rising tensions in the East Sea. In addition, India has boosted maritime
cooperation with the United States and Japan, increasing Beijing's concern.
In 2007, the India-United States naval exercise Malabar was expanded into
a large-scale, multilateral practice in the Bay of Bengal involving the United
States, India, Japan, Singapore, and Australia. China views this event as an
attempt to prevent the country's ascent. Brewster (2010). At the same
time, the 2014 India-US Joint Strategic Vision Statement also affirmed: "the
importance of safeguarding maritime security and ensuring freedom of
navigation and overflight throughout the region, especially in the East Sea"
Das (2018).

232

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

In addition, India's military diplomacy with ASEAN nations has
strengthened, as demonstrated by the agreement to undertake yearly joint
naval exercises with Singapore, known as SIMBEX, since 1994. The drill
between the two sides on May 18, 2017, was the twenty-fourth exercise
between the two navies in the East Sea. Over time, the scope and scale of
joint activities have grown to encompass all aspects of air defense, marine
deterrent, etc. India has also struck an agreement with ASEAN to host a
joint exercise with eight of its partner nations since 2017. Within the
framework of ADMM+, the cyber practice dubbed FORCE-18 incorporates
ground operations, peacekeeping, humanitarian relief, etc. In July of 2020,
India and Australia struck an important defense deal allowing the use of
each other's military sites and inviting Australia to participate in the
Malabar Navy exercises that India performs with Japan and the United
States to bolster the efforts of the "Quad" - Australia, Japan, the United
States, and India - against China's maritime ambitions in the region
Mansingh (1994). In addition, India and ASEAN conduct many security
cooperation through maritime patrol against terrorism, piracy, and
transnational crime. India has also transferred radar and submarine
detection technology to Myanmar and has contracted to sell two frigates to
the Philippines. Vietnam and India also had 9 times the Vietnam - India
Security Dialogue at the level of deputy defense ministers. India also gave
Vietnam a credit of USD 100 million (2014) and USD 500 million (2016)
Sarma (2020) for defense connectivity between the two countries, and
many military cooperation agreements between the two sides were signed,
such as training, Naval training, anti-piracy drills, pilot training, military
equipment maintenance or military equipment installation, military
procurement.
For many years, India has helped Vietnam train many pilots to fly Su-30
MK2Vs and crew members of Kilo-class submarines Vo (2017). India and
Vietnam are negotiating whether India will sell Brahmos and Akash longrange rockets to Vietnam. India is assigning Indian company Larsen&Tubro
(L&T) to build a number of high-speed patrol boats Rosenberg and Chung
(2008) for Vietnam to protect maritime security, control illegal activities at
sea, and control illegal activities at sea participating in search and rescue
operations. Importantly, L&T will transfer the design and technology to
Vietnam and supply spare parts and equipment to build this type of vessel
at a Vietnamese shipbuilding company. India is aiming to export arms to
ASEAN amid the growing defense industry. Vietnam, Myanmar and the
Philippines are now India's main partners in this field. In the future, ASEAN
will be an important market for the Indian military industry as the
awareness of the security environment is increasing concern by countries
in the region.
In terms of connectivity, India's commitment to re-presentation for the
Mekong - Ganges Cooperation (MGC) under the Modi administration is
assisting mainland Southeast Asia in attracting the attention of major
countries such as the United States (with the Lower Mekong InitiativeMLI), China (with the Mekong - Lancang Cooperation), Japan (with the
233

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Greater Mekong Subregion Cooperation), Korea (with the Mekong - Korea
Action Plans 2014 - 2017; 2017 In addition to the importance of building a
strategic balance for the area, India and other major countries' investments
helps expand and strengthen the infrastructure and infrastructure
connectivity for mainland Southeast Asian countries. ASEAN-India ties are
progressing toward long-term and strategic objectives, and ASEAN is
becoming India's regional foreign policy's primary priority. And perhaps
now is the perfect time for Southeast Asian nations to reap the benefits of
India's policy of expanding its economic, military, and security presence.
As researcher Alka Acharya once mentioned: "ASEAN is the gateway to the
Asia-Pacific region, and the Look East Policy becomes a springboard to
bring India out of the confinement of South Asia, helping India become a
key player, a rising regional power" (Hong, 2013).
Southeast Asia in China's Competitive Strategy
Southeast Asia is located in the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean.
Important sea routes pass through this area, especially Indonesia,
Singapore, Malaysia, and Vietnam. For China, Southeast Asia holds an even
more critical position because many Southeast Asian countries share land
and sea borders with China. Equally important, China's rise requires space,
and China has chosen Southeast Asia as a strategic site for Beijing's growing
influence. The role of Southeast Asia with China is becoming more and
more critical in the context that significant powers in the Indo-Pacific
region, such as the United States, Japan, and India, are also constantly
increasing their cooperation in many fields in this area. After many years
of fostering the growth of their relations together, ASEAN and China have
achieved very significant results. This relationship has provided a robust
legal foundation for collaboration in all critical areas. Cooperation
institutions are pretty complete. The principles of cooperation are clear
and straightforward, based both on internationally recognized legislation
and the Asian way of life. The breadth of cooperation is broadening with
increasingly tangible outcomes.
Based on these achievements, on October 8, 2003, at the 7th ASEAN-China
Summit held in Bali, Indonesia, the two sides' leaders decided to upgrade
their relations to Strategic Partnership. In the "Joint Statement between the
Heads of State/Government of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and the People's Republic of China on the Strategic Partnership for Peace
and Prosperity," the two parties expressly stated their intent to form a
strategic partnership for peace and prosperity. Promote amicable
relations, mutually beneficial cooperation, and good neighborliness, and
further contribute to the region's lasting peace, development, and
collaboration Yeung (2006). The ASEAN-China strategic partnership will
be realized through a comprehensive expansion and development of
ASEAN-China cooperation relations.
The idea that the ASEAN-China strategic alliance was settled upon when
ASEAN had just concluded its expansion process and China was
234

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

experiencing a rapid rise could generate suspicions amongst international
powers. In the aforementioned joint declaration, the two parties
emphasized the nature of their Strategic Partnership in the region as "nonaligned, non-military, and non-exclusive, and does not preclude the parties
from forming all-oriented relations of friendship and cooperation with
other nations" Yeung (2006). The objective of defining the nature of the
ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership is to make it plain to the outside world
that ASEAN and China have no intention of forging a military alliance
against any other nation. Outside the region, those nations participating in
this strategic partnership may maintain or build new cooperative ties with
countries, so long as these ties are based on the principles of friendliness
and cooperation.
The legal basis of the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership is the Charter of
the United Nations, the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia,
the 5 Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and internationally recognized
standards. The 1997 ASEAN-China Summit and other cooperation
documents signed by the two sides include the Joint Statement on
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China and the
ASEAN-China Joint Declaration on Cooperation in non-traditional security
(2002). The above documents are on political - security, economic - social
cooperation. This once again affirms the non-military nature of the ASEANChina Strategic Partnership. This relationship is "comprehensive and
forward-looking cooperation, focusing on political, economic, social,
security and international and regional issues" Wattanapruttipaisan
(2003). The establishment of the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership has
brought relations between the two sides to a new and higher stage of
development, "clearing the way for an enhanced and more substantive
interaction between ASEAN and China" Van (2015).
The birth of the ASEAN-China strategic partnership is a major diplomatic
victory for China in Southeast Asia. In just over a decade, China has
succeeded in turning countries in this region, which see their rise as a
threat to the peace and security of Southeast Asia as whole many ASEAN
member countries in particular, to become its strategic partner. The
ASEAN-China strategic partnership is also a great success of Chinese
diplomacy. This alliance has supplied China with vital evidence of its good
relationship with a group of Southeast Asian developing nations. Other
developing countries in Africa and Latin America might look to this
partnership as a model for expanding and deepening their cooperation
with the People's Republic of China. This would expand China's influence
in the third world and give China another instrument to increase its
negotiating position with other large countries, such as India.
At the same time, the economic connection between China and ASEAN is
constantly developing. Under the impact of tax cuts, two-way trade
between ASEAN and China has increased markedly. In 2004, the total trade
turnover between ASEAN and China reached 105.8 billion USD (Urban,
2006). Since 2009, China has been ASEAN's largest trading partner.
235

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Additionally, the two parties collaborate to promote a green economic
relationship and expand the sustainable utilization of marine resources.
2020 is also the year of ASEAN-China digital economic cooperation,
emphasizing developing areas, including 5G networks, e-commerce,
scientific and technological innovation, and smart cities. In the first two
months of 2020, the total value of ASEAN-China trade-in products
amounted to around $84.8 billion, a 2% increase over the same time in
2019 and equivalent to 14.4% of China's total foreign trade value W. Wang
(2015).
ASEAN has surpassed the European Union to become China's top trading
partner. Investment cooperation between the two sides also developed
relatively quickly. Foreign direct investment (FDI) flowing from China to
ASEAN amounted to US$10.2 billion in 2018, accounting for 6.6% of
ASEAN's total FDI. Compared to ASEAN's dialogue partners, China ranks
third in terms of foreign investment capital in ASEAN. China's investment
capital and construction contracts in the ASEAN region continuously
increased sharply, reaching 11 billion USD in the first six months of 2019,
double that of the last six months of 2018. Generally, from 2014 to 2018,
Chinese investment projects in the ASEAN region accounted for 35% of the
total number of projects under the "Belt and Road" framework (BRI).
Malaysia receives the most investment capital, up to 27.5 billion USD,
accounting for 7.2% of the total value. In Cambodia, Chinese investment in
real estate skyrocketed to $4.6 billion in the first seven months of 2019,
53% higher than the same period in 2018 E.-Y. Lee and Park (2019). In
general, the economic development of ASEAN, significantly since the 2008
world financial crisis, has depended heavily on China's economic growth.
Assessing the influence of China's economic growth, Philippine researcher
Walden Bello said that "Ultimately, demand from the Chinese economy
grows at a dangerously fast rate is the main factor. The key to Southeast
Asia's economic growth began around 2003, following low growth after the
Asian financial crisis of 1997 and 1998" (Bello, 2010).
As China's economic and political strength has strengthened, it is evident
that ASEAN's position in China's diplomatic policy has also grown
significantly. Countries participating in the Indo-Pacific strategy,
particularly the United States, Japan, India, and Australia, require ASEAN
as a partner to restrain China. China, in turn, requires the assistance of
ASEAN or, at the very least, a neutral stance from ASEAN in its regional
diplomatic policy to counter the increasing pressure from the United States
and its allies. In addition, Southeast Asia plays a significant part in other
China-led regional cooperation programs, like the Belt and Road Initiative
(BRI) and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB).
Before the official establishment of ASEAN-China relations, China's status
and influence in the six ASEAN member states (Malaysia, Thailand,
Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Brunei) were only bolstered by
Mao Zedong-influenced political opposition. Even though some of the
founding members of ASEAN (Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and the
236

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Philippines) have formed links with China, China's economic influence has
not been significant. Since establishing the ASEAN-China Summit
mechanism in December 1997, Beijing has attempted to use this
mechanism to increase its influence over ASEAN and its member states in
particular. Beijing is always the initiator of cooperative initiatives between
ASEAN and China, while ASEAN is mostly the recipient. Since the two sides
began establishing a strategic alliance in October 2003, this reality has
become more apparent. Not to mention significant initiatives such as the
ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA), cooperation in the field of nontraditional security, the development of a Code of Conduct of Parties in the
East Sea (DOC), and the establishment of the ASEAN - China Strategic
Partnership was proposed by Beijing in 2002 and 2003, the cooperation
initiatives in the process of constructing the ASEAN - China Strategic
Partnership were also primarily proposed by China.
The initiative to organize the China-ASEAN Business and Investment
Summit (CABIS) was launched by Premier Wen Jiabao at the 7th ASEANChina Summit held on October 8, 2003, in Bali. At the meeting, Prime
Minister Wen Jiabao proposed to organize the annual China-ASEAN Trade
Expo. He also brought the initiative to meet the Communications Ministers
Conference in 2006, environmental cooperation on a bilateral basis, and
set up China - ASEAN Investment Fund; China-ASEAN Infrastructure
Development Fund. China's new leaders also continue the trend. In October
2013, President Xi Jinping, during his first visit to Southeast Asia after
taking office, launched a series of important initiatives to promote the
strategic partnership with ASEAN. These initiatives have been developed
by Premier Li Keqiang and generalized into the China-ASEAN "2+7
Cooperation Framework". China also supports the performance of the
above initiatives.
With the above active and active role, China had played a leading role in
developing ASEAN-China relations, especially since 2003, when the two
sides realized the ASEAN-China strategic partnership. This role has helped
China enhance its influence in Southeast Asia, especially from 2003 to
2008. China's political-diplomatic presence appears everywhere. At the
regional level, a Chinese delegation to ASEAN has been established. At the
national level, in addition to Chinese embassies in the capitals of ASEAN
countries, Chinese consulates have been present in most cities and major
economic centers in ASEAN countries. Chinese leaders are welcome in
most Southeast Asian capitals. Because they represent an increasing
power, they also carry large amounts of aid on every trip. Through
assistance, China has transformed itself into one of the significant financial
resources many Southeast Asian countries look to. From 1997 to 2010,
many Southeast Asian leaders praised China and its help to their country.
Even the Philippines declared, "We are delighted to consider China as our
eldest brother"Jia (1998). This shows the tremendous political influence of
China in Southeast Asia in the above period.

237

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Since 2003, China's cultural influence in Southeast Asia has expanded
significantly. In numerous ASEAN nations, cultural centers of Chinese
origin have been established. Up to 2010, 32 Confucius Institutes had been
constructed in this region. Thailand is home to 23 of these institutes. The
remaining institutions are dispersed around Singapore, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, and Indonesia. Confucius Institutes are locations
for propagation, cultural exchange, and teaching Chinese. Through the
operations of these academies, China's soft influence in Southeast Asian
nations has increased. In addition to bolstering the creation of Confucius
Institutes, China grants scholarships for international students to study in
China, with Southeast Asia receiving priority. China has recently awarded
the Mekong Sub-region countries 1,000 scholarships for five years and
substantial funds for Chinese language instruction. According to the
figures, 951 students from ten ASEAN member states got full scholarships
from the Chinese government in 2007. The Chinese government awarded
50 full scholarships to member nations in 2009. In addition, a substantial
amount of China's cultural industry items are exported to ASEAN nations.
China Radio International and Guangxi Radio Foreign Affairs founded
"Voice of the Gulf of Tonkin" in 2009. (BBR). The radio show is transmitted
from Guangxi, in the direction of Southeast Asia, in five languages: English,
Thai, Vietnamese, Cantonese, and Mandarin, for 17 hours every day, from
7 am to 24 am. The government also actively uses television programs to
promote China in Southeast Asia (Otmazgin, 2012).
In terms of foreign policy, China declares its willingness to build a
friendship with all countries globally, especially neighboring countries, on
equality, mutual benefit, openness to trade, scientific and technical
cooperation, cultural exchange, and cooperation for development. An
essential part of China's periphery diplomacy is promoting regional
cooperation in the service of economic and strategic considerations.
China's active participation and economic integration processes are
evidence that China is trying to reassure its neighbors that its "peaceful
rise" strategy is not threatening. East Asian economy, joining ASEAN + 3,
increasing leadership position in East Asia Summit (EAS), etc. The
country's pursuit of multilateralism to take on a more significant regional
and world economy initiative has shown considerable progress in
enhancing strategic goals through external activities. China is increasingly
showing its ambition through stricter steps in the East Sea regarding the
East Sea issue. In this regard, ASEAN is almost no longer as central as the
Regional Forum (ARF) or the East Asia Summit (EAS). Researcher Zeng
Zhang assessed that China has "understood" ASEAN both strategically and
tactically Vo (2017) and bluntly stated that ASEAN does not have a central
position in the East Sea issue.
China's general East Sea strategy is to "keep a low degree of tension" to
control the situation in the region and gradually "gnaw" the South China
Sea while avoiding large-scale confrontation. China has taken steps such as
asserting sovereignty, repeatedly making claims, bolstering diplomatic
propaganda, modernizing its Navy, enhancing its management of the
238

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

occupied islands, and using its economic influence to exert pressure on
ASEAN to split the organization. Maintaining the status quo, rejecting
internationalization, and upholding the principles of bilateral agreements
are the "immutable" principles that China is imposing on the area as a great
power. It can be seen that China's sovereignty claims in the East Sea are
becoming increasingly unyielding. A partnership with ASEAN is necessary,
but controlling three-quarters of the South China Sea's territory is more
crucial. This explains why China can reach compromises with ASEAN on
various subjects but never alters its position on resolving the South China
Sea issue bilaterally with relevant nations. According to this opinion, China
buys time to prolong the sovereignty debate until it can monopolize the
South China Sea. (Le Lan Huong et al., 2015).
Thus, the development of ASEAN - China relations in recent years has
created opportunities for China to increase its influence in most of the main
fields in the life of Southeast Asian countries, creating more favorable
conditions for China to develop conditions to help China have the ability to
compete fairly with other major countries, including India.
Impact of China-India Competition on Southeast Asia
As the twenty-first century begins, the rivalry among the world's leading
nations becomes increasingly severe to reposition the new global order.
The battle for influence among significant countries in Southeast Asia,
where there is a strong expanding ASEAN Community with an important
geo-strategic area, is hotter than ever. In many complex changes, India and
China have emerged and found many ways to draw ASEAN into their
dominant orbit, creating a position of mutual restraint while the
relationship between the two sides is developing. From a political and
security standpoint, the rivalry for influence between China and a large
number of ASEAN members, including India, has significantly strengthened
ASEAN's position in the area. The fact that ASEAN discussed the question
of expanding the ASEAN + 3 mechanism into the ASEAN + 4 mechanism at
the ASEAN Summit and the ASEAN + 3 Summit in 2000 demonstrated
ASEAN's multilateralization and diversity of partners in its foreign policy.
Although ASEAN + 3 has not been increased to ASEAN + 4, it is evident that
the 2002 ASEAN-India Summit established a framework for collaboration
that goes beyond the scope of ASEAN + 1 or ASEAN + 3. (China, Japan, and
Korea). In other words, the ASEAN's status and function are more generally
acknowledged when the ASEAN + 1 mechanism extends beyond the AsiaPacific region to South Asia.
The strategic struggle between India and China raises the value of ASEAN
in the strategies of nations such as the United States, Japan, and Australia.
In June 2019, ASEAN announced the ASEAN Vision for the Indo-Pacific,
which affirms the central role of ASEAN as the fundamental principle for
promoting cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region, with mechanisms led by
ASEAN; a vision based on the principles of strengthening ASEAN's
centrality, open, transparent, inclusive, rules-based framework, and good
239

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

governance, resp. Interestingly, immediately after ASEAN presented its
vision for the Indo-Pacific, the Quartet countries reaffirmed their strong
support for the central role of ASEAN and the ASEAN-led regional
architecture during November 2019 meetings Leguizamón Moncaleano
(2021). In other words, one of the Quartet's primary objectives is to
restrain China's aggression and compel it to conform to international law.
In this group's vision of the growing regional architecture, ASEAN's pivotal
role in the region is still acknowledged. In terms of economy, the
competition between India and China in Southeast Asia in this area,
although not prominent, is a vital driving force promoting ASEAN's central
role in economic integration in the Asia-Pacific, a goal that ASEAN strives
to achieve through negotiations to build free trade agreements (FTAs) and
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreements (CEPs) (Roadmap for
an ASEAN Community 2009-2015).
Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat, April 2009, p.37). Suppose the ASEAN Free
Trade Agreement (AFTA) is ASEAN's internal economic integration
mechanism. In that case, the FTAs between ASEAN and significant partners
are efforts to form a network of ASEAN free trade agreements externally,
strengthening ASEAN's central role in the region. ASEAN's partners in the
EAS have also supported ASEAN's central role in regional economic
integration. The 2nd EAS Presidential Statement in 2007 affirmed: "We
reiterate our support for ASEAN's driving role in economic integration in
the region. For further integration, we most position to launch research on
channel 2 on the Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia
(CEPEA) among EAS participants" Fukunaga (2015). Not long after CECA
between China and ASEAN was signed in 2002, India quickly signed CECA
with ASEAN in 2003. A similar FTA between ASEAN and Korea was signed
in 2005. Economic Partnership Agreement ASEAN - Japan Banr
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (CEPA) was born in 2008.
The ASEAN - Australia - New Zealand FTA started negotiations in 2004,
concluded negotiations in 2019, signed in 2019, and took effect from
January 1, 2020. With this system of AFTAs, the central role of ASEAN as it
desires has become a reality with the system of ASEAN-centered FTAs with
partners China, Japan, Korea, India, Australia, and New Zealand. Despite the
absence of India's participation since 2019, with the signing of RCEP at the
end of 2020, a new generation of a free trade agreement with ASEAN as the
center has been born, just like the principles and the guiding objective of
the RCEP negotiations point out: "The RCEP negotiations will recognize
ASEAN's central role in the emerging regional economic architecture"
Hong (2013). This role was also previously set by ASEAN as soon as this
idea was born in 2011 Fukunaga (2015). Although there are still views that
ASEAN's leadership role in the RCEP negotiations is more symbolic than
substantive, it is clear that FTAs and RCEPs are creating a system of FTAs
in the region Asia-Pacific centered by ASEAN.
However, besides strengthening ASEAN's major role, China-India
competition in Southeast Asia also contributes to the division of ASEAN,
240

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

especially on sensitive issues such as the East Sea. It can be seen that there
is a specific competition between India and countries with interests in
Southeast Asia, such as China, the US, Japan, South Korea, Australia, etc.,
especially in terms of economic interests, in which the highlight is the
competition in the investment market, investment attraction as well as the
import and export market of goods. However, on issues such as politics and
security, India shares with the US, Japan, and Australia's security
challenges, especially in the South China Sea issue, or shares democratic
values and principles of law, which is an element China takes a contrarian
approach. At the same time, India and countries such as the US, Japan, and
Australia make efforts to unite ASEAN sharing its commitment to freedom
of navigation and overflight, the rule of law, and the settlement of disputes
by peaceful means under the law. Under international law, including
UNCLOS 1982, on the contrary, China tried to divide ASEAN in the East Sea
issue to carry out a plot to monopolize this sea. The fact that ASEAN did not
issue a joint statement at the 2012 Foreign Ministers Meeting or the
organization had to withdraw the joint statement on the 2016 PCA ruling
affirms China's intense involvement in this issue.
In addition, India's withdrawal from RCEP negotiations at the end of 2019
can be partially attributed to the intense competition between India and
China. According to India's viewpoint, the initial RCEP negotiation
principles were altered favor of China and a few other nations, while India
incurred significant losses. India's withdrawal from RCEP is advantageous
to China. India's participation in RCEP can assist this agreement in
attracting a considerable market, offsetting the disadvantages that ASEAN
nations suffer from the Chinese market.

Conclusion
The strategic competition in India-ASEAN-China ties is becoming more
intricate due to these countries' rising-great-power foreign policies. China
may be gaining more significant benefit and weight in economic, political,
and diplomatic connections with Southeast Asian countries in the SinoIndian strategic race, even though India and China have long-standing
traditional ties with ASEAN. In most ways, India lags well behind China in
terms of strength, and events in Southeast Asia demonstrate that China's
influence continues to overshadow India's. Therefore, ASEAN countries
will face a significant challenge shortly since the attractiveness of major
powers will be contingent on the cohesiveness and efficacy of the
consensus system. In the meantime, the US Indo-Pacific approach is
supported by the Quartet of the United States, Japan, Australia, and India.
There has been coordination between the four nations listed above. But to
truly establish a footing in the area and earn popular trust, the procedure
mentioned above must have the backing of ASEAN, which is seen as the
linchpin of the current regional security architecture. ASEAN has been the
site for many contacts and dialogues between East Asian nations (China,
Japan, and Korea), Russia, and South Asian countries. If there is a large
international cooperative security structure covering this region in the
241

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___

future, ASEAN will undoubtedly play a central role. Oppositely, China
exerts pressure on ASEAN to draw it through diplomacy, economics, and
politics, even going "underground" with each country in ASEAN to seduce
them in China's path. How therefore can ASEAN retain its accomplishments
and its prominent position in the region? Whether ASEAN is capable of
ensuring that the values of the Community do not erode in the face of
intense competition between the world's leading countries. This is an
important topic that requires consideration.

XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

References
Agastia, I. G. B. D. (2020). Understanding Indonesia's role in the ‘ASEAN
Outlook on the Indo‐Pacific’: A role theory approach. Asia & the
Pacific
Policy
Studies,
7(3),
293-305.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/app5.308
Anwar, D. F. (2020). Indonesia and the ASEAN outlook on the Indo-Pacific.
International
Affairs,
96(1),
111-129.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiz223
Asher, M. G., Sen, R., & Srivastava, S. (2003). ASEAN-India: emerging
economic opportunities. Beyond the Rhetoric: The Economics of
India’s Look-East Policy, 45-79.
Athukorala, P.-C. (2009). Trends and patterns of foreign direct investments
in Asia: A comparative perspective. Margin: The Journal of Applied
Economic
Research,
3(4),
365-408.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1177/097380100900300403
Bello, W. (2010). The China-Asean free trade area: Propaganda and reality.
Asia News Network, January 15th.
Brewster, D. (2010). Australia and India: the Indian Ocean and the limits of
strategic convergence. Australian Journal of International Affairs,
64(5),
549-565.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2010.513369
Daly, K., & Vo, X. V. (2013). The determinants of home bias puzzle in equity
portfolio investment in Australia. International Review of Financial
Analysis, 27, 34-42. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2012.05.005
Dang, T. T., Pham, M. H., Bui, H. V., & Van Le, D. (2020). First full-length
genome sequence of dengue virus serotype 2 circulating in Vietnam
in 2017. Infection and drug resistance, 13, 4061.
doi:https://doi.org/10.2147/IDR.S275645
Das, C. (2018). Changing contours of India’s Ocean strategy, 2004–2015.
Australian Journal of Maritime & Ocean Affairs, 10(3), 153-167.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/18366503.2018.1465253
Delatolla, A., Rahman, M., Anand, D., Caesar, M., Haastrup, T., Adiong, N. M.,
. . . Youde, J. (2021). Challenging Institutional Racism in
International Relations and Our Profession: Reflections,
Experiences, and Strategies. Millennium, 50(1), 110-148.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1177/03058298211059357
Downey, L. E., Mehndiratta, A., Grover, A., Gauba, V., Sheikh, K., Prinja, S., . .
. Teerawattananon, Y. (2017). Institutionalising health technology
assessment: establishing the Medical Technology Assessment
242

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Board

in
India.
BMJ
Global
Health,
2(2),
e000259.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2016-000259
Eberstadt, N. (2002). The future of AIDS. Foreign Affairs, 22-45.
doi:https://doi.org/10.2307/20033342
Frankel, F. R. (2011). The breakout of China-India strategic rivalry in Asia
and the Indian Ocean. Journal of international affairs, 1-17.
Fukunaga, Y. (2015). ASEAN's Leadership in the R egional C omprehensive
E conomic P artnership. Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies, 2(1), 103115. doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/app5.59
Harnandez, P. E. D. C. G. (2015). The ASEAN Community Beyond 2015.
Hong, Z. (2007). India and China: rivals or partners in Southeast Asia?
Contemporary
Southeast
Asia,
121-142.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1355/CS29-1F
Hong, Z. (2013). The South China sea dispute and China-ASEAN relations.
Asian
Affairs,
44(1),
27-43.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/03068374.2012.760785
Jain, B. M. (2004). India–China relations: Issues and emerging trends. The
Round
Table,
93(374),
253-269.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/00358530410001679602
Jia, W. (1998). Facework as a Chinese conflict-preventive mechanism: A
cultural/discourse analysis. Intercultural Communication Studies, 7,
43-62.
Keling, M. F., Shuib, M., & Ajis, M. N. e. (2009). The emergence of India as
new military power: Threat or opportunity to Southeast Asia? Asian
Social
Science,
5(4),
22-31.
doi:https://doi.org/10.5539/ass.v5n4p22
Le, D. T. (2019). Vietnam as an Emerging Middle Power towards 2030 and
beyond. The Russian Journal of Vietnamese Studies, 3(3), 7-17.
Le Lan Huong, V. L. T., Thai, T. H., Jones, C., Sang, H. M., Kien, N. T., Bich, N.
T. K., . . . Tan, H. D. (2015). 4.1 Comparative assessment of
manufactured pellet feed and traditional trash fish feed on
production of tropical rock lobster (Panulirus ornatus) and
environmental effects in sea-cage culture in Vietnam. Spiny lobster
aquaculture development in Indonesia, Vietnam and Australia, 68.
Lee, C., & Fukunaga, Y. (2014). ASEAN regional cooperation on competition
policy.
Journal
of
Asian
Economics,
35,
77-91.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asieco.2014.09.005
Lee, E.-Y., & Park, K. (2019). Change in the recent warming trend of sea
surface temperature in the East Sea (Sea of Japan) over decades
(1982–2018).
Remote
Sensing,
11(22),
2613.
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11222613
Lee, L. (2015). InDIa as a natIon of conseQUence In asIa: the potentIal anD
lImItatIons of InDIa’s ‘act east’polIcY. The Journal of East Asian
Affairs, 29(2), 67-104.
Leguizamón Moncaleano, A. (2021). Strengthening the students’ speaking
skill of the 1B level from the extension courses at Libre University
through the cooperative learning strategy.

243

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Li, M. (2020). The Belt and Road Initiative: geo-economics and Indo-Pacific
security competition. International Affairs, 96(1), 169-187.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiz240
Limaye, S. (2016). India-East Asia Relations: A Full Year of" Acting East".
Comparative Connections, 17(3), 153.
Mansingh, S. (1994). India-China relations in the post-Cold War era. Asian
Survey, 34(3), 285-300. doi:https://doi.org/10.2307/2644986
Nguyen, H. H., & Truong, Q. H. (2022). The Nexus between Inward Foreign
Direct Investment and Global Value Chains in Developing Countries:
A Case Study of Viet Nam.
Otmazgin, N. K. (2012). Geopolitics and soft power: Japan's cultural policy
and cultural diplomacy in Asia. Asia-Pacific Review, 19(1), 37-61.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/13439006.2012.678629
Pal, D. (2016). Reorienting India’s Foreign Policy–Neighborhood First. The
National Bureau of Asian Research, January.
Pant, H. V., & Deb, A. (2017). India-ASEAN partnership at 25. ORF Issue Brief,
189, 1-8.
Pradhan, P. (2021). Resolution Of Conflicts Through Negotiated Settlement
And CBM A Case Study Of Indo China Border Dispute. NVEONATURAL VOLATILES & ESSENTIAL OILS Journal| NVEO, 1592215934.
Principles, G. (2012). Objectives for Negotiating the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership. Australian Government,
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.[Электрон. ресурс].– URL:
http://dfat.
gov.
au/trade/agreements/rcep/pages/regionalcomprehensive-economic-partnership. aspx (дата обращения:
03.03. 2017).
Rosenberg, D., & Chung, C. (2008). Maritime security in the South China
Sea: coordinating coastal and user state priorities. Ocean
Development
&
International
Law,
39(1),
51-68.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/00908320701641602
Sarma, S. (2020). India–Vietnam Relations through the Prism of the IndoPacific
Concept.
Strategic
Analysis,
44(4),
360-377.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/09700161.2020.1809213
Scott, D. (2013). India's role in the South China Sea: geopolitics and
geoeconomics
in
play.
India
Review,
12(2),
51-69.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/14736489.2013.786965
Secretariat, A. (2007). Chairman’s Statement of the Second East Asia
Summit”. Cebu, Philippines, 15.
Singh, M. (2005). Keynote Address by the Indian Prime Minister to Special
Leaders’ Dialogues of the ASEAN Business Advisory Council. Kuala
Lumpur, December.
Sinha, T. (2009). India–ASEAN Free Trade Agreement. A Survey of
Literature: IPCS Special Report(75).
Spry, D. (2019). From Delhi to Dili: Facebook diplomacy by ministries of
foreign affairs in the Asia-Pacific. The Hague Journal of Diplomacy,
15(1-2),
93-125.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1163/1871191X15101067

244

Croatian
International
Relations
Review
___
CIRR
___
XXVIII (89) 2022,
225-245

Thu, M. N. (2012). History of Southeast Asia. Volume VI, Social Science
Publishing House, Hanoi.
Urban, W. (2006). China: Economy on a fast track. L. Podkaminer, V.
Gligorov et al.(2006),‘Strong Growth, Driven by Exports in the NMS
and by Consumption in the Future EU Members’, wiiw Research
Reports, 95-100.
Van, H. T. H. (2015). ASEAN-China relations since building of strategic
partnership and their prospects. International Journal of China
Studies, 6(2), 187.
Vinh, V. X. (2020). India in Vietnam’s foreign policy. Strategic Analysis,
44(1),
31-44.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/09700161.2020.1699997
Vinh, V. X., Hiep, T. X., & Hung, V. M. (2021). India’s Engagement in the South
China Sea. Maritime Affairs: Journal of the National Maritime
Foundation
of
India,
17(2),
64-77.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/09733159.2021.2022287
Vo, X. V. (2017). Vietnam–India maritime cooperation. Maritime Affairs:
Journal of the National Maritime Foundation of India, 13(1), 63-72.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/09733159.2017.1315888
Wang, W. (2015). 3. The EU-aSEan economic relations and China-aSEan
economic relations. China, the European Union and the Developing
World:
A
Triangular
Relationship,
89.
doi:https://doi.org/10.4337/9781783477340.00011
Wang, Y. (2008). Public diplomacy and the rise of Chinese soft power. The
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
616(1),
257-273.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1177/0002716207312757
Wattanapruttipaisan, T. (2003). Four proposals for improved financing of
SME development in ASEAN. Asian Development Review, 20(2), 66104.
Xavier, S., Norris, C. M., Ewasiuk, A., Kutsogiannis, D. J., Bagshaw, S. M., van
Diepen, S., . . . Karvellas, C. J. (2020). The impact of cirrhosis in
patients undergoing cardiac surgery: a retrospective observational
cohort study. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia/Journal canadien
d'anesthésie, 67(1), 22-31. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630019-01493-7
Yeung, H. W. C. (2006). Change and continuity in Southeast Asian ethnic
Chinese business. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 23(3), 229254. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10490-006-9007-2

245

