Vrije Universiteit Brussel

Control Through Cooperation? Assessing China's Economic and Military-Strategic Interests in
the South China Sea
Ernst, Maximilian
Published in:
Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies

Publication date:
2022
License:
Unspecified
Document Version:
Final published version
Link to publication

Citation for published version (APA):
Ernst, M. (2022). Control Through Cooperation? Assessing China's Economic and Military-Strategic Interests in
the South China Sea. Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, 9(2), 7-30.
https://www.journalofterritorialandmaritimestudies.net/_files/ugd/36708f_7ac2a636674246239e97e169742cf89a.
pdf

Copyright
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form, without the prior written permission of the author(s) or other rights
holders to whom publication rights have been transferred, unless permitted by a license attached to the publication (a Creative Commons
license or other), or unless exceptions to copyright law apply.

Take down policy
If you believe that this document infringes your copyright or other rights, please contact openaccess@vub.be, with details of the nature of the
infringement. We will investigate the claim and if justified, we will take the appropriate steps.

Control Through Cooperation?
Assessing China’s Economic
and M
­ ilitary-Strategic Interests
in the South China Sea
Maximilian Ernst
Structured Abstract
Article Type: General Review
Purpose—China’s assertive policy toward the South China Sea (SCS) is commonly
explained as a function of Beijing’s objective to control shipping lanes and resources (fish,
hydrocarbons), and to cater to nationalist sentiments. Some publications also point to the
alternative explanation of China’s m
­ ilitary-strategic interests. By analyzing Beijing’s SCS
policy, including aggressive action but also offers of cooperation, this article determines
which explanation is adequate.
Findings—China not only coerces SCS littoral states, but also offers cooperation
in maritime security and joint resource exploration. As the example of the Philippines demonstrates, these offers are predicated on littoral states’ unequivocal acceptance of illegal Chinese territorial claims. Beijing views joint resource exploration
as means to the end of physical control over SCS maritime territory, supporting its
­m ilitary-strategic interests. If the littoral state accepts China’s territorial claims, it is
granted access to resources within its EEZ or may develop said resources jointly with
China.
Practical Implications—­A sia-Pacific states should reconsider their SCS policies,
accounting for the fact that China’s ultimate objective is not control over commercial shipping lanes and resources, but the deployment of military assets on SCS maritime territory
to support A2/AD and further ­military-strategic objectives.
Originality/Value—The analysis of Beijing’s SCS policy demonstrates the limitations
Vrije Universiteit Brussel: Maximilian.Ernst@vub.be
Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies / Volume 9, Number 2 / Summer/Fall 2022 / pp. 7–30 /
ISSN 2288-6834 (Print) / DOI: 10.2307/JTMS.9.2.7 / © 2022 ﻿

Control Through Cooperation?

7

of the common economic security explanation and corroborates the alternative, traditional
security explanation in the literature.
Keywords: Chinese foreign policy, security policy, ­Sino-American
strategic competition, South China Sea, traditional security

I. Introduction
China’s assertive policy toward the South China Sea (SCS) is among the most salient
challenges in contemporary security politics. Particularly China’s illegal territorial claims,
artificial island building, and militarization of the SCS have the potential to significantly
destabilize regional security, which is only exacerbated by the emerging ­Sino-American
strategic competition. Against this background, it remains unclear why Beijing engages in
such assertive, even aggressive, actions at the detriment of littoral states, risking further
regional conflict and SCS littoral states plausibly organizing against China.1 The common
explanation for Chinese assertive actions in the SCS relates to its economic interests, specifically control over shipping lanes and access to hydrocarbons and fish resources.2 Economic or ­so-called nontraditional security certainly informs Chinese foreign policy, but
falls short in explaining China’s aggressive actions and violation of international law in the
SCS. Notably, the economic security explanation omits the fact that China has repeatedly
extended offers to cooperate on maritime security and to jointly develop SCS resources.
If control over commercial shipping lanes and resources were so important to China—so
important that it would risk the escalation of a regional conflict—why then does Beijing
offer to share these resources? There is also the argument that domestic nationalism forces
the Chinese leadership to defend territorial claims, lawful or not, and that assertive actions
in the SCS gain the CCP legitimacy to rule.3 This explanation is often given alongside the
­above-mentioned economic security factors as an additional contributing variable.
Some studies point to the importance of the m
­ ilitary-strategic component as the driving
force behind China’s behavior in the SCS.4 This line of argument follows a traditional conceptualization of security. Although this argument also neglects China’s offers of cooperation and joint resource development, it at least does not constitute an inherent contradiction,
as is the case for the more common economic security explanation. The present study corroborates the alternative traditional security argument by demonstrating that n
­ on-traditional
economic security interests and the need to cater to domestic nationalism cannot possibly be
the main driver for Chinese actions in the SCS. After all, China has, repeatedly over the past
two decades, offered littoral states to cooperate in maritime security and to jointly explore
and develop resources in the SCS. But such offers to cooperate have a catch: China requires
the littoral state to accept its illegal territorial claims. Building on the traditional security
argument, it is proposed that Beijing’s offers of cooperation are not an end, but a means of
incentivizing littoral states to accept China’s unlawful territorial claims, serving the end of
China’s strategic control of the entire SCS—which is, from China’s perspective, a strategic
necessity to prevail in the great power competition with the United States.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section II briefly introduces
the phenomenon of China’s aggressive behavior in the context of SCS territorial disputes.
8

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

Section III provides an overview of the common explanation for China’s actions in the
SCS, namely its alleged desire to exclusively control shipping lanes, unilaterally explore
hydrocarbon and fish resources, and for the CCP to cater to nationalist sentiments at
home and gain legitimacy. Section IV presents the alternative explanation of China’s
­m ilitary-strategic interests to be the driver for Chinese actions in the SCS, specifically its
plans to develop A
­ nti-Access Area Denial (A2/AD) capabilities, to provide a safe bastion
for its n
­ uclear-powered ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) fleet, and to develop the SCS as
a secure perimeter for its space program operating out of Wenchang on Hainan. Section
V corroborates the alternative argument by demonstrating, through an empirical analysis
of Chinese policy toward the Philippines and ASEAN, that Beijing is willing to share control of the SCS and its resources. Section VI synthesizes the analytical part with the review
of the literature in earlier sections to present the argument that China’s offers to cooperate and jointly explore resources are a means to the end of securing ­m ilitary-strategic control of the SCS. Based on this, the economic security explanation can be refuted. The article
concludes with a summary of findings, points to limitations as well as avenues for future
research, and discusses policy implications.

II. The Phenomenon: South China Sea
Territorial Disputes and China’s Assertive
Actions Toward Littoral States
The SCS has witnessed numerous territorial disputes over the past decades which
have, on numerous occasions, erupted into hostilities between claimants.5 Especially violent examples are clashes between the Vietnamese and Chinese militaries over the Paracel Islands in January 19746 and again with Vietnam over Johnson South Reef of the Spratly
Islands in March 1988.7 Between 1994 and 1995, China’s occupation of Mischief Reef, which
is in the Eastern Spratlys within the Philippine Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and the
building of military observation posts on it, had also resulted in the confrontation of Philippine and Chinese ships on several occasions.8 Absent such occasional h
­ igh-intensity
crises, of which there are plenty, SCS disputes still complicate diplomacy and deteriorate
regional security. The relationship between SCS littoral states and China is especially and
profoundly impacted by these territorial disputes. It is beyond the scope of this article to
provide a detailed review of the legal claims, pertaining laws, and court decisions.9 Hence,
a short overview will have to suffice.
Besides China, other claimants of SCS maritime territory are the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei, and Taiwan. Many parties have conflicting claims, and
some have had disputes with one another. But China’s role in these disputes is preeminent
because it is the claimant with the most developed military capabilities, claiming almost
the entirety of the SCS—per its 9­ -Dash Line—whereas other parties only claim parts of
the SCS.10 ASEAN members have by now harmonized their claims with UNCLOS, so that
there exist, in principle, no major disputes among all other SCS littoral states (see Map 1).11
In addition, China has built artificial islands and deployed military infrastructure on natural and artificial islands inside disputed waters, thus creating facts on the ground.12 China’s artificial island building and subsequent militarization thereof has been ruled illegal
Control Through Cooperation?

9

by the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in June 2016. China’s appeal to what it calls
“historic rights” (through its 9­ -Dash Line) was judged to have no legal weight; none of China’s land holdings are considered “islands” under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) criteria, and therefore don’t generate EEZ entitlement.13 Nevertheless, Beijing continues to disregard the PCA ruling and asserts physical control of SCS
maritime territory.
The year 2012 saw intense exchanges between the Philippines and China over the
Scarborough Shoal. In April 2012, the two countries were on the brink of armed conflict,

Map 1: Territorial Claims in the South China Sea. Source: Voice of America, “Territorial Claims in the
South China Sea,” VOA, July 30, 2012, https://blogs.voanews.com/state-department-news/2012/07/31/
challenging-beijing-in-the-south-china-sea/, accessed May 5, 2022. (Public domain; edited by author.)

10

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

both dispatching naval vessels to the shoal. China was able to gain control over the shoal
through the deployment of hundreds of ships belonging to its maritime militia and coast
guard in addition to a few PLA Navy (PLAN) vessels. China continues to control the shoal
to this day.14 In an attempt to compel the Aquino Benigno III administration (2010–2016)
to accept its territorial claims, China also imposed restrictions on banana imports and
curbed the number of Chinese tourists, resulting in considerable economic hardship to the
Philippines.15
It should be noted that this review article is written in the academic discipline of international security and strategic studies. The objective is not to analyze the legality of Chinese actions, but to explain why China acts the way it does. China’s actions in the SCS have
already been ruled unlawful under UNCLOS by the PCA in the Hague in 2016 after a case was
brought against China by the Philippines. But Beijing has made it clear from the beginning
that it does not recognize the court’s jurisdiction over SCS territorial disputes and continues to claim maritime territory through its ­9-Dash Line, thereby violating other SCS littoral
states’ EEZ. This article operates based on the realization that China disregards international
law, including treaties and conventions it has ratified. The article seeks to understand what
drives Chinese actions in the SCS, specifically whether economic or military security interests are the main drivers for Chinese actions. Importantly, this article’s analysis of China’s
strategic considerations is not to be understood as an endorsement of China’s actions.

III. Common Explanation:
Control Over Shipping Lanes,
Access to Resources, Nationalism
The common explanation for Beijing’s assertive policy toward SCS littoral states is
based on China’s economic interests.16 These economic interests can be divided into three
subcategories, namely (1) control over commercial shipping lanes, (2) access to hydrocarbons (oil, gas), and (3) access to fish resources. There is also the argument that links Chinese assertive policy to nationalism and the CCP’s ambition to gain legitimacy at home
through appearing strong on international politics. Notably, many scholarly and journalistic
accounts arguing in favor of these economic and nationalist variables treat them inclusively
and acknowledge all four dimensions, merely diverging over their hierarchy of importance.

3.1 Control Over SCS Commercial Shipping Routes
The SCS carries about 21% of global trade. Importantly, about 40% of China’s international trade in goods passes through the SCS.17 The SCS is critical also in terms of energy
security; about 50% of global oil tanker shipments pass through it.18 Moreover, 70% of China’s electricity is generated from fossil fuels,19 80% of which pass through the SCS.20 Taken
together, the SCS carries three times as much commercial shipping as the Suez Canal and
five times as much as the Panama Canal.21 The problem for China inheres in the maritime
geography of the SCS,22 which is vulnerable to ­peace-time interruptions caused by natural
or ­man-made disasters as well as to blockage by a military adversary during regional conflict.23 The maritime chokepoints of the SCS are especially important in this regard, namely
Control Through Cooperation?

11

the Sunda Strait, the Lombok Strait and, most prominently, the Malacca Strait.24 From Beijing’s perspective, the U.S. Navy and Air Force, with their ability to control and blockade
these maritime chokepoints, hold a dagger to China’s throat, allowing them to interrupt
China’s energy imports and trade flows at any given time. Besides being home to some of
China’s harbors, the SCS is the main transit between the Indian and the Pacific Oceans,
and disruption through natural disaster, blockade, or military escalation would lead to
increased shipping costs and global supply chain interruptions.

3.2 Access to Hydrocarbons (oil, gas)
Proven and probable reserves of hydrocarbons in the SCS are estimated at around
190 trillion cubic feet of natural gas and 11 billion barrels of oil. Additional undiscovered

Map 2: Oil and Gas Exploration in the South China Sea Source: Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, “South China Sea Energy Exploration and Development,” CSIS, n.d., https://amti.csis.org/
south-china-sea-energy-exploration-and-development/, accessed May 5, 2022; edited by the author.

12

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

resources could amount to another 160 trillion cubic feet of natural gas and 12 billion barrels of oil.25 Although this may sound like a lot, the estimated exploitable oil resources, for
example, would merely cover one year of China’s oil consumption.26 The largest reserves of
oil and natural gas have been discovered under the SCS floor north of Borneo (within the
EEZs of Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei), east of the Malay Peninsula (within the EEZs of
Malaysia and Indonesia), and northwest of Palawan (within the EEZ of the Philippines).27

3.3 Fish Resources
Thanks to the inflow of ­nutrient-laden waters from land, SCS marine life is rich and
accounts for about 10% of global fish stocks. It holds at least 3,365 marine species, the most
abundant being tuna, mackerel, croaker, anchovy, shrimp, and shellfish.28 The area is heavily fished, providing the main source of animal protein in densely populated Southeast Asia.29
About 1.5 billion people in the region depend on SCS fisheries for nutrition, and about 3.7 million people find employment in the region’s fishing industry.30 However, due to ­over-fishing,
the fish stocks of the SCS have been degraded by about 70–95% since 1950. Moreover, the
destruction of coral reefs, among other environmentally destructive actions such as artificial
island building, has exacerbated the dramatic reduction of fish stocks and marine biodiversity
more broadly.31 If overfishing and the destruction of marine biodiversity were to continue at
this rate, the argument of SCS fish resources informing Chinese actions will soon be obsolete.

3.4 Nationalism as a Constraint on CCP D
­ ecision-Making
Finally, there is the argument that nationalist sentiments within the Chinese population constrain the options of the Chinese leadership in finding a multilateral solution
to SCS disputes short of insisting on full control over the entirety of the SCS. 32 This argument is not in contradiction to the economic security explanation and is often mentioned
as an additional factor, alongside shipping lanes and resources. Fostered by decades of
­state-controlled political indoctrination across media, education, and academia, the Chinese public predominantly supports China’s illegal actions in the SCS and believes that the
international maritime legal regime as well as international courts are controlled by a U.S.
imperialist agenda and more broadly hostile foreign interests.33 Hence, defending China’s
territorial claims in the SCS at all costs can be seen as a deliverable by the CCP to the Chinese public to gain legitimacy to rule. Whereas the CCP’s legitimacy has thus far mostly
been secured through the provision of stable economic growth and welfare, some scholars argue that the promotion of national glory and the protection of territorial integrity can
plausibly inform Beijing’s readiness to risk security and stability in the SCS, and even to use
military force against regional states.34

IV. Alternative Explanation:
Military-Strategic Considerations
Contrary to the above discussed explanations relating to economic security and
nationalism, several scholarly articles point to the m
­ ilitary-strategic dimension as the main
Control Through Cooperation?

13

driver behind China’s aggressive and destabilizing policy toward the SCS.35 This argument must be understood against the background of the S­ ino-American strategic competition. Apart from a ­technological-industrial as well as an ­economic-ideological dimension,
this competition also has a m
­ ilitary-strategic dimension. China has the declared objective to assume regional hegemony in the ­A sia-Pacific, as it is stated in the Chinese Dream
of National Rejuvenation.36 This Chinese Dream has a clear foreign policy objective, which
is, in the words of Yoshihara and Holmes, to make “the nation prosperous and confident at
home and abroad,” to “assume its rightful station as a pole in a multipolar world, presumably Asia’s dominant power,” and to “make good on its intent to alter the U
­ S-led status quo
and revise the international order to its liking.”37
Although the United States is today and will remain for the foreseeable future the
preeminent military power in the world, China will be able to challenge U.S. preponderance in the Western Pacific. Over the past two decades, China has invested heavily in
the PLAN. Between 2014 and 2018 alone, China added more vessels to the PLAN than
the number of ships in service of the navies of the UK, Spain, India, and Germany combined. By 2019, the PLAN consisted of 339 ships, compared to 296 U.S. Navy ships. Since,
however, the PLAN’s modernization concentrates on littoral warfare capabilities based

Map 3: The First and Second Island Chains. Source: U.S. Department of Defense, “Annual Report
to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2010”
(Washington, D.C.: Office of the Secretary of Defense, 2010), p. 23; edited by the author.

14

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

on smaller vessels, the tonnage of the U.S. Navy remains more than double that of the
PLAN.38 In the coming decades, the Western Pacific will likely emerge as a militarily contested space in which neither the United States and its regional allies nor China enjoys
military supremacy.39
In addition to U.S. military presence, China’s path toward regional hegemony is
complicated by natural barriers in the Western Pacific, namely the first- and second
island chains, of which the former is particularly important. Running down from Japan
via Taiwan, the Philippines, and Malaysia, the first island chain presents a natural barrier that contains China’s “strategic will to the sea,” complicating its commercial and
military sea lines of communication (SLOCs).40 The fact that China’s littoral waters are
shallow and that the first island chain is inhabited by U.S. allies and partners makes it
extremely difficult for the PLAN to project naval power—above and below the surface—
beyond China’s littorals and into the Pacific proper. In this geopolitical context, the SCS
matters profoundly in China’s ­m ilitary-strategic interest. The SCS can be understood as
the soft underbelly of the first island chain, with the Strait of Luzon (the gap between the
northern tip of the Philippines and Taiwan) as the most promising exit point for Chinese naval power. If China wants to prevail in a prolonged ­m ilitary-strategic competition with the United States and its allies, it must develop the SCS as strategic rear from
which it can break out of U.S. containment and conduct naval operations across the
­I ndo-Pacific and beyond.41
Based on a review of relevant expert literature, three interrelated m
­ ilitary-strategic
dimensions—conditions of sorts—can be identified, which China needs to fulfill to break
out of its littoral dilemma and to become a p
­ eer-competitor to the United States in the
­Asia-Pacific. Notably, Beijing’s desire to fulfill these three dimensions also explains China’s
artificial island building, militarization of the SCS, illegal territorial claims, and its aggressive behavior toward SCS littoral states. It is furthermore not in contradiction to China’s
efforts to also cooperate on maritime security and to jointly develop SCS resources with littoral states (cf. section V). These three dimensions are discussed below.

4.1 Deny U.S. Power Projection into the South China Sea
The first dimension is the physical control over territorial features in the SCS, such as
rocks, reefs, and small islands. China’s objective is to construct on them conventional military infrastructure in support of an A2/AD perimeter covering the entire SCS.42 To fulfill this objective, the PLA must build radars and runways to deploy t­ heater-range missiles,
air- and missile defense, fighter aircraft, and a­ ir-refueling tanker planes across SCS islands,
including the Spratly Islands, the Paracel Islands, and Scarborough Shoal.43 With logistical support and existing capabilities based on Hainan, the PLA would acquire the ability to deny the U.S. Navy access to the SCS and complicate U.S. military supremacy in the
wider Western Pacific, inhibiting U.S. power projection in the Taiwan Strait and onto the
Chinese mainland.44 Chinese A2/AD over the SCS is an ambitious yet rewarding objective, since it enhances China’s national security, improves the PLA’s position in a potential T
­ aiwan-Strait contingency or invasion of Taiwan, and reduces U.S. coercive potential
over China. But A2/AD over the SCS is also the necessary condition for the other two
dimensions.
Control Through Cooperation?

15

4.2 ­Submarine-Based Nuclear Deterrence
Chinese strategic thinkers have been observing with concern U.S. ambitions to
improve ballistic missile defense (BMD) in the A
­ sia-Pacific. In China’s perspective, particularly worrisome is the participation of U.S. allies, notably Japan, Australia, and South
Korea, in U.S. BMD.45 Beijing believes that U.S. and allied BMD systems enhance U.S.
national missile defense, and hence undermine China’s ­s econd-strike capability which
has so far relied on a limited arsenal of ­land-based nuclear warheads and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).46 The case of China’s economic retaliation in response to
the deployment of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system in South
Korea exemplifies that Chinese strategic thinkers consider U.S. BMD assets a threat to
China’s security.47 Alarmed by improving U.S. BMD capabilities as well as the U.S. conventional prompt global strike (CPGS) program, China must invest in a more robust
nuclear deterrent.48 In addition to increasing the number of the PLA Rocket Force’s
­l and-based ICBMs and the assignment of a nuclear mission to the PLA Air Force, the
PLAN too has become an integral part of China’s nuclear deterrent.49 The SCS is critical
in this endeavor: since China’s other littoral seas, namely the Yellow and East China Seas,
are shallow with water depths of no more than 200 m, the SCS is, with an average depth
of 1,210 m and an abyssal plain of 4,300 m depth, the only space where PLAN SSBNs can
access deeper waters without having to pass the first island chain and risk detection by
U.S. or allied sensors.50
Numerous analyses and specialist publications concur that China is pursuing a
­so-called “nuclear bastion” in the SCS.51 The adoption of a nuclear bastion, a strategic concept originally used by the Soviet Union in the Okhotsk and Barents Seas, 52 solves two
related issues. First, global patrols of ­nuclear-armed SSBNs as practiced by the United
States, the United Kingdom, and France, are highly complex, and the PLAN may plausibly
lack the operational skills to conduct them.53 Second, a nuclear bastion in the SCS partly
solves the littoral dilemma, i.e., above mentioned problem of PLAN SSBNs’ potential detection when attempting to slip through the first island chain, past U.S. allies, and into the
Pacific proper; this would then simply not be necessary.54 The development of l­ ong-range
­submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) that can be mounted on China’s J­ in-class
SSBNs, 55 such as the ­C SS-N-14 (­J L-2) and more recently the ­J L-3, 56 supports the assertion
that China pursues a nuclear bastion, enabling China to hold at risk U.S. and allied military
and civilian targets across the ­Indo-Pacific and the continental United States.57
Given the nuclear bastion’s strategic importance, China needs to be able to protect
its ­nuclear-armed SSBNs in the SCS. The establishment of China’s “Underwater Great
Wall” will do just that.58 The militarization of the SCS, notably the creation of artificial
islands and the construction of military infrastructure on them, enables the deployment
of ­a nti-submarine warfare (ASW) systems to deter or destroy enemy attack submarines
that could harm PLAN’s SSBNs in the SCS.59 Such infrastructure includes helipads and
­a ir-strips for A
­ SW-capable helicopters and patrol planes, which both have been identified
on China’s artificial islands.60 On Woody Island, part of the Paracels, China has furthermore constructed facilities to collect and synthesize oceanographic data from satellites
and sonar buoys, which would provide PLAN units operating in the SCS with situational
awareness of activities above, on, and below the SCS surface.61
16

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

4.3 China’s Space Program and the Wenchang Space Launch Center on Hainan
Space as a military domain implicates all other domains, namely land, air, sea, and
cyber. In its defense white papers, China emphasizes its ambitions of force modernization
and informationization.62 To conduct n
­ et-centric warfare, the PLA requires independent
systems in earth’s orbit. Furthermore, if China wants to become a regional hegemon in the
­Asia-Pacific, as it is prescribed in the Chinese Dream, the PLA must first become a technological ­peer-competitor to U.S. forces, which it has not yet achieved.63 This requires autarky
in global positioning and communications infrastructure. Specialist publications discuss
the necessity of s­ pace-based systems to develop the kind of A2/AD and power projection
capability that China’s defense white papers devise,64 but China’s space program has been
largely absent in debates about Chinese activity in the SCS.
An exception is the work by Kirchberger and O’Keeffe, who point to the construction
and protection of the Wenchang Space Launch Center (WSLC) on Hainan as an important
variable that informs China’s policy toward the SCS.65 WSLC’s geographic location on the
southern Chinese island Hainan makes it China’s quintessential location to launch satellites into various orbits that enable different communications- and e­ arth-surface observation missions. Those are geostationary (GEO), ­low-earth (LEO), and ­sun-synchronous

Map 4: Approximate Flight Corridors of WSLC-Launched Rockets Source: By author, created with
Google Earth, based on Sarah Kirchberger and Patrick O’Keeffe, “Chinas Schleichende Annexion Im
Südchinesischen Meer-Die Strategischen Hintergründe [China’s Creeping Annexation in the South
China Sea],” SIRIUS—Zeitschrift Für Strategische Analysen [Journal of Strategic Analysis] 3(1) (2019),
pp. 3–20.

Control Through Cooperation?

17

(SSO) orbits (See Map 4).66 Thanks to Hainan’s proximity to the equator, WSLC raises the
Chinese space program’s maximum payload by 15% compared to spaceports in Xichang,
Taiyuan, and Jiuquan.67 The increased payload enables China to launch heavy military
and ­dual-use systems, such as China’s orbital space station ­Tiangong-2.68 WSLC can
launch the Long M
­ arch-5, China’s most powerful rocket.69 It furthermore has the advantage of allowing rockets and equipment to be delivered by ship, significantly increasing
the capacity over other spaceports that are supplied by railroad.70 WSLC has been under
construction since 2009 and was completed in 2014.71 In June 2016, the first successful
launch was conducted.72
Space vessels ascending out of WSLC would take one of three potential corridors—
depending on the orbit—all of which lead over the SCS. In the early stages of ascent, rockets are vulnerable to directed energy, kinetic, as well as electronic warfare attacks such as
spoofing and jamming.73 Since s­ pace-based systems are of utmost importance for the PLA
to operate modernized, informationized forces and to compete with the United States, it is
not surprising that China is building a secure, A2/­A D-based defense perimeter across the
SCS.74 It should also be noted that Chinese artificial island building in the SCS accelerated
one year ahead of WSLC’s construction.75

V. Corroborating the Alternative
Explanation: China’s Conditional Offers
of Cooperation with Littoral States
Until the 1990s, China pursued a comparatively aggressive policy and occupied
numerous territorial features of the SCS by force, particularly in the Paracels and Spratlys,
leading to a number of violent exchanges between the PLA and the militaries of Vietnam
and the Philippines.76 But China’s unlawful occupation of SCS territorial features, e.g., of
Mischief Reef in 1994, also led to considerable diplomatic backlash, incentivizing the Chinese leadership to explore other options to safeguard its strategic interests in the SCS. By
the mid–1990s China adapted its SCS policy in two significant ways.
First, China harmonized territorial claims in the SCS with the evolving international
regime on maritime law. Importantly, China ratified UNCLOS in 1996.77 In addition, China
codified its territorial claims through the passage of domestic legislation. In the late 1990s,
China’s National People’s Congress passed numerous laws that define China’s territorial rights to its adjacent waters.78 However, Fravel points out that China left its territorial
claims in the SCS purposely ambiguous, and numerous claims promulgated through these
various legal sources are contradictory. For instance, China’s EEZ claims, the invocation of
historical rights, and UNCLOS are incompatible with each other.79
Second, China deployed a “delaying strategy” throughout the late 1990s and 2000s,
using lengthy legislative processes to defend its territorial gains of the early 1990s.80 Beijing
also engaged with regional states through bilateral and multilateral agreements, such as
the 1995 Code of Conduct (CoC) with the Philippines81 or the 2002 Declaration of Conduct
(DoC) with ASEAN, signed at the 8th ASEAN summit in November 2002 in Phnom Penh.82
The 2002 DoC marks the first time that China signed a multilateral agreement relating
18

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

to the governance of the SCS. Previously, Beijing had sought to solve SCS disputes and
disagreements on territorial questions through bilateral negotiations. China also offered
regional states to cooperate in multilateral projects to explore the SCS seabed and locate
fossil fuels. A prominent example is the 2005 Joint Marine Seismic Undertaking (JMSU)
with the Philippines and Vietnam.
The remainder of this section concentrates on the second dimension of China’s efforts
to engage SCS littoral states in cooperation projects that would, if successful, result in
cooperation on SCS ocean governance, shared control over shipping lanes, and joint development of SCS resources (hydrocarbons, fish). The analysis focuses on Chinese bilateral
engagement with the Philippines as a representative case and multilateral engagement
through ASEAN.

5.1 Chinese Offers of Cooperation in the South China Sea:
The Example of the Philippines and ASEAN
Coinciding with improving ­China-Philippine diplomatic relations in the first decade
of the 21st century, Beijing found ways to cooperate with Manila in the SCS. At a h
­ igh-level
dialogue in Beijing in September 2004, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao offered Philippine
President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo to join efforts in promoting SCS ocean governance and
maritime security, including sea rescue, disaster mitigation, and joint exercises.83 They also
agreed to find a solution, in line with UNCLOS, to their contradicting territorial claims in
the SCS and to jointly develop natural resources.84 China and the Philippines agreed on
the JMSU with the objective of jointly gathering and analyzing data on the SCS seabed in
preparation for ensuing joint development of hydrocarbons.85 Through the JMSU, China
hoped to solve the SCS disputes first bilaterally and, when Hanoi joined in March 2005,
trilaterally.86
During Chinese President Hu Jintao’s visit to Manila in April 2005, on the 30th anniversary of S­ ino-Philippine diplomatic relations, Manila and Beijing agreed to cooperate
on numerous issues relating to trade, investment, infrastructure development, and agriculture. The two parties also signed an MOU on Defense Cooperation and initiated a consultation mechanism on defense and security between the Philippine and Chinese defense
departments.87 They further expressed their mutual will to maintain peace and stability
in the SCS, to cooperate with other ASEAN members to implement the 2002 DoC, and to
work with Vietnam within the framework of the JMSU.88
However, over the following years, China’s relations with the Philippines and other
ASEAN states deteriorated. This deterioration was in no small part due to SCS littoral
states’ opposition to Chinese illegal territorial claims in the SCS. Not surprisingly, this
adversely affected China’s efforts to solve SCS disputes with littoral states through bi- and
multilateral agreements in a fashion that would still guarantee China’s physical control
over the SCS. In the case of the Philippines, controversies over Chinese Official Development Assistance (ODA) led to a graft investigation by the Philippine Senate. As a result,
numerous C
­ hinese-financed infrastructure and agriculture development projects were
canceled in 2007.89 Philippine public attention also turned to the JMSU, which was suspected to undermine Philippine territorial rights in the SCS by giving Chinese and Vietnamese energy corporations access to Philippine maritime territory.90 The JMSU was then
Control Through Cooperation?

19

continued by the three parties and finalized in 2009, but it was kept under the radar and the
results were not publicized by any of the three governments.91
In the subsequent years, the dispute between China and the Philippines over territorial rights in the SCS escalated. This dispute notably began in the late years of Arroyo’s
second presidential term (June 2004–June 2010) and was carried into the Aquino administration (June 2010–June 2016). Initially, President Aquino sought to improve relations with
China, especially in economic terms.92 To do so, Aquino spent considerable political capital
and joined a 1­ 9-state coalition supporting China’s boycott of the Nobel Peace Prize award
to Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo in December 2010. Manila also extradited 14 Taiwanese
nationals to China in February 2011.93 With regards to the SCS, however, Aquino insisted
on Philippine territorial rights.94 The Aquino administration launched a Long Term Capability Development Plan to enhance Philippine defense capabilities, especially of the Navy
and Air Force, and improved security cooperation with the United States in 2011, which
went h
­ and-in-glove with the Obama administration’s Pivot to Asia, further exacerbating
discord between Manila and Beijing.95 The S­ ino-Philippine dispute, which started with the
Scarborough Shoal incident in April 2012 and led to the arbitration case brought by the
Philippines against China in January 2013, has been discussed in detail by previous publications.96 For this article’s purpose, it should be noted that throughout the Aquino administration and until Rodrigo Duterte’s inauguration as President of the Philippines in July
2016, Beijing extended no meaningful offers to cooperate with Manila on SCS ocean governance and resource exploration, neither bilaterally nor through ASEAN (cf. Figure 1).
Already during his presidential campaign, Duterte announced that he would repair
the ­Sino-Philippine relationship and reverse his predecessor’s confrontational stance on
China and the SCS.97 He also signaled early in his Presidency that he would engage in bilateral talks with China,98 and that joint maritime patrols with the United States would not
continue.99 Duterte also declared that he would not give much importance to the PCA ruling and would rather seek a bilateral solution with China on the SCS issue. A bilateral solution, of course, would notably come with the exclusion of ­extra-regional players, i.e., the
United States, and ignore international courts’ rulings, precisely reflecting China’s interest. China–ASEAN level efforts to advance and implement the 2002 DoC as well as the 2014
Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES) also made progress in the following months,
notably at the 19th ­China-ASEAN summit in September 2016 in Vientiane.100 Throughout
the prior four years, the S­ ino-Philippine territorial dispute had been an obstacle to improving SCS maritime security and resolving territorial issues, on bilateral as well as on the
multilateral A
­ SEAN-China level.101
President Duterte visited Beijing on October 20–22, 2016, where he and Xi announced
to resume talks on the SCS territorial dispute.102 On October 29, just one week later, Beijing
granted Philippine fishers access to the Scarborough Shoal (within the Philippine EEZ),
which is under effective Chinese control since April 2012.103 In December 2016, Beijing and
Manila even considered the formation of a joint coast guard, 104 which, however, did not
materialize in the end. Over the following two years, Manila and Beijing also discussed
cooperation on issues such as marine environmental protection, fisheries, marine scientific research, hydrocarbon development, and implementation of the CoC and DoC.105 For
instance, in July 2017, Beijing expressed support for a ­Sino-Philippine joint hydrocarbon
development project.106 During Duterte’s presidency, PLAN ships even made port calls in
20

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

the Philippines, all the while China’s illegal militarization of the SCS, notably in the Spratlys and Paracels, continued.107

Table 1: Chinese Offers to Cooperate and Share
SCS Resources with the Philippines and ASEAN
August 1995
China—Philippines; Signing of SCS CoC.
November 2002
China—ASEAN; Signing of DoC in the SCS.
November 2004
China—Philippines; Beijing offers to cooperate on SCS security (sea
	   rescue, disaster mitigation, joint exercises), agree to find solution based
	   on UNCLOS, JMSU.
March 2005
China—Philippines—Vietnam; Hanoi joins JMSU.
April 2005
China—Philippines; MOU on defense cooperation, agree to implement
	   2002 DoC, work with Vietnam on JMSU.
July–August 2016 China—ASEAN; Agree to advance and implement the DoC and CUES.
October 2016
China—Philippines; Beijing “grants” Philippine fishers access to
	  Scarborough Shoal.
May 2017
China—Philippines; PLAN port call to Davao, Mindanao on Manila’s
	  invitation.
July 2017
China—Philippines; Beijing proposes joint S­ ino-Philippine hydrocarbon
	  development project.

VI. Synthesis: Cooperation as Means to the
End of Controlling the South China Sea
The above analysis demonstrates through the example of the Philippines that China
has, on numerous occasions, sought to invite SCS littoral states to cooperate in bilateral
and multilateral frameworks to enhance maritime security, jointly police shipping routes,
contribute to ocean governance, and to share resources (hydrocarbon, fish). The common
explanation relating to economic, or nontraditional, security can hence be refuted. To the
contrary, China has tried to involve individual states like the Philippines as well as ASEAN
in efforts to jointly govern the SCS and share its resources. What needs to present, from
Beijing’s perspective, is that the littoral state effectively gives up its EEZ and accepts that
China, in principle, possesses territorial rights over the entire SCS, per its ­9-Dash Line.
Notably, such acceptance of China’s demands was absent during the Aquino presidency.
During Arroyo’s (2001–2010) and later Duterte’s (2016–2022) presidencies, on the other
hand, Philippine insistence on territorial rights was less pronounced, enabling China to use
cooperation projects to consolidate its illegal territorial claims.
The above analysis demonstrates that if a littoral state accepts China’s illegal claims,
Beijing will cooperatively grant access to SCS resources. To clarify: the littoral state will
be granted access to maritime territory that is, under UNCLOS, already within its EEZ.
For instance, in the early to mid–2000s, Beijing invited Manila, and later Hanoi, to jointly
explore the SCS seabed at a time when relations were stable, and the Arroyo administration prioritized commercial exchanges with China over territorial rights. This changed in
the final years of Arroyo’s and throughout Aquino’s presidency. Similarly, once Duterte,
by ignoring the PCA ruling, effectively accepted China’s territorial claims in 2016, Beijing
swiftly permitted Philippine fishers to again access the Scarborough Shoal, which is within
Control Through Cooperation?

21

the Philippine EEZ but under Chinese control since 2012. In other words, once Duterte gave
in to China’s Realpolitik and ignored his country’s legally assured territorial rights under
UNCLOS, Philippine marine industry workers were able to return to C
­ hinese-controlled
territory within the Philippine EEZ.
Indeed, Chinese scholars concur that the Chinese government is willing to share
resources with littoral states, as long as China’s territorial claims are accepted. Xu and Cao,
for instance, assert that China’s approach to maritime disputes in the SCS, and engagement
with littoral states, is guided by four principles:
1. The prerequisite is that the SCS is China’s sovereign maritime territory.
2. Disputes over sovereignty should be shelved until conditions improve and the eventual
settlement is possible, but the claim of sovereignty cannot be given up.
3. China may conduct joint resource development with regional states in disputed
maritime territory.
4. The purpose of joint development with regional states is to create conditions for the
eventual consensual settlement of disputes through cooperation and promotion of mutual
understanding.108
Especially principles (3) and (4) are instructive to understand the role that SCS
resources have in Chinese strategy, and how China utilizes joint development for its strategic interests. China seeks to bind regional states into mutually lucrative cooperation
projects, thus incentivizing regional states to eventually accept China’s territorial claims
to secure continued access to SCS resources. This is supported by the previous section’s
analysis. China’s leveraging of economic interdependence in this context is reminiscent
of its economic statecraft in other contingencies like the South Korean THAAD case or
more recently Chinese import restrictions of a wide range of Australian goods.109 Cha and
Lim refer to this practice as China’s “Predatory Liberalism” whereby China “engages in the
global trading order up until the point when it chooses not to […]. Instead, China leverages
the vulnerability that interdependence creates in a predatory fashion.”110
It can be concluded that the driver behind China’s SCS policy—which is sometimes
aggressive/coercive and sometimes cooperative—cannot be the securing of control over
commercial SLOCs and maritime resources. Rather, China employs offers of cooperation in ocean governance and in developing SCS resources to garner regional states’ acquiescence on the question of territoriality, and eventual acceptance of effective Chinese
control. The example of China’s engagement toward the Philippines and ASEAN demonstrates this. China demands undisputed sovereignty over the SCS, not merely exclusive
access to resources. The objective of undisputed control over the SCS is to realize China’s
­m ilitary-strategic objectives, namely the development of A2/AD, establishing the SCS as a
nuclear bastion, and securing the airspace above the SCS for rocket launches from WSLC
on Hainan. These ­m ilitary-strategic objectives require undisputed access to the entire SCS
and all its territorial features on which military installations such as radars, missiles, runways, harbors, etc., can be deployed. In Beijing’s calculation, the best way to achieve this is
to leverage joint cooperative relationships with regional states. If this is not reciprocated,
as was the case with the Philippines between 2012 and 2016, China will instead use military
and economic coercive power to assume control of SCS territory, even within the EEZ of
other littoral states.
22

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

The above analysis hence supports the alternative explanation of China’s militarystrategic interests to be the driver of Chinese actions. This explanation already exists in specialist publications but has been ignored by many academic and most journalistic accounts.
By demonstrating that China—absent littoral states’ strong opposition—in fact readily
offers cooperation on ocean governance and joint resource exploration as means to eventually gain undisputed control over the SCS, the common explanation relating to economic
security can be refuted. The alternative explanation relating to China’s ­m ilitary-strategic
interests, however, holds up against the above analysis. The explanation of nationalism can
neither be refuted nor corroborated. It can hence be accepted as another contributing variable until it is either verified or falsified by future empirical analyses.

VII. Conclusion
Disputes in the SCS are well researched subject matter within the discipline of international security- and strategic studies. China’s role in these disputes is preeminent due to
its relative economic size and military power on the one hand, and its aggressive courses
of action, illegal island building, and disregard for international law on the other. Beijing’s
aggressive approach and illegal island building are commonly explained as a function of
economic security considerations, namely the control of SLOCs and access to fish and
hydrocarbon resources. The alternative explanation posits that China’s m
­ ilitary-strategic
interests are the driver behind its actions in the SCS. As this article demonstrates, the alternative explanation is reconcilable with the fact that China also offers cooperation in ocean
governance and joint resource exploration to littoral states. The m
­ ilitary-strategic explanation is hence corroborated, whereas the common explanation relating to control over
SLOCs and resources can be refuted.
It is demonstrated that China’s SCS policy, specifically its offers of cooperation with
littoral states, can be explained as means to consolidate China’s physical control over the
SCS, further underwriting its m
­ ilitary-strategic objectives. Chinese scholars concur that
joint exploration of SCS resources serves as a coercive tool to incentivize littoral states to
cooperate and to effectively accept China’s illegal claims. Once cooperation yields lucrative results, the littoral state’s costs of disputing Chinese illegal territorial claims, and thus
losing out on the exploration business, would be significantly higher. Of course, economic
factors will also inform Chinese foreign policy, but China’s willingness to share resources
demonstrates that this cannot explain its aggressive behavior toward littoral states. While
the Philippines and ASEAN are useful case studies, SCS disputes are ­multi-faceted, and
this article’s analysis is only partly representative of China’s engagement with other SCS littoral states. Future research may explore Beijing’s assertive as well as cooperative coercive
policies toward further regional states to improve our understanding of China’s strategic
ambitions toward the SCS.
Last but not least, the findings of this article have policy implications for SCS littoral
states, ASEAN, and states from the wider A
­ sia-Pacific region, including the United States.
It has been known that China disregards UNCLOS since it denied the PCA jurisdiction
over SCS disputes and announced that it will not accept the ruling. So far, territorial disputes between SCS littoral states and China were understood to be driven by considerations
Control Through Cooperation?

23

relating to resources and shipping lanes. If that were the case, bilateral and multilateral
cooperation projects such as the JSMU or the CoC and DoC would seem like a solution.
However, it appears that China merely uses offers of cooperation as a means, a policy tool
so to say, to control littoral states with economic inducements. The end of China’s actions in
the SCS, however, is to secure m
­ ilitary-strategic objectives and to establish A2/AD, operate
a nuclear bastion, and protect rockets launched from its spaceport on Hainan. Understanding China’s true objectives in the SCS as well as the limited impact that UNCLOS and international law more generally have on China’s foreign policy will be crucial in finding a more
robust solution to the ongoing territorial disputes.

Acknowledgments
Maximilian Ernst would like to thank the editors of the Journal of Territorial and
Maritime Studies for the competent management of the ­peer-review and publication process and two anonymous reviewers for useful comments and edits. An earlier version of
this article was presented at the Dreizack Maritime Security Conference organized by the
Institute for Security Policy Kiel (ISPK) in November 2021. Comments and suggestions by
conference participants contributed to the present research. Special thanks go to Tongfi
Kim, Jon Dannemann, and Da Hee Jeon for detailed comments and suggestions on the
manuscript.

Notes
1. For a discussion of this dilemma, see also: Maximilian Ernst, “Costs of Coercion: Predicaments
of Chinese Statecraft in the ­A sia-Pacific,” Global Politics Review 7(1) (2021), pp. 6–17.
2. Swaran Singh, “Continuity and Change in China’s Maritime Strategy,” Strategic Analysis 23(9)
(December 1999), pp. 1493–1508, https://doi.org/10.1080/09700169908455139; Ross Babbage, “Countering China’s Adventurism in the South China Sea” (Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments, 2017), pp. 11–12.
3. Kheng Swe Lim, “China’s Nationalist Narrative of the South China Sea: A Preliminary Analysis,”
in Power Politics in Asia’s Contested Waters, ed. Enrico Fels and T
­ ruong-Minh Huy Vu (Berlin: Springer,
2016), pp. 159–172, https://doi.org/10.1007/­978-3-319-26152-2_8; Bill Hayton, “The Modern Origins of
China’s South China Sea Claims: Maps, Misunderstandings, and the Maritime Geology,” Modern China
45(2) (March 2019), pp. 127–170, https://doi.org/10.1177/0097700418771678.
4. Sarah Kirchberger and Patrick O’Keeffe, “Chinas Schleichende Annexion im Südchinesischen
­Meer-die Strategischen Hintergründe [China’s Creeping Annexation in the South China Sea],” SIRIUS—Zeitschrift Für Strategische Analysen [Journal of Strategic Analysis] 3(1) (2019), pp. 3–20, https://doi.
org/10.1515/­sirius-2019-1002.
5. Chen Guang Ang, “The South China Sea Dispute ­Re-Visited,” IDSS Working Paper Series (Singapore: Institute for Defence and Strategic Studies, 1999).
6. Toshi Yoshihara, “The 1974 Paracels Sea Battle,” Naval War College Review 69(2) (2016), pp.
41–65.
7. Koh Swee Lean Collin and Minh Tri Ngo, “Learning from the Battle of the Spratly Islands,” The
Diplomat, March 20, 2018, https://thediplomat.com/2018/03/­learning-from-the-battle-of-the-spratlyislands/, accessed May 5, 2022.
8. Greg Austin, “Unwanted Entanglement: The Philippines’ Spratly Policy as a Case Study in Conflict
Enhancement?,” Security Dialogue 34(1) (2003), pp. 41–54, https://doi.org/10.1177/09670106030341005.
9. A useful overview is provided by: Christine Elizabeth Macaraig and Adam James Fenton, “Analyzing the Causes and Effects of the South China Sea Dispute,” Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies 8(2) (2021), pp. 42–58.

24

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

10. Except for Taiwan, which at least officially claims portions of the SCS similar to those of the
PRC. Still, Taiwan does not assert its claims through naval presence or violations of other claimants’ EEZ.
Kimberly L. Wilson, “Party Politics and National Identity in Taiwan’s South China Sea Claims,” Asian
Survey 57(2) (April 2017), pp. 271–296, https://doi.org/10.1525/as.2017.57.2.271.
11. Viet Hoang, “The Code of Conduct for the South China Sea: A Long and Bumpy Road,” The Diplomat, September 8, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/09/­t he-code-of-conduct-for-the-south-chinasea-a-long-and-bumpy-road/, accessed May 5, 2022.
12. Tom Miller, China’s Asian Dream: Empire Building along the New Silk Road (London: Zed
Books, 2019), p. 199.
13. Permanent Court of Arbitration, “The South China Sea Arbitration (The Republic of Philippines v. The People’s Republic of China),” ­P CA-CPA, January 22, 2013, https://­p ca-cpa.org/en/
cases/7/#:~:text=On%2022%20January%202013%2C%20the, accessed May 5, 2022.
14. Ryan D. Martinson, “Echelon Defense: The Role of Sea Power in Chinese Maritime Dispute
Strategy,” CMSI Red Books (New Port, RI: U.S. Naval War College, 2018), pp. 1–3.
15. Christina Lai, “Acting One Way and Talking Another: China’s Coercive Economic Diplomacy
in East Asia and Beyond,” The Pacific Review 31(2) (2018), pp. 169–187, https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748
.2017.1357652; Ketian Zhang, “Cautious Bully: Reputation, Resolve, and Beijing’s Use of Coercion in the
South China Sea,” International Security 44(1) (2019), pp. 117–159, https://doi.org/10.1162/isec_a_00354.
16. Bernard D. Cole, The Great Wall at Sea: China’s Navy in the T
­ wenty-First Century, 2nd ed.
(Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2010), p. 49; Michael Lelyveld, “Mideast Oil Drives China Disputes,” Radio Free Asia, July 18, 2011, https://www.rfa.org/english/commentaries/energy_watch/­
oil-07182011103202.html, accessed May 5, 2022.
17. China Power Project, “How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea?,” CSIS, n.d., https://
chinapower.csis.org/­much-trade-transits-south-china-sea/, accessed May 5, 2022.
18. Global Security, “South China Sea Oil Shipping Lanes,” n.d., https://www.globalsecurity.org/
military/world/war/­spratly-ship.htm, accessed May 5, 2022.
19. Cesare M. Scartozzi et al., “Connecting Northeast Asia: Renewable Energy and Prospects for
Cooperation,” Asian Perspective 45(4) (2021), pp. 761–783, https://doi.org/10.1353/apr.2021.0040.
20. China Power Project, “How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea?”
21. Beina Xu, “South China Sea Tensions,” Council on Foreign Relations, May 14, 2014, https://www.
cfr.org/backgrounder/­south-china-sea-tensions, accessed May 5, 2022.
22. Toshi Yoshihara, “Chinese Maritime Geography,” in Strategy in Asia: The Past, Present, and
Future of Regional Security, eds. Thomas G. Mahnken and Dan Blumenthal (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2014), pp. 43–60.
23. Evan Braden Montgomery, “Reinforcing the Front Line: U.S. Defense Strategy and the Rise of
China,” (Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2017), p. 32.
24. Marc Lanteigne, “China’s Maritime Security and the ‘Malacca Dilemma,’” Asian Security 4(2)
(2009), pp. 143–161, https://doi.org/10.1080/14799850802006555.
25. AMTI, “South China Sea Energy Exploration and Development,” Asia Maritime Transparency
Initiative, n.d., https://amti.csis.org/­s outh-china-sea-energy-exploration-and-development/, accessed
May 5, 2022.
26. Ethen Kim Lieser, “How Much Oil and Gas Is Contained in the South China Sea?,” National
Interest, February 22, 2021, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/­how-much-oil-and-gas-containedsouth-china-sea-178587, accessed May 5, 2022.
27. Eugene C. LaFond, “South China Sea: Economic Aspects,” Britannica, April 16, 2020, https://
www.britannica.com/place/­South-China-Sea/­E conomic-aspects, accessed May 5, 2022.
28. Clive Schofield, “Fish, Not Oil, at the Heart of the South China Sea Conflict,” Fridtjof Nansens
Institutt, October 24, 2017, https://www.fni.no/news/­fi sh-not-oil-at-the-heart-of-the-south-china-seaconflict-article1556-330.html, accessed May 5, 2022.
29. LaFond 2020.
30. Xu 2014.
31. Ben Dolven et al., “Chinese Land Reclamation in the South China Sea: Implications and Policy
Options” (Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, June 2015), p. 19.
32. See for example: Robert S. Ross, “The Problem with the Pivot,” Foreign Affairs, December 2012,
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/asia/­2 012-11-01/­problem-pivot, accessed May 5, 2022; Aileen
Baviera, “Domestic Interests and Foreign Policy in China and the Philippines Implications for the South
China Sea Disputes,” Philippine Studies: Historical & Ethnographic Viewpoints 62(1) (2014), pp. 133–143,

Control Through Cooperation?

25

https://doi.org/10.1353/phs.2014.0005; Suisheng Zhao, “Foreign Policy Implications of Chinese Nationalism Revisited: The Strident Turn,” Journal of Contemporary China 22(82) (July 2013), pp. 535–553, https://
doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2013.766379.
33. Masayuki Masuda, “China: Quest for a G
­ reat-Power Role,” in East Asian Strategic Review, ed.
Shinji Hyodo (Tokyo: National Institute for Defense Studies, 2017), pp. 73–102.
34. Stein Ringen, The Perfect Dictatorship: China in the 21st Century (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2016), pp. 10–11, https://doi.org/10.5790/hongkong/9789888208937.001.0001.
35. Mathieu Duchâtel and Eugenia Kazakova, “Tensions in the South China Sea: The Nuclear
Dimension,” SIPRI, August 27, 2015, https://www.sipri.org/commentary/essay/2015/­t ensions-southchina-sea-nuclear-dimension, accessed May 5, 2022; Rex Li, “China’s Sea Power Aspirations and Strategic
Behaviour in the South China Sea from the Theoretical Perspective of Identity Construction,” in Power
Politics in Asia’s Contested Waters, ed. Enrico Fels and T
­ ruong-Minh Huy Vu (Berlin: Springer, 2016), pp.
117–137, https://doi.org/10.1007/­978-3-319-26152-2_6; Toshi Yoshihara and James R. Holmes, Red Star
Over the Pacific: China’s Rise and the Challenge to U.S. Maritime Strategy, 2nd ed. (Annapolis, MD: Naval
Institute Press, 2018), pp. 199–203.
36. Jinping Xi, The Governance of China (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press Co. Ltd., 2014), p. 53.
37. Yoshihara and Holmes, Red Star Over the Pacific, pp. 1–2.
38. China Power Project, “How Is China Modernizing Its Navy?,” CSIS, n.d., https://chinapower.
csis.org/­china-naval-modernization/, accessed May 5, 2022.
39. Stephen Biddle and Ivan Oelrich, “Future Warfare in the Western Pacific: Chinese Antiaccess/
Area Denial, U.S. AirSea Battle, and Command of the Commons in East Asia,” International Security
41(1) (July 2016), pp. 7–48, https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00249.
40. Yoshihara and Holmes 2018, pp. 71–94.
41. Ibid., p. 202.
42. Vengalil Venugopal, “How Effective Is China’s A2/AD in the South China Sea,” 9dashline, June
9, 2020, https://www.9dashline.com/article/­how-effective-is-chinas-a2/­ad-in-the-south-china-sea?s=08,
accessed May 5, 2022; Thomas G. Mahnken, “China’s ­A nti-Access Strategy in Historical and Theoretical
Perspective,” Journal of Strategic Studies 34(3) (2011), pp. 299–323, https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.201
1.574971.
43. Minh Tri Ngo, “China’s A2/AD Challenge in the South China Sea: Securing the Air from the
Ground,” The Diplomat, May 19, 2017, https://thediplomat.com/2017/05/­chinas-a2ad-challenge-in-thesouth-china-sea-securing-the-air-from-the-ground/, accessed May 5, 2022.
44. Eric Heginbotham et al., The U.S.–China Military Scorecard: Forces, Geography, and the Evolving Balance of Power 1996–2007 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2015), p. 93; Kirchberger and
O’Keeffe 2019, p. 10, https://doi.org/10.7249/RR392.
45. Kingston Reif, “U.S. and Allied Ballistic Missile Defenses in the ­A sia-Pacific Region,” Arms
Control Association, January 2019, https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/­u s-allied-ballistic-missiledefenses-asia-pacific-region, accessed May 5, 2022.
46. Riqiang Wu, “China’s Anxiety About U.S. Missile Defence: A Solution,” Survival 55(5) (October
2013), pp. 29–52, https://doi.org/10.1080/00396338.2013.841803.
47. Maximilian Ernst, “When Coercion Fails, Then What? An Analysis of Chinese Balancing
Responses to THAAD Deployment in the Republic of Korea,” in Next Generation Perspectives on Korean
Peninsula Security, ed. Susan A. Thornton and Juliet Lee (New York: National Committee on American
Foreign Policy, 2021), pp. 113–129.
48. Thomas G. Mahnken et al., “Understanding Strategic Interaction in the Second Nuclear Age”
(Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2019), pp. 72–75.
49. U.S. Department of Defense, “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s
Republic of China 2020,” Annual Report to Congress (Washington, D.C.: Office of the Secretary of
Defense, 2020), pp. 49, 55–56, 60–62, 90–94.
50. Sarah Kirchberger, Assessing China’s Naval Power (Berlin: Springer, 2015), pp. 47–49, https://
doi.org/10.1007/­978-3-662-47127-2.
51. Duchâtel and Kazakova, 2015; Brittney Washington, “The South China Sea and Nuclear Deterrence in the Asia Pacific,” in Project on Nuclear Issues, ed. Mark Cancian (Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), 2017), pp. 115–125; Tong Zhao, “Tides of Change: China’s Nuclear Ballistic
Missile Submarines and Strategic Stability” (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, 2018), p. 28; Michael Paul, “Maritime Nuclear Deterrence: S­ ubmarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles
in the South China Sea,” SWP Comment (Berlin: SWP, October 2018); Kirchberger and O’Keeffe, 2019.

26

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

52. Gjert Lage Dyndal, “50 Years Ago: The Origins of NATO Concerns About the Threat of Russian Strategic Nuclear Submarines,” NATO Review, March 24, 2017, https://www.nato.int/docu/review/
articles/2017/03/24/­5 0-years-ago-the-origins-of-nato-concerns-about-the-threat-of-russian-strategicnuclear-submarines/index.html, accessed May 5, 2022.
53. Robert G. Loewenthal, “Cold War Insights into China’s New ­Ballistic-Missile Submarine Fleet,”
in China’s Future Nuclear Submarine Force, eds. Andrew S. Erickson et al. (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2007), pp. 286–303; Kirchberger and O’Keeffe, 2019, p. 12.
54. China Power Project, “Does China Have an Effective S­ ea-Based Nuclear Deterrent?,” CSIS,
December 28, 2015, https://chinapower.csis.org/ssbn/, accessed May 5, 2022; Duchâtel and Kazakova
2015.
55. Matthew P. Funaiole, Joseph S. Bermudez, Jr., and Brian Hart, “A Glimpse of Chinese Ballistic Missile Submarines,” CSIS, August 4, 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/­g limpse-chinese-ballisticmissile-submarines, accessed May 5, 2022.
56. U.S. Department of Defense 2020, p. 86; Shaan Shaikh, “China Flight Tests New ­J L-3 SLBM”
(Washington, D.C.: CSIS Missile Defense Project, December 21, 2018); CSIS Missile Defense Project, “­J L2,” CSIS, July 31, 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/­jl-2/, accessed May 5, 2022.
57. Minnie Chan, “China’s New Nuclear Submarine Missiles Expand Range in U.S.: Analysts,”
South China Morning Post, May 2, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3131873/­
chinas-new-nuclear-submarine-missiles-expand-range-us-analysts, accessed May 5, 2022.
58. Catherine Wong, “‘Underwater Great Wall’: Chinese Firm Proposes Building Network of Submarine Detectors to Boost Nation’s Defense,” South China Morning Post, May 19, 2016, https://www.
scmp.com/news/china/­d iplomacy-defence/article/1947212/­u nderwater-great-wall-chinese-firmproposes-building, accessed May 5, 2022; Ewen Levick, “China’s ‘Underwater Great Wall,’” Maritime
Executive, June 18, 2018, https://www.­m aritime-executive.com/editorials/­c hina-s-underwater-greatwall, accessed May 5, 2022.
59. Sam LaGrone, “China Reclaimed Land for South China Sea ­A nti-Submarine Helicopter Base
Near Vietnam,” USNI News, February 15, 2016, https://news.usni.org/2016/02/15/­china-reclaimed-landfor-south-china-sea-anti-submarine-helicopter-base-near-vietnam, accessed May 5, 2022.
60. Gregory B. Poling, “The Conventional Wisdom on China’s Island Bases Is Dangerously Wrong,”
War on the Rocks, January 10, 2020, https://warontherocks.com/2020/01/­t he-conventional-wisdom-onchinas-island-bases-is-dangerously-wrong/, accessed May 5, 2022.
61. Kirchberger and O’Keeffe 2019, p. 13.
62. “2019 Defense White Paper: China’s National Defense in the New Era,” 中华人民共和国国防
部 [Ministry of National Defense of the People’s Republic of China], July 24, 2019, http://eng.mod.gov.cn/
news/­2019-07/24/content_4846443.htm, accessed May 5, 2022.
63. Andrea Gilli and Mauro Gilli, “Why China Has Not Caught Up Yet,” International Security
43(3) (2019), pp. 141–189, https://doi.org/10.1162/isec_a_00337.
64. Anthony H. Cordesman and Joseph Kendall, “How China Plans to Utilize Space for A2/AD
in the Pacific,” National Interest, August 17, 2016, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/­t he-buzz/­how-chinaplans-utilize-space-a2-ad-the-pacific-17383, accessed May 5, 2022; Mike Yeo, “China’s Missile and Space
Tech Is Creating a Defensive Bubble Difficult to Penetrate,” Defense News, June 2, 2020, https://www.
defensenews.com/global/­a sia-pacific/2020/06/01/­chinas-missile-and-space-tech-is-creating-a-defensivebubble-difficult-to-penetrate/, accessed May 5, 2022.
65. Kirchberger and O’Keeffe 2019, p. 14.
66. Ibid., p. 15.
67. Shuang Cheng Tzu, “China’s Numerous Active Spaceports,” Space Today, n.d., http://www.
spacetoday.org/Rockets/Spaceports/China.html, accessed May 5, 2022.
68. Kevin Pollpeter et al., “China Dream, Space Dream: China’s Progress in Space Technologies and
Implications for the United States” (U.S.–China Economic and Security Review Commission, February
2015), p. 98; “­Shijian-18 Satellite & D
­ FH-5 Platform,” Spaceflight101, January 2021, https://spaceflight101.
com/­long-march-5-shijian-18/­shijian-18/, accessed May 5, 2022.
69. 王辛莉 Wang Xinli, “海南首次展出文昌航天发射场设计模型图 [Hainan Exhibits for the
First Time Design of Wenchang Space Launch Site],” 中国新闻图片网 [CNS Photo], April 29, 2008,
https://web.archive.org/web/20110723124004/http://www.cnsphoto.com/trssearch/ShowLibDetailTrs.
asp?RecID=11795527, accessed May 5, 2022.
70. Leonard David, “China’s New Spaceport to Launch Country’s Largest Rocket Yet,” Space.Com,
April 2, 2014, https://www.space.com/­25323-china-new-spaceport-rocket-launches.html, accessed May

Control Through Cooperation?

27

5, 2022; 李厦 Li Sha et al., “长征五号遥三运载火箭运抵海南文昌 [­CZ-5 Launch Vehicle Yaosan Arrived
in Wenchang, Hainan],” 观察者 [The Observer], October 27, 2019, https://www.guancha.cn/­i ndustryscience/2019_10_27_522891.shtml, accessed May 5, 2022.
71. Gang Li, “China Begins Space Center Construction in Southern Island of Hainan,” People’s
Daily, September 14, 2009, http://en.people.cn/90001/90781/90876/6756756.html, accessed May 5, 2022;
“China Begins New Space Center Construction,” Space War, September 15, 2009, https://www.spacewar.
com/reports/China_Begins_New_Space_Center_Construction_999.html, accessed May 5, 2022.
72. “Wenchang Space Launch Centre,” China Space Report, n.d., https://chinaspacereport.
wordpress.com/facilities/wenchang/, accessed May 5, 2022.
73. U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “Challenges to Security in Space,” (DIA, February 2019), pp.
8–10.
74. Pollpeter et al. 2015, p. 14; See also: Chinese National Space Administration, “China’s Space
Activities in 2016,” Information Office of the State Council of the PRC, December 2016, http://www.china.
org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7245058.htm, accessed May 5, 2022.
75. Kirchberger and O’Keeffe 2019, p. 17.
76. M. Taylor Fravel, “China’s Strategy in the South China Sea,” Contemporary Southeast Asia 33(3)
(2011), pp. 292–319, https://doi.org/10.1355/­c s33-3b.
77. Ibid., p. 294.
78. For a full list of Chinese national legislation that is contingent on UNCLOS, see: UN Office of
Legal Affairs, Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, “China,” United Nations, 2020, https://
www.un.org/Depts/los/LEGISLATIONANDTREATIES/STATEFILES/CHN.htm, accessed May 5, 2022.
79. Fravel 2011, p. 294.
80. Ibid., pp. 298–299.
81. International Crisis Group, “The Philippines’ Dilemma: How to Manage Tensions in the South
China Sea,” Crisis Group, December 2, 2021, https://www.crisisgroup.org/asia/­north-east-asia/china/­316philippines-dilemma-how-manage-tensions-south-china-sea, accessed May 5, 2022.
82. ISN ETH Zurich, “Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea,” PRIA,
November 4, 2002, https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/125380/5066_South_China_Sea.pdf, accessed May 5,
2022.
83. Renato Cruz De Castro, “­Twenty-First Century Philippines’ Policy Toward an Emergent China:
From E
­ qui-Balancing to Strategic Balancing,” Asian Politics & Policy 8(2) (April 2016), pp. 305–328,
https://doi.org/10.1111/aspp.12249.
84. Republic of the Philippines, “Memorial of the Philippines Volume 1,” Arbitration under Annex
VII of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (Manila, March 2014), p. 50.
85. Ian Storey, “China and the Philippines: Moving Beyond the South China Sea Dispute,” China
Brief 6(17) (2007).
86. Ernest Z. Bower, “The JMSU: A Tale of Bilateralism and Secrecy in the South China Sea,” Southeast Asia Program (Washington, D.C.: CSIS, July 27, 2010).
87. Embassy of the PRC in the Philippines, “Joint Statement of the People’s Republic of China and
the Republic of the Philippines,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC, April 28, 2005, http://ph.­chinaembassy.org/eng/zfgx/zzgx/t199778.htm, accessed May 5, 2022.
88. De Castro 2016, p. 306.
89. Philippine Daily Inquirer, “Arroyo Couple Can Post Bail,” AsiaOne, December 30, 2011, https://
www.asiaone.com/News/AsiaOne%2BNews/Asia/Story/­A1Story20111230-319035.html, accessed May 5,
2022.
90. Ian Storey, “Trouble and Strife in the South China Sea Part II: The Philippines and China,”
China Brief 8(9) (2008).
91. Marites Danguilan Vitug, “Rock Solid: Standing Up to China,” Minda News, August 6, 2018,
https://www.mindanews.com/mindaviews/2018/08/­rock-solid-standing-up-to-china/, accessed May 5,
2022.
92. “Hu Jintao Holds Talks with Philippine President,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC,
August 31, 2011, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/cedk/eng/TourChina/t855400.htm, accessed May 5, 2022.
93. “Philippines ‘Interests Above Nobel,’” Aljazeera, December 12, 2010, https://www.aljazeera.
com/news/2010/12/12/­philippines-interests-above-nobel, accessed May 5, 2022; “Philippine Government Must Respect Taiwan Sovereignty,” Taiwan Today, February 11, 2011, https://taiwantoday.tw/news.
php?unit=2&post=1666, accessed May 5, 2022.
94. International Crisis Group, “Stirring Up the South China Sea (II): Regional Responses,” Crisis

28

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

Group, July 24, 2012, https://www.crisisgroup.org/asia/­s outh-east-asia/­s outh-china-sea/­stirring-southchina-sea-ii-regional-responses, accessed May 5, 2022.
 	95. Renato Cruz De Castro, “Philippine Strategic Culture: Continuity in the Face of Changing
Regional Dynamics,” Contemporary Security Policy 35(2) (2014), pp. 249–269, https://doi.org/10.1080/13
523260.2014.927673.
 	96. See for example: Renato Cruz De Castro, “The Aquino Administration’s Balancing Policy
Against an Emergent China: Its Domestic and External Dimensions,” Pacific Affairs 87(1) (2014), pp. 5–27,
https://doi.org/10.5509/2014871005.
 	97. Sebastian Strangio, In the Dragon’s Shadow: Southeast Asia in the Chinese Century (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2020), p. 253, https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300256253.
 	98. Manuel Mogato, “Philippines’ Duterte Says Talks with China on Sea Dispute ‘Within the
Year,’” Reuters, August 23, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/­u s-southchinasea-ruling-philippines/­
philippines-duterte-says-talks-with-china-on-sea-dispute-within-the-year-idUSKCN10Y19E, accessed
May 5, 2022.
 	99. Richard Javad Heydarian, “Assessing Duterte’s Diplomacy,” Council on Foreign Relations, September 15, 2016, https://www.cfr.org/blog/­a ssessing-dutertes-diplomacy, accessed May 5, 2022.
100. “Joint Statement on the Application of the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea in the South
China Sea,” ASEAN, September 7, 2016, https://asean.org/­joint-statement-on-the-application-of-thecode-for-unplanned-encounters-at-sea-in-the-south-china-sea/, accessed May 5, 2022.
101. Michael Peel, “Divided Asean Nations Issue Mild Statement on South China Sea,” Financial Times, September 8, 2016, https://www.ft.com/content/­e e78dad2-75a6-11e6-b60a-de4532d5ea35,
accessed May 5, 2022.
102. Ankit Panda, “Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte Meets Xi Jinping: First Takeaways,” The
Diplomat, October 21, 2016, https://thediplomat.com/2016/10/­philippine-president-rodrigo-dutertemeets-xi-jinping-first-takeaways/, accessed May 5, 2022.
103. Emily Rauhala, “South China Sea Dispute: China Has Quietly Stopped Chasing Fishermen
from Contested Shoal,” Sydney Morning Post, October 29, 2016, https://www.smh.com.au/world/­s outhchina-sea-dispute-china-has-quietly-stopped-chasing-fishermen-from-contested-shoal-20161029gsdlbs.html, accessed May 5, 2022.
104. Prashanth Parameswaran, “China, Philippines Mull New Coast Guard Cooperation,” The Diplomat, December 17, 2016, https://thediplomat.com/2016/12/­c hina-philippines-mull-new-coast-guardcooperation/, accessed May 5, 2022.
105. Kristin Huang, “China, Philippines Talks Silent on Militarization of South China Sea,”
South China Morning Post, February 14, 2018, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/­d iplomacy-defence/
article/2133327/­china-philippines-talks-silent-militarisation-south, accessed May 5, 2022.
106. Kristin Huang, “Beijing Sees Joint Energy Venture with Manila as a ‘Model’ for Resolving
South China Sea Disputes,” South China Morning Post, July 26, 2017, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/­
diplomacy-defence/article/2104097/­b eijing-sees-joint-energy-venture-manila-model, accessed May 5,
2022.
107. “Duterte Visits Chinese Warships in Hometown Davao in First Philippines Port Call Since 2010,”
South China Morning Post, May 1, 2017, https://www.scmp.com/news/asia/diplomacy/article/2092036/­
duterte-visits-chinese-warships-hometown-davao-first-philippines, accessed May 5, 2022.
108. Hui Xu and Xianyu Cao, “A Perspective on China’s Maritime Strategy,” in Handbook of Naval
Strategy and Security, ed. Joachim Krause and Sebastian Bruns (Abingdon: Routledge, 2016), pp. 339–350.
109. Jeffrey Wilson, “Australia Shows the World What Decoupling from China Looks Like,” Foreign Policy, November 9, 2021, https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/11/09/­australia-china-decoupling-tradesanctions-coronavirus-geopolitics/, accessed May 5, 2022; Ernst, 2021.
110. Victor Cha and Andy Lim, “Flagrant Foul: China’s Predatory Liberalism and the NBA,”
The Washington Quarterly 42(4) (October 2, 2019), pp. 23–42, https://doi.org/10.1080/0163660X.2019.
1694265.

Biographical Statement
Maximilian Ernst is a researcher with the Centre for Security, Diplomacy, and Strategy
(CSDS) at the Brussels School of Governance and a PhD candidate at the Vrije Universiteit
Control Through Cooperation?

29

Brussels. His research focuses on A
­ sia-Pacific security, particularly Chinese foreign policy
towards regional states. He received a B.A from the J­ ohannes-Gutenberg University Mainz
and an M.A. from Yonsei University. In 2020, Maximilian was a transatlantic fellow at the
AICGS at Johns Hopkins University. His research has been published in journals such as
North Korean Review, Asian Journal of Peacebuilding, Asian Perspective, and Journal for
Intelligence, Propaganda and Security Studies.

Submitted: 01-25-2022 • Sent for Review: 02-02-2022 • Decision: 03-03-2022

30

Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies, Summer/Fall 2022

