Australian Journal of International Aﬀairs

ISSN: 1035-7718 (Print) 1465-332X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/caji20

Examining the Philippines’ China policy: great
powers and domestic politics
Xiangning Wu & Joseph Ching Velasco
To cite this article: Xiangning Wu & Joseph Ching Velasco (2022) Examining the Philippines’
China policy: great powers and domestic politics, Australian Journal of International Aﬀairs,
76:6, 672-693, DOI: 10.1080/10357718.2022.2085242
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2022.2085242

Published online: 10 Jun 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 2441

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=caji20

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
2022, VOL. 76, NO. 6, 672–693
https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2022.2085242

Examining the Philippines’ China policy: great powers and
domestic politics
Xiangning Wua and Joseph Ching Velascob
a

Department of Government and Public Administration, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau; bDepartment of
Political Science and Development Studies, De La Salle University, Manila, Philippines
ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

When great powers such as the United States and China grow
especially hawkish with more uncertainties, how does a smaller
state react to such a complex and dangerous territorial conﬂict?
Given the competing frames of inﬂuence between China and the
United States, what are the underlying reasons for the shift in the
Philippines’ foreign policy? This paper focuses on the Philippines’
changing foreign policy on the South China Sea dispute and
examines the main rationale for its shift in strategy towards
China. We use the perspective of neoclassical realism to unpack
the constraining factors that underlie the Philippines’ domestic
politics and ongoing global exigencies. With changes in its
domestic politics and the security challenges posed by the
evolving geopolitics of the Indo-Paciﬁc region, the Philippines is
in a diﬃcult situation, having to choose between a territorially
hostile trading partner and its historical security guarantor.

Sino-Philippine relations;
Philippine foreign policy;
South China Sea dispute; US
Indo-Paciﬁc strategy

Introduction
Sino-Philippine relations have been ‘one of the most volatile interstate relationships in
recent memory’ (Heydarian 2017a, 573). China and the Philippines have overlapping
claims in the South China Sea (SCS), particularly over the Spratly Islands, Scarborough
Shoal, and more recently, the Whitsun Reef. Over the past decade, Sino-Philippine
relations have been characterised by complex adversarial dynamics, particularly during
President Benigno ‘Noynoy’ Aquino III’s administration. The Scarborough Shoal
standoﬀ in 2012 led to the immense souring of Beijing and Manila’s bilateral relationship.
In 2013, the Philippines initiated proceedings against China at the Permanent Court of
Arbitration (PCA), an act which subsequently heightened tensions between the two
countries.
The Philippines contended that ‘the recourse to arbitration [was] an open and friendly
attempt to ﬁnd a durable solution to the increasing tension in the SCS (Department of
Foreign Aﬀairs 2013). However, China refused to participate or acknowledge the proceedings. The PRC Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs (2016) asserted that the ‘unilateral
initiation of arbitration by the Philippines [was] out of bad faith’ and the ‘award [was]
null and void and [had] no binding force.’ China could not acknowledge the ruling
CONTACT Xiangning Wu

xiangningwu@um.edu.mo

© 2022 Australian Institute of International Aﬀairs

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

673

‘because to do so would surrender its claim to be a rising power’ (Zhao 2018, 8). Conversely, other Southeast Asian countries welcomed the arbitration award. Storey (2016)
opined that
the award not only [represented] a legal victory for the Philippines but also one for Vietnam,
Malaysia, Brunei and Indonesia in that the judges ruled that China cannot legally exploit
maritime resources in areas where the nine-dash line overlaps with those countries’ EEZs.

Nevertheless, without a long-term resolution to the conﬂicting claims of multiple parties,
the SCS continues to be a regional security problem (Swe 2014) and an enduring
dilemma for China, the Philippines, and other claimants. This is further inﬂected by
the ongoing US–China rivalry and increasing Indian and Japanese involvement in the
Indo-Paciﬁc region (Hong 2013, 38).
The tensions subsided partially after President Rodrigo Duterte came into power in
2016, which brought the Philippines economically closer to China. Noticeable, there
has been a deepening of trade and investment links between Beijing and Manila, and
China has become the Philippines’ largest trading partner (Rabena 2018). In 2019,
China was ranked the largest source of foreign direct investments in the Philippines (Santander Trade 2021). However, the Philippines must constantly balance these economic
beneﬁts with security concerns pertaining to its asymmetrical relationship with China.
Moreover, there has been a global shift in power relations and the ‘changes in the Philippines’ foreign policy [have been] responses to China’s growing power and uncertainty
about US commitments in the region’ (Tran 2018, 1).
As the pillar of Asia’s security architecture, US bilateral security alliances in the region
have been further reinforced by the US’s Indo-Paciﬁc strategy, which on an abstract level
has been framed as a ‘geopolitical rivalry between free and repressive world visions’
(Summers 2021, 8). More tangibly, the Indo-Paciﬁc strategy has been Washington’s
response to the rise of China and the subsequent changes in the regional landscape
(Liu 2020). The brewing competition for inﬂuence between China and the United
States has led the Philippines to vacillate between the two powers. Despite increases in
Sino-Philippine trade and economic linkages, the Philippines continued to be relevant
to US national interests in the region (USAID 2021). In exploring this facet of Sino-Philippine relations, we ask the following questions: First, what are the possible rationales for
the Philippines’ strategic shift towards China? Second, what are the underlying factors
that account for substantial diﬀerences between the previous and current approaches?
Interactions between the US and China in recent years have raised systemic uncertainties and unpredictability to an all-time high. Why has the Philippines’s response changed
from Aquino III’s policy of balancing to Duterte’s policy of hedging? Previous studies
examined the various related factors. Ross (1999) argues that the geographic characteristics of the Philippines are one of the primary factors to consider when examining the
country’s China policy. Ross asserts that continental countries in Southeast Asia tend
to adopt bandwagon strategies in relation to China, while maritime countries like the
Philippines tend to adopt balancing strategies. Chang (2019) believes that the Philippines
needs to turn to the SCS as a possible alternative energy source, as the Philippines is
threatened by shocks in the global oil supply chain and limited by a lack of onshore
energy reserves. Kurlantzick (2021) addressed the signiﬁcance of Duterte’s populist leadership. Zhu and Liu (2016) aﬃrm that the US’s policy in Southeast Asia and Philippine
domestic politics have been the most crucial factors. This paper contends that a

674

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

combination of factors relating to the Philippines’ domestic political milieu and the
dynamics of the international system have signiﬁcant consequences on the country’s
policy towards China. The international structural factors substantially shape the Philippines’ response while the unit-level variables such as political leaders’ perceptions and
domestic politics explain Philippine policy changes: from balancing to hedging in
dealing with the relations with China. First, the Philippines’ policies and strategies
have been considerably constrained by Chinese and US interests. Exclusively siding
with China or the US has led to heightened risks for the Philippines and also limited
the possible range of strategies that the Philippines can deploy. Second, the economic linkages between the Philippines and China have undergone changes, which can explain
why the Philippines has altered its policies towards China. Moreover, security ties with
Washington take the dominant position in Manila’s foreign policy consideration.
Third, the Philippines’ foreign policy agenda is open to a high degree of personalisation
because domestic politics in general is highly personalised (Zha 2015), and foreign policy
is primarily an executive function usually dominated by the president (Balboa 2020). This
has inﬂuenced the variability of the Philippines’ foreign policy and aﬀected the dynamics
of its relationship with China. The perceptions of the Philippine political leaders, as well
as the geopolitical dynamics of great powers, shape the Philippines’ policies toward
China.
The arguments are elaborated further in four parts. Through neoclassical realism, we
explain the complex web of international structural constraints and domestic political
realities, within which the Philippines has developed its foreign policy towards China.
Then, we review and reﬂect on changes in the Philippines’ foreign policy between
Benigno Aquino III’s and Rodrigo Duterte’s administrations, focusing speciﬁcally on
Aquino III’s policy of balancing and Duterte’s policy of hedging. The case of the Scarborough Shoal Standoﬀ in 2012 substantially demonstrates the complexity of Sino-Philippine relations. Philippine foreign policy under the Duterte administration highlighted
his personal approach to Philippine politics and his subsequent responses to external
constraints. Ultimately, we seek to elucidate the diﬀerent possible motivators underlying
the dynamics of the Philippines’ policies towards China.

The complex web of factors underpinning Philippine foreign policy
towards China: issues and challenges
The Philippines has developed its foreign policy towards China within a complex web of
strategic opportunities and dilemmas, which has been shaped by international structural
constraints and domestic political realities. The scope and ambition of a country’s foreign
policy are determined by the material capabilities of the state and the relative power distributions in the international system (Rose 1998). Meanwhile, the senior oﬃcials of the
state are constrained by state power, deﬁned as the relative ability of the state to extract
and mobilise resources from domestic society; it also shapes the types of internal balancing strategies that countries are likely to pursue (Zakaria 1998).
Ripsman (2011) believes structure must be interpreted by agents and responded to
within domestic political institutions that may delegate decision-making authority to
agents. International imperatives, through the medium of the state structure, aﬀect
how top oﬃcials assess likely threats and identify viable strategies in response to such

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

675

threats (Lobell, Ripsman, and Taliaferro 2009). When the international system sends
clear signals to states, Schweller (2004) argues that four domestic political variables
lead to under-balancing—a failure to balance appropriately: elite consensus and cohesion, which aﬀect the state’s willingness to balance; and government/regime vulnerability
and social cohesion, which explain the state’s ability to extract resources from society to
implement a balancing strategy. However, when international circumstances do not prescribe ideal policies, Ripsman (2009) argues that the actual choices states make have far
more to do with the worldviews of leaders, the strategic cultures of the states they lead,
the nature of the domestic coalitions they represent, and domestic political constraints on
their ability to enact and implement various policy alternatives. Therefore, how senior
oﬃcials perceive relative power matters even more than the relative quantities of physical
resources (Rose 1998). Hence, domestic factors and individual factors are signiﬁcant in
the observation of changes in countries’ foreign policies (Gvalia et al. 2013). The impact
of the international system on national behaviour diﬀers because of the perceptions of the
decision-makers and state structures (Wohlforth 1993).
Neoclassical realists do not provide a precise theoretical account of how psychological,
ideational, and cultural factors may aﬀect the way political actors perceive their own and
others’ capabilities or how such perceptions are translated into foreign policy. However,
as an ‘outside-in’ approach to the analysis of state behaviour and international politics
(Götz 2021), neoclassical realism explains variations in the foreign policies of the same
state over time and the possible diplomatic, economic, and military responses of particular states to systemic imperatives. Our analytical framework posits that the Philippines’
foreign policy is rooted in structural and domestic factors, with a particular emphasis on
domestic factors. The uncertainties brought by great powers motivate the Philippines to
make policy changes. The Philippines’ domestic dynamics which include the political
elites’ interests, the president’s ideas, unique political culture, nationalist pressures,
and domestic political constraints from various interest groups have an inﬂuence on
the response to the structural uncertainties.
The continuous cyclical competition and possible confrontation between China
and the US created more unpredictability and uncertainties in the region, which
determines the structural conditions where the Philippines can make relevant
responses. The Philippines, as the US’s ally, has tended to have a China policy that
has been restrained or at least inﬂuenced by the US’s China strategy (Ortuoste
2013). From the ‘pivot to Asia’ strategy of Obama’s administration to the IndoPaciﬁc Strategy of Trump’s administration, the U.S. vision for Asia-Paciﬁc has
become more apparent, that is, to become a geopolitical counterweight against
China. With an economically and militarily stronger China, China’s intention to
assert more inﬂuence in the region substantially brings up more uncertain geopolitical
dynamics. Chinese construction of the artiﬁcial islands in the SCS is recognised as a
provocative manoeuvre and a challenge to international norms. These compel ASEAN
members including the Philippines to walk on a tightrope and vacillate between
powers through a host of strategies, such as balancing–just as the Philippines opted
to entirely align with the US in order to counterbalance China militarily under
Benigno Aquino III (Lai and Kuik 2021), bandwagoning, hedging—not picking
sides and actively developing back-up alternatives, light-hedging or heavy hedging
(a term coined by Kuik and Rozman 2015).

676

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

The power disparity between China and the Philippines has aﬀected both countries’
foreign policy agendas (Thayer 2010; Tolentino and Ham 2015). Southeast Asia has
been distrustful of China for reasons that can be traced back to the Cold War and
Chinese policies in the 1960s. Speciﬁcally, China provided support to local communist
insurgent groups in Southeast Asia which led to a host of domestic issues (Ba 2003).
China’s rapid rise has recently been a signiﬁcant source of concern for Southeast
Asian countries, and the Philippines has perceived this growth to be aggressive and
expansionist (Le Thu 2019). China’s expansive maritime territorial claims have further
enhanced the Philippines’ distrust towards China. A counterbalance, however, to the perceived threat that China poses has been the expected economic and social beneﬁts.
Graham (2013) and Chen and Yang (2013) argue that in cases wherein the threat level
is low and the beneﬁt level is high, Southeast Asian states tend to choose a ‘bandwagon’
approach to China, whereas if the threat and risk level are both high, they tend to hedge
between China and the US. In the case of the Philippines, both of these factors have been
instrumental in shaping the Philippines’ foreign policy towards China (Graham 2013;
Roy 2005).
Shoji and Tomikawa (2017, 137) opine that the ‘United States has had an overwhelming inﬂuence on the Philippines in virtually every aspect of the bilateral relationship,
including security, politics, economy and culture.’ The Philippines initially allowed
American presence on its shores through the 1947 Military Bases Agreement. Speciﬁcally, the US was allowed to establish military bases in the Philippines for 99 years but
later shortened to 25 years (Candelaria and Mendoza 2016). The Mutual Defence
Treaty (MDT) signed in 1951, is the most overt indicator of the Philippines’ security
reliance on the US. This has encouraged Manila to support Washington’s strategic objectives in the region as manifested by its subsequent accession to the Philippine–United
States Visiting Forces Agreement (VFA). Article 5 of the MDT states that an attack on
either the US or the Philippines ‘is deemed to include an armed attack on the metropolitan territory of either of the Parties, or on the island territories under its jurisdiction in
the Paciﬁc or on its armed forces, public vessels or aircraft in the Paciﬁc’ (Yale Law
School 2008). Philippine Defence Secretary Renato De Villa expressed in conﬁdence in
1992, ‘if we are attacked from the outside—which is not likely to happen in the ﬁrst
place—if the Philippine government invoked this treaty, then the US will have to
come to our aide in defending us’ (Fox 2021, 70).
The US initially failed to clarify the extent to which the MDT would be initiated,
should a conﬂict between China and the Philippines transpire (Heydarian 2017a).
There has been a lingering concern about the extent to which the treaty compels the
US to intervene (Taylor 2011), in the absence of convincing strategic assurances from
the US. However, the Enhanced Defence Cooperation Agreement (EDCA) was signed
to allow rotational American presence in the Philippines (Oﬃcial Gazette 2014) and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo clariﬁed that the SCS is indeed part of the Paciﬁc, and that
any armed attack on the Philippine forces, aircraft, or public vessels in the SCS would
trigger mutual defence obligations. However, the aforementioned intricacies of the
MDT leave the Philippines ﬂexibility in its approach to China, especially with issues pertaining to the SCS (De Castro 2014c). The US expectation with regard to democratic
practice and human rights, and the condemnation of Duterte’s bloody war on drugs
drove Duterte to re-orient the Philippines away from the US (Murphy 2017). Duterte’s

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

677

approach signals a deviation from Aquino III’s foreign policy dominated by ‘the promotion of the Philippines’ maritime interests and sovereign rights in the SCS’ (Baviera
2016, 202). Duterte emphasises ‘peaceful coexistence’ and possible consideration of
joint ventures for the supposed mutual interests of both the Philippines and China
(Baviera 2016, 206).
With regard to the Philippines’ domestic political structure, the country has a presidential cabinet system that gives the president the power to formulate and implement
foreign policy. Medeiros et al. (2008, 99) argue that ‘the Philippine political system is
and has always been personality driven.’ Baviera (2012, 10) further notes that within
the Philippines’ personality-driven politics, there are no institutionalised or programfocused parties and, by extension, Philippine ‘diplomacy is far from being immune to
patronage politics.’ Philippine foreign policy is therefore not immune from the personal
will and preferences of the country’s president. With the president playing the role of the
chief architect of foreign policy, the country’s foreign aﬀairs bureaucracy is in constant
danger of being sidelined. Once a transition of power takes place, the new president
may delegitimise their predecessor by attacking their domestic and foreign policies.
The winning administration appeals to the dominant socio-political zeitgeist while simultaneously discrediting the preceding administration’s domestic and foreign policies.
The president may deploy foreign policy to bolster domestic legitimacy. Meanwhile,
the opposing faction may also leverage such decisions to discredit the incumbent
leader. Unsurprisingly, transitions of power in the Philippines are always followed by
changes in Philippine foreign policy towards China, e.g. Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s
equibalancing approach (Heydarian 2017b), Aquino’s balancing approach (De Castro
2014a), and Duterte’s hedging approach (Quintos 2018). Philippine foreign policy
towards China has been shaped by domestic political realities and markedly inﬂuenced
by individual leaders, particularly the president (Murphy 2017).
After the collapse of the Marcos dictatorship, the Philippines embarked on a path of
democratisation. However, factions in the Philippine military have frequently launched
coup d’états against civilian governments or attempted to seize power in other ways (De
Castro 2017). Lee (2020) reveals that the Philippine military was involved in the resignation of former President Joseph Estrada and the subsequent bolstering of the Arroyo
administration. Notably, members of the armed forces have ‘engaged in more subtle
and complex forms of political participation which are in conﬂict with the norms, principles, and practices with democratic civil-relations’ (Arugay 2011, 85). The politicised
nature of the Philippine armed forces has thus led to a complex relationship between
them and the presidency. The relationship between the president and the military has
possibly aﬀected the latter’s legitimacy to fulﬁl the mandate of the position and subsequently the path of Philippine foreign policy. Duterte has mitigated a military backlash
by providing them with ‘side payments’ in exchange for support of his ‘unpopular foreign
and defence policies’ (De Castro 2017, 557). Aquino III, on the other hand, pursued the
strategy of continued military modernisation (Domingo 2015; Simon 2013).
Overall, the foreign policy of the Philippines towards China has been inﬂuenced by a
constellation of mediating factors, such as interstate power dynamics and domestic politics. Zhu and Liu (2016) aﬃrm that two of these factors have been most crucial: the US’s
policy in Southeast Asia and Philippine domestic politics. To better explain how speciﬁc
domestic and international factors have inﬂuenced actions taken and policies adopted by

678

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

the Philippines, we ﬁrst examine the case of the Scarborough Shoal Standoﬀ in 2012,
which has had far-reaching implications. It continues to be an enduring issue in SinoPhilippine relations and is a compelling signiﬁer of the rapidly changing power conﬁguration in the region. It is also considered the barometer of the United States’ willingness to
assist the Philippines concerning Chinese territorial expansion (Morris 2019).

The Scarborough Shoal Standoﬀ: a geopolitical confrontation between
China and the Philippines
In April 2012, the hostilities between China and the Philippines reached an all-time high,
with both countries dispatching military units to confront vessels in the disputed areas.
The Scarborough Shoal standoﬀ lasted for two months and increased the tension between
China and the Philippines. This tension was exacerbated by the Philippines’ unilateral
termination of the Joint Marine Seismic Undertaking (JMSU) project and its subsequent
strengthening of military relations with the US, Japan, and Vietnam in a move against
China. The Department of Foreign Aﬀairs of the Philippines issued an eight-point statement that all political and diplomatic means for a peaceful dispute settlement ought to be
exhausted. Communications between Beijing and Manila were poor, and traditional diplomatic channels were ineﬀective (De Castro 2014b). There was no structured dialogue
between Philippine and Chinese leadership. After months of painstaking negotiations
facilitated by Washington, both sides eventually agreed on a mutual disengagement
deal to initiate de-escalation. In the end, the Philippines withdrew while China did
not. China cordoned oﬀ the area and took control of Scarborough Shoal. In response,
the Philippines took up the dispute internationally, accusing China at the UN General
Assembly and initiating an arbitration case against China at the Permanent Court of
Arbitration. On one occasion, Aquino sought to engage China shortly after President
Xi came to oﬃce, but China insisted that the Philippines drop its arbitration case as a
precondition for high-level talks. Bilateral ties plunged to a level not seen since the
end of the Cold War.

The signals from international constraints
During the Scarborough Shoal standoﬀ, two external factors—the Chinese and American
factors—constrained the Aquino administration’s possible range of responses. With the
Philippines’ relative military disadvantage and a lack of commitment from ASEAN
countries, the Aquino administration embraced the US’s strategic pivot to Asia and
thereby opened the Philippines to the rotational presence of American forces. The US
also showed its willingness to assist the Philippines in restraining an assertive China.
The US pledged to provide the Philippines $40 million from the Global Security Contingency Security Fund (Department of Foreign Aﬀairs n.d.). Moreover, in early 2012, Secretaries Hillary Clinton and Leon Panetta reaﬃrmed the US’ treaty obligations during
their 2 + 2 meeting with Secretaries Alberto del Rosario and Voltaire Gazmin. Although
the US did not take a public position during the Scarborough Shoal standoﬀ, the Philippines’ position was strengthened through US intervention, in particular its call for a resolution to the disputes under international law and its questioning of the validity of
China’s ‘nine-dash line’ doctrine. US support served as an indirect deterrent against

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

679

further Chinese assertion, which gave the Aquino administration the conﬁdence to take a
ﬁrmer stance in relation to China.
Aside from confronting the Philippine naval presence during the Scarborough Shoal
incident, Beijing also retaliated economically. China ultimately imposed restrictions on
banana imports from the Philippines, alleging pest infestation problems (ABC News
2012). This economic retaliation by China had the potential to aﬀect the livelihood of
around half a million Filipinos (De Castro 2015). The retaliation, however, did not
lead to economic consequences that were severe enough for the Aquino III administration to change its stance on the SCS. In 2012, bananas only accounted for 1.24% of
the Philippines’ total merchandise exports, and the value of Philippine banana exports
increased to US$ 646.7 million from US$ 472.4 million in 2011 (Philippine Statistics
Authority 2012). Moreover, the Philippines’ trade with China only accounted for
11.2% of its total trade in 2012 (Philippine Statistics Authority 2013). The majority of
exports from the Philippines to China were electronic products. They originated from
plants owned by Japanese, Taiwanese, and South Korean companies, which were
shipped to plants in China owned by the same companies for assembly (Medeiros
et al. 2008). As a result, China’s economic sanctions did not successfully halt Aquino’s
assertive foreign policy, as few challenges and restraints from domestic economic
losses were confronted.

The concerns from the domestic political environment
Aquino III considered it important to distance himself from his predecessor. Through his
platform called daang matuwid (the straight path), Aquino III cultivated an image distinctly opposed to that of Arroyo, whose China policies had been severely marred with
allegations of graft and corruption. Aquino III’s strategy, which paved the way for his
political rise to power, capitalised on the crisis of Arroyo’s political legitimacy (Liang
2018). Baviera (2012) explains that Aquino III campaigned and won on a platform of
good governance and promised to purge the corruption that had been allegedly perpetuated by the Arroyo government.
The Arroyo administration was accused of trading the Philippines’ territorial sovereignty for Chinese oﬃcial development assistance and personal economic beneﬁts. The
JMSU was a highly contentious issue in the Philippines, with critics questioning
whether it was ‘a quid pro quo for China’s generous economic packages’ during
Arroyo’s administration (Palanca and Ong 2018, 100). The National Broadband
Network–Zhongxing Telecommunications Equipment (NBN-ZTE) project was also
ridden with allegations of corruption (Baviera 2012; Storey 2008). Against the backdrop
of widespread opposition to the Arroyo administration—due to the scandals of the JMSU
agreement and NBN-ZTE project—Aquino III was able to further dismantle Arroyo’s
China policy. Aquino III criticised Arroyo for signing the JMSU, claiming that it
‘shouldn’t have happened’ (Calica 2011) and that the JMSU had made a ‘small bump
of controversy [become] a dense mountain of a problem’ (Salaverria 2012). In his
speech during the 113th anniversary of the Department of Foreign Aﬀairs, Aquino III
highlighted that he would not allow the country’s territorial claims in the SCS to be violated by other claimants, stating that ‘if we allow other countries to just push us around,
our 7,100 islands might become a mere two digits in the near future’ (Bugaoisan and del

680

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

Callar 2011). The Aquino III administration also instrumentalised domestic nationalism
as leverage to adopt a hard-line policy towards China during the crisis, initiating the arbitration case as his most assertive strategy. These actions appear to conﬁrm the suggestion
made by Van Ham, Montesano, and van der Putten (2016) that when domestic nationalism surges, smaller claimants in the SCS tend to further internationalise the dispute by
including extra-regional actors. Driven by his resolute stance towards China, his restoration of macroeconomic stability, and good governance reforms, Aquino’s satisfaction
rating reached over 50% in 2012, and in 2013, 65% of Filipino adults approved of the government’s actions regarding tensions over Scarborough Shoal (Social Weather Station
2015). Aquino’s distinctly aggressive stance on the SCS issue set him apart from his predecessor, distinguishing him as a leader who asserted the territorial sovereignty of the
Philippines.
The military appeared to generally support Aquino’s policies, and there were no
visible attempted military takeovers during his administration (Lee 2020). During his
presidential campaign, Aquino III promised to raise military spending to 2% of the
GDP. He ‘pledged to modernise the Armed Force of the Philippines for both territorial
defence and disaster relief mission’ (Fisher 2012). After taking oﬃce, Aquino III also
vowed to increase military spending to two percent of the country’s GDP (Reuters
2010). The Scarborough Shoal standoﬀ presented a perfect opportunity for Aquino III
to improve the military’s defence posture and for the Philippine Navy to build capabilities for ‘substantial maritime awareness, limited territorial sea interdiction operations,
and defensive deterrence to protect the country’s interests in the SCS’ (De Castro
2016, 120).
In sum, the Philippines has relied on the protection and support of the US as clearly
exempliﬁed by the diﬀerent mechanisms of security cooperation like the MDT. Domestically, a semblance of political instability also motivated Philippine leaders to use foreign
policy to achieve political survival (Zha 2015). Both of these factors led the Aquino
administration to take a signiﬁcantly more combative approach against China than previous administrations had taken. Liang (2018) argues that Aquino’s ‘concern over his
political legitimacy motivated the construction of a set of nationalism-driven, antiChinese narratives’ (290), leading the Aquino administration to choose a hard-line
stance throughout the Scarborough Shoal standoﬀ to satisfy domestic clamour. China
approached the Philippines to pursue bilateral talks after the standoﬀ, but Aquino III
“was much more anti-Chinese in his rhetoric domestically and internationally” and
Baviera reiterated that it does not leave “much room for alternative means to deal
with the dispute” (Wiegand & Beuck, 2018, 8).
Baviera’s opinion is from the interview with Wiegand, which Wigand directly quoted.

China eventually upped the ante by expressing its non-recognition of the arbitral
award, PRC Vice Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin ﬁrmly reiterated that it ‘is null
and void and has no binding force and China does not accept or recognize the
award’ (PRC Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs 2016). While the arbitration case served
an expedient domestic function in presenting the Aquino III administration as a
strong defender of the country’s territorial integrity to a domestic audience, the
administration ran into an impasse abroad, as its moves created too much volatility
in the Sino-Philippine bilateral relationship.

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

681

The Philippines’ evolving China policies under Duterte
Political conditions in smaller countries provide strong incentives for leaders to take
drastic measures, including changing a country’s foreign policy, to survive politically.
Unlike Aquino III’s anti-China stance, Duterte’s approach has been one of hedging
and, to some extent, appeasement, particularly during the initial administration
periods. Duterte’s administration has adopted a strategy of hedging to reduce tension
between China and the Philippines (Banlaoi 2017; Quintos 2018; Wu 2019), essentially
compartmentalising territorial issues from other aspects of Sino-Philippine relations
(Chao 2021). This hedging strategy has been motivated by the unreliability of the US
as an ally, Duterte’s promise of infrastructure development to the Filipino people; in
addition, the ﬁnancing opportunities presented by China, which could compensate for
the limited national budget of the Philippines (Chao 2021).
The domestic stimulus and pressure
Duterte has placed a strong emphasis on economic growth with a focus on, as he says,
‘build, build, build,’ through his infrastructure development plan. Such programmes
have required massive amounts of funding, which he has expected to be ﬁnanced by
China. China was not necessarily viewed as an enemy but as a potential investment
and trade partner because of its proximity and rapid economic development. After
taking oﬃce in 2016, Duterte downplayed the outcome of the PCA ruling and subsequently visited China ﬁve times. He speciﬁcally stated, ‘in the play of politics now, I
will set aside the arbitral ruling’ (SCMP 2016). He also refused to use the 2017
ASEAN chairmanship to tout the victory of the Philippines (Serapio and Petty 2017).
The antagonism between the two countries over the SCS was eﬀectively cooled down
(Men 2018). Beijing praised Duterte’s ﬁrst visit to China as ‘an ice-breaking trip
marking a milestone in the history of China-Philippines relations’ (PRC Ministry of
Foreign Aﬀairs 2022). China stepped up its ﬁnancial assistance to the Philippines’ infrastructure construction. According to the Philippine Board of Investment, China ranked
ﬁrst in 2018 among countries that had foreign investments in the Philippines; its investments amounted to US$ 975 million, up by 2,072% from just US$ 47 million in 2017. In
2019, China ranked second on the list, with its US$ 1.7 billion translating to 32% of total
foreign investments (a 174% increase) in 2018. The growth was mainly driven by
increased investment in sectors such as IT & communications, manufacturing, real
estate, and electricity (BOI 2020). In addition, China has become the Philippines’
second-largest and fastest-growing international tourist market. The Philippines also
received a total of 1.255 million Chinese tourists in 2018, up by 30% from 2017.
Tourism data showed that a total of 1.74 million Chinese tourists visited the Philippines
in 2019, up 38.58% from 2018 (Xinhua 2020). All of these contributed to bridging the
infrastructure investment gap and prospering the Philippines’ economy, which indicates
a growing motivation for the Philippine economic dependence on China. However, continuing negative sentiments toward China were generated as the criticism increased when
the large-scale projects promised by China failed to actualise.
The compartmentalisation of Sino-Philippine economic relations from territorial disputes has led to ﬁnancial gains for Manila. Duterte continued to placate public clamour
for a ﬁrmer stance against China’s territorial encroachments. He used Chinese

682

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

investments to ‘bolster his administration’s reputation and reward his supporters among
the elite, no matter the social, environmental, ﬁnancial, or geopolitical cost’ (Lischin
2022, 150). However, the public does not welcome the economic beneﬁts rooted in
Duterte’s friendlier gambits toward China. This is exempliﬁed by opposition to some
China-funded projects (Ordaniel and Camba 2018). There is a disjuncture between the
president’s foreign policy and the public’s sentiment (Amador and Baladjay 2020).
Pockets of resistance to his approach still exist among the public, as exempliﬁed by a
Social Weather Station (2021) survey, in which 47% of the respondents indicated that
the Philippine government was not doing enough with respect to asserting Philippine
rights over the SCS. The perception that Philippine foreign policy towards China has
become ‘more defeatist and submissive’ has increased (Bautista 2020, 287). While
Duterte’s presidential term has brought relative calm to Sino-Philippine territorial
issues, his approach is a contravention or misalignment with the will of the Filipino
people (Amador and Baladjay 2020).
At the backdrop of the Whitsun Reef incident, the Philippines has also been experiencing the exigencies of the COVID-19 pandemic. This public health crisis has tremendous
implications for how the Philippines positions itself between China and the US. In the
context of vaccine diplomacy, Duterte was in a quandary of needing to plead with Xi
Jinping ‘to prioritise the Philippines in its distribution of the vaccines while also confessing about feeling helpless in ﬁghting Manila’s interests in the SCS’ (Magcamit 2021).
Notably, China-produced vaccines were the ﬁrst to arrive in the Philippines. However,
this did not dissuade public distrust. Scepticism of China’s intentions has prevailed
with the territorial dispute being one of the reasons for refusing the vaccines from
China’s Sinovac (Amit et al. 2022). Filipinos still consider the US the most trusted
country and China to be among the least trusted. There are 38 percentage more likely
to have a positive view of the U.S. than China (Pew 2020).
With immense domestic popularity and populist policies, Duterte’s continued with
high approval ratings throughout his presidency. In the 2019 elections, Duterte had
obtained a supermajority in both the Philippine Senate and House of Representatives,
indicating ‘a lack of restraint (other than law) on his exercise of executive power’
(Baviera and Arugay 2021, 288). Duterte’s China-friendly policies are not necessarily
popular with opposition political ﬁgures. For example, Senator Leila de Lima is dismayed by Duterte’s lackadaisical stance in defending Philippine sovereignty. She
argues ‘it is disappointing to have a leader that does not stand for sovereignty and
national dignity. The Philippine public is being deceived by Duterte’s cowardice. Standing up for our territorial rights is not tantamount to proclaiming war’ (Philippine
Senate 2021a). Senator Risa Hontiveros expressed the need for Duterte to put his
words into action in defending Philippine sovereignty (Philippine Senate 2021b).
Senator Francis ‘Kiko’ Pangilinan mentions that ‘China’s emboldened behaviour is a
result of the Duterte administration’s kow-towing to China despite the Philippines’
victory’ in the arbitration (Philippine Senate 2022). The opposition within the
Cabinet can also be observed from the termination of the VFA. For example, in February 2020, Presidential Spokesperson Salvador Panelo said there was no ‘internal
clash’ and they were ‘always in unison with respect to the policies enunciated by the
President.’ However, Duterte was asked to reconsider the decision by Senate President
Vicente Tito Sotto III, Senate Minority Leader Franklin Drilon and Senator Panﬁlo

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

683

‘Ping’ Lacson. Secretary Locsin and Senate Majority Leader Miguel Zubiri also had disagreements based on economic concerns (CNN Philippines 2020).

The evolving international dynamics
In March 2021, approximately 200 Chinese vessels converged in the disputed area in the
Whitsun Reef tension. Philippine Foreign Aﬀairs Secretary Locsin ﬁled diplomatic protests against this move by China. Philippine Defence Secretary Lorenzana asserted that
the Chinese vessels in Whitsun Reef were manned by militias and that their presence
indicated an increased intent to occupy the said areas (Reuters 2021a). The Chinese
Embassy in Manila responded that Whitsun Reef (Niu’e Jiao) was a part of China’s
Nansha Islands. The Chinese embassy further denied that the vessels in Whitsun Reef
were maritime militia vessels and expressed exasperation over speculations that
‘[cause] unnecessary irritation’ (Chinese Embassy in Manila 2021). Consequently, the
United States articulated support for the Philippines and expressed aﬃrmation for the
MDT. Speciﬁcally, Secretary of State Blinken (2021) remarked that ‘the United States
stands with our ally, the Philippines, in the face of the PRC’s maritime militia amassing
at Whitsun Reef. We will always stand by our allies and stand up for the rules-based
international order.’
Duterte opted to undermine the statement. He publicly proclaimed that China is a
‘good friend’ and reminded the public of the United States’ irresolute stance during
the Scarborough Shoal incident in 2012 (Inquirer 2021). However, Duterte’s inclination
for Chinese appeasement has reached a critical point. It emboldened China to pursue
further territorial expansion in the South China Sea at the expense of Philippine maritime
security (De Dios 2022). Duterte had a ‘good but misplaced faith on China’ and this may
have resulted in economic beneﬁts, but it certainly situated the Philippines at a geopolitical and territorial disadvantage (De Castro 2022, 2). Aside from the Whitsun Reef incident, in response to China’s legislation of the coast guard law, the Philippine foreign
aﬀairs secretary Locsin (2021) warned that ‘while enacting a law is a sovereign prerogative, this one—given the area involved, or for that matter the open SCS—is a verbal threat
of war to any country that deﬁes the law.’ The coast guard law has exacerbated tensions
between China and the Philippines and became a cause of signiﬁcant concern for other
countries in the region (Trung 2021). The Philippines needed to devise a way to rebuﬀ
Chinese expansionism without necessarily being antagonistic.
Since 2016, the US is consistently attempting to sustain its relations with the Philippines despite an unstable and unfavourable status quo (Lischin 2022). Duterte has publicly made his displeasure with the US throughout his term in oﬃce, warning the US not
to point ﬁngers at anti-drug operations. He undermined the pillars of the US-Philippine
security alliance such as the MDT, EDCA, and VFA. However, the Philippines has maintained close relations with the US with regard to the SCS. The Philippines has conducted
joint military exercises with the US, and during one such event, the US dispatched F-35
ﬁghters for the ﬁrst time. The US has also stated that defence support would be provided
should an enemy military force launch an attack against the Philippines. Toward the end
of Duterte’s term, he has silently recalibrated its relationship with the US. In July 2021,
during the Communist Party of China and World Political Parties Summit, Duterte proclaimed ‘we count on China as a friend and partner for peace and development’

684

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

(Presidential Communications Operations Oﬃce 2021). Yet in the same month, Duterte
ended the uncertainty of the VFA by proceeding to restore the agreement. This is in stark
contrast with his 2016 pronouncement that American troops should leave the Philippines
within two years and raise the possibility of abrogating US-Philippine agreements (Aljazeera 2016). Duterte’s decision to initially suspend the VFA was for him to vent his antiAmericanism and such was not necessarily rooted in a strategic rationale (Storey 2021). If
the abrogation of the VFA materialised, it would lead to complications in the other pillars
of the US-Philippine security alliance (Lischin 2022, 151). China’s legislation of the coast
guard law is the critical reason for Duterte’s approval of the VFA (De Castro 2021). On
the eve of the 70th anniversary of the US-Philippine MDT, both countries decided to
proceed with the operationalisation of EDCA and agreed to negotiate a bilateral maritime
security framework (Nepomuceno 2021b).
The Philippines also signalled its support for Western-led initiatives. In 2017, Duterte
said ‘Japan is a friend closer than a brother. That means Japan is a friend unlike any
other,’ and ‘ours is a special friendship whose value is beyond any measure’ (ABSCBN News 2017). For the ﬁrst time since World War II, Japan sent an armoured
vehicle unit to the biennial Philippine-US Balikatan exercises under Duterte’s presidency
(ABS-CBN News 2018). In 2018, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
completed its assistance to the Philippines with the delivery of ten Multi-Role Response
Vessels (MRRV) for maritime security. In 2022, both sides stepped up their cooperation
in maritime security with the inspection of the 97-meter MRRV from Japan (JICA 2022).
With doubts about the robustness of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (QUAD)
among India, Australia, and the US; Japan is seeking to encourage fellow US allies,
such as the Philippines as a possible participant (Heydarian 2022). The QUAD is considered the ﬁrst multilateral resistance to China in the light of its rejection of the arbitration award (De Castro 2018). The Philippines and Japan had the ﬁrst-ever ‘2 + 2’ meeting
and explored the ﬁnalisation of the Reciprocal Access Agreement. Both sides welcomed
‘the contribution of a strong US presence to regional stability’ and emphasised the
‘importance of each country’s respective treaty alliance with the United States and that
of enhancing cooperation with regional partner countries’ (Department of Foreign
Aﬀairs 2022). To enhance maritime security cooperation, the Philippines and Japan
signed a contract for advanced radar systems to be built by the Mitsubishi Electric Corporation. Aside from the security engagements with Japan, Philippine Foreign Aﬀairs
Secretary Locsin expressed support for the Australia-United Kingdom-United States
technology sharing accord (AUKUS). Secretary Locsin asserted, ‘the enhancement of a
near abroad ally’s ability to project power should restore and keep the balance rather
than destabilize it’ (Department of Foreign Aﬀairs 2021). Defence Secretary Lorenzana
also stated that Australia, like the Philippines, has the right to improve its submarine
defence capability (Nepomuceno 2021a).
The most overt indicators of the Philippines’ foreign policy recalibration are the
declaration of the US-Philippines Joint Vision for a twenty-ﬁrst Century United
States-Philippines Partnership in 2021 and the resumption of the Balikatan (shoulderto-shoulder) exercises in 2022. The 2021 US-Philippine joint vision underscores the
bilateral security alliance mechanisms ‘which facilitates an open, interconnected, resilient, and secure Indo-Paciﬁc region’ (State Department 2021). The Balikatan exercises
in April 2022 is a show of force with approximately 9,000 participants from the US

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

685

and the Philippines focusing on the areas of maritime security and disaster relief (U.S.
Embassy in the Philippines 2022). With the resurgence of the US-Philippine security
partnership, US Marine Corps Forces Paciﬁc Deputy Commander Clearﬁeld articulated
that Philippine and US ‘militaries have grown together in friendship, and we are better
prepared to respond as one cohesive team to any crisis or challenge’ (US Embassy in
the Philippines 2022). Philippine Defence Secretary Lorenzana also remarked, ‘we are
sending a message to the world that the alliance between our countries is stronger
than ever’ (Reuters 2022).
In sum, Duterte’s strategy is centred on the Philippines’ continuous economic and
political engagement with China while simultaneously retaining security ties with the
United States (Wu 2019). Duterte’s entente with China allowed the Philippines to be
on the receiving end of a host of economic beneﬁts. However, China hardly separates
economic relations from the territorial dispute, as Beijing has previously used its economic inﬂuence for political ends (Baviera 2017). China attempted to intervene with
the review of the US-Philippine MDT. Former Chinese ambassador to the Philippines,
Zhao Jianhua, urged Defence Secretary Lorenzana to drop the review of the MDT and
intimated that any attempt to revise the agreement would be construed as ‘containing
the rise of China’ (Reuters 2021b). The Philippines’ attempt to separate territorial
issues from other aspects of Sino-Philippine relations emboldened China to increase
its territorial aggressiveness, which further stimulated dissatisfaction in the Philippines.
The increasing domestic disagreements and lack of strong domestic support hardly laid a
solid foundation for the long-term pro-China policy in the Philippines. Batongbacal
(2021, 214) explains that Duterte’s foreign policy is unsustainable in the long run
because it establishes a ‘patron-client relationship with China and the Philippines, but
without broader support and coordinated action from the public at large.’ Consequently,
a policy reconﬁguration has transpired through restoring the VFA, enhancing ties with
Japan, supporting AUKUS, declaring the US-Philippine Joint Vision 2021, and the Balikatan exercises in 2022. Moreover, at the 37th ASEAN Summit, Duterte asserted that no
country can ignore nor diminish the Philippines’ arbitral victory in the SCS. All of these
have tremendous repercussions on Sino-Philippine relations, with the Philippines being
generally acquiescent to China during Duterte’s term in oﬃce. The dramatic change in
the Philippines’ China policy under President Duterte taking an anti-American stance,
can only be understood as an exceptional case, not a pattern.

Conclusion
With the ongoing tensions between China and the Philippines, the threat level in the SCS
has not waned to the levels of the 1990s (Feng and He 2019). This paper suggests that to
comprehensively understand the motivations underlying the Philippines’ China policy, it
is important to put into perspective the intersection of national constraints with global
exigencies. The Philippines has a unique domestic political environment that allows
foreign policies to be personalised and even politicised. At the same time, it has
needed to balance its traditional alliances and interests vis-à-vis a rising and threatening
great power.
Aquino III’s combative approach to and Duterte’s appeasement of China during the
initial administration stage both represent extremes that have failed to deter China

686

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

from its continuously aggressive expansionist agenda in the SCS. The Philippines
through its current foreign policy has become ‘complicit in China’s long-term strategy
of maritime expansion to ease the US out of East Asia’ (De Castro 2019, 1035).
China’s forceful claim in the Whitsun Reef vividly emphasises the inadequacy of
Duterte’s defeatist and submissive foreign policy. China has fully realised that maritime
strength is a substantially important strategic leverage if it seeks to become a regional
hegemon and superpower (Pant 2012). The US has become more attentive to the
Indo-Paciﬁc region and has made overtures to its allies, indicating a desire to reengage
with diplomacy in the region. The US’s Indo-Paciﬁc strategy is the security architecture
to contain China’s expansionist agenda. With China’s and the US’s competing frames of
inﬂuence, the Philippines is in a highly complicated position, having to choose between a
territorially aggressive trading partner or its historical security guarantor. Any major or
dramatic change in Sino–US relations could quickly exert pressure on the Philippines’
generally pro-China foreign policy. Based on these considerations, combined with the
Philippines’ domestic political environment and the continuing SCS conﬂict, the Philippines’ current pro-China policy is limited, constrained, and unsustainable. Duterte’s
most recent policy reconﬁguration can be seen as a pushback against Chinese domination. However, the continuation of this policy trajectory will be highly dependent on
the succeeding president, who needs to recalibrate its relationship with China while
taking into consideration the US’s reinvigorated interest in the Indo-Paciﬁc region as
he delicately navigates domestic concerns.
The landslide victory of Fernidand Marcos, Jr. in the 2022 elections puts into question
how the Philippines would proceed toward China. Before the elections, Beijing had already
expressed its goodwill to Marcos Jr.; during his visit to the Chinese embassy in 2021,
Ambassador Huang Xilian remarked, ‘when you drink water, think of those who dug
the well’ and ‘China hopes to pass on our traditional friendship from generation to generation’ (Philstar 2021). Marcos Jr. has also shown support for Duterte’s China-friendly
approach, he clariﬁed that ‘although it is criticized, it is the right way to go’ (Corrales
2021). But to avoid being perceived to be extremely close to China, he signalled to his domestic base that he would still send warships to the SCS to protect the Philippines’ territorial
claim (SCMP 2022). Notably, the US-Philippine relationship under a Marcos Jr. presidency
might be complicated considering his family’s record of abuse, corruption, and human
rights violations in the country. Washington might lose strategically if it distances itself
from Marcos Jr. when the result seems favourable to China. A gradual reformulation of
the Philippines’ hedging strategy has been on the way with the indication of enhancing
ties with the US and its allies albeit in an extremely calculated way. How Marcos Jr. calculates the possible beneﬁts from the rivalry between China and the US will signiﬁcantly
determine the trajectory of Philippine foreign policy in the succeeding years.

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Notes on contributors
Xiangning Wu, PhD (University of Birmingham, UK) is an Assistant Professor in the Department
of Government and Public Policy, University of Macau. Her research focuses on Asia-Paciﬁc

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

687

regionalization, China-US relations, and International Political Economy. Her works have
appeared in journals such as Asian Survey, The China Review, and China International Strategy
Review. Email: xiangningwu@um.edu.mo
Joseph Ching Velasco, Ph.D. is a faculty member of the Department of Political Science and Development Studies of De La Salle University, Manila. He is currently the Managing Editor and former
Editor-in-Chief of the Asia-Paciﬁc Social Science Review. He is pursuing further studies in international relations and public policy at the University of Macau. His works have appeared in journals such as Asian Ethnicity, Kritika Kultura, and Pertanika Journal of Social Sciences and
Humanities. Email: josephchingvelasco@gmail.com

References
ABC News. 2012. “Banana Crisis Blamed on Philippines-China Dispute.” https://www.abc.net.au/
news/2012-06-29/an-banana-exporters-caught-in-philippines-china-dispute/4100422.
ABS-CBN News. 2017. “Duterte: ‘Japan is a Friend Closer Than a Brother’.” https://news.abs-cbn.
com/news/01/12/17/uterte-japan-is-a-friend-closer-than-a-brother.
ABS-CBN News. 2018. “Japan Military Joins Historic PH-US War Games.” https://news.abs-cbn.
com/news/10/06/18/uter-military-joins-historic-ph-us-war-games.
Aljazeera. 2016. “Philippines’ Duterte Wants US Troops Out in Two Years.” https://www.aljazeera.
com/news/2016/10/26/utertene-duterte-wants-us-troops-out-in-two-years.
Amador, Julio, and Deryk Baladjay. 2020. The New Normal of President Duterte’s ‘Independent
Foreign Policy’. East-West Center. https://www.eastwestcenter.org/publications/the-newnormal-president-duterte’s-“independent”-foreign-policy.
Amit, Arianna Maever L, Veincent Christian F. Pepito, Lourdes Sumpaico-Tanchanco, Manuel M
Dayrit, and Dione Benjumea-Bedoya. 2022. “COVID-19 Vaccine Brand Hesitancy and Other
Challenges to Vaccination in the Philippines.” PLOS Global Public Health 2 (1): e0000165.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgph.0000165.
Arugay, Aries A. 2011. “The Military in Philippine Politics: Still Politicized and Increasingly
Autonomous.” In The Political Resurgence of the Military in Southeast Asia: Conﬂict and
Leadership, edited by Marcus Mietzner, 85–106. London: Routledge.
Ba, Alice D. 2003. “China and ASEAN: Renavigating Relations for a 21st-Century Asia.” Asian
Survey 43 (4): 622–647.
Balboa, Jenny D. 2020. “Duterte’s Foreign Policy Pivot and Its Impact on Philippine Trade and
Investments: An International Political Economy Perspective.” Philippine Political Science
Journal 41 (1-2): 127–160.
Banlaoi, Rommel C. 2017. “Duterte Presidency: Shifts in Philippine-China Relations.” In The
South China Sea Disputes: Flashpoints, Turning Points and Trajectories, edited by Yang Razali
Kassim, 357–362. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Publishing.
Batongbacal, Jay L. 2021. “Deciphering Duterte’s Foreign Policy on the South China Sea.” In
Routledge Handbook of the South China Sea, edited by Keyuan Zou, 199–224. London: Routledge.
Bautista, Lowell. 2020. “The Ones Who Don’t Walk Away from the Philippines.” Southeast Asian
Aﬀairs 2020: 275–294.
Baviera, Aileen. 2012. The Inﬂuence of Domestic Politics on Philippine Foreign Policy: The Case of
Philippine-China Relations Since 2004. RSIS Commentary. https://dr.ntu.edu.sg/bitstream/
10356/95218/1/WP241.pdf.
Baviera, Aileen. 2016. “President Duterte’s Foreign Policy Challenges.” Contemporary Southeast
Asia 38 (2): 202–208.
Baviera, Aileen. 2017. Duterte’s China Policy Shift: Strategy or Serendipity? East Asia Forum.
https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2017/08/13/dutertes-china-policy-shift-strategy-or-serendipity/.
Baviera, Aileen S. P., and Aries A. Arugay. 2021. “The Philippines’ Shifting Engagement with
China’s Belt and Road Initiative: The Politics of Duterte’s Legitimation.” Asian Perspective 45
(2): 277–300.
Blinken, Anthony. 2021. Twitter Post. March 29, 2021, 7:53 am. https://twitter.com/secblinken/
status/1376321521120116737?lang=en.

688

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

BOI Philippines. 2020. “Philippines-China Business Relations.” https://boi.gov.ph/ciﬁt-2020philippines-china-business-relations/.
Bugaoisan, Virgilio, and Michaela del Callar. 2011. “Noy: RP-China Conﬂict Gloria’s Fault.” Daily
Tribune, July 5. http://globalbalita.com/2011/07/05/noy-rp-china-conﬂict-glorias-fault/.
Calica, Aurea. 2011. “Aquino Says JMSU with China Worsened Spratly Dispute.” Philippine Star,
July 6. https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2011/07/06/702803/aquino-says-jmsu-china-worsenedspratly-dispute.
Candelaria, Sedfrey M., and Elaine S. Mendoza. 2016. “Testing Constitutional Waters VI:
Developments in Treaty-Making and the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement.”
Ateneo Law Journal 61 (1): 1–31.
Chang, Felix. 2019. “Running Out of Gas: Philippine Energy Security and the South China Sea.”
Foreign Policy Research Institute, September 6. https://www.fpri.org/article/2019/09/runningout-of-gas-philippine-energy-security-and-the-south-china-sea/.
Chao, Wen-Chih. 2021. “The Philippines’ Perception and Strategy for China’s Belt and Road
Initiative Expansion: Hedging with Balancing.” The Chinese Economy 54 (1): 48–55.
Chen, Ian Tsung-Yen, and Alan Hao Yang. 2013. “A Harmonized Southeast Asia? Explanatory
Typologies of ASEAN Countries’ Strategies to the Rise of China.” The Paciﬁc Review 26 (3):
265–288. doi:10.1080/09512748.2012.759260.
Chinese Embassy in Manila. 2021. “Statement by Spokesperson of the Chinese Embassy in the
Philippines on the Presence of Alleged Chinese Maritime Militia Vessels at Niu’e Jiao.”
http://ph.china-embassy.org/eng/sgfyrbt/t1863034.htm.
CNN Philippines. 2020. “Panelo: ‘No Contradiction, Inconsistency’ in Statements About VFA
Termination.” February 9. https://www.cnnphilippines.com/news/2020/2/9/salvador-panelostatements-vfa-termination.html.
Corrales, Nestor. 2021. “When Bongbong Met Xilian: Strengthening and Deepening Ties With
China.” Inquirer, October 22. https://globalnation.inquirer.net/199716/when-bongbong-metxilian-strengthening-and-deepening-ties-with-china.
De Castro, Renato. 2014a. “The Aquino Administration’s Balancing Policy Against an Emergent
China: Its Domestic and External Dimensions.” Paciﬁc Aﬀairs 87 (1): 5–27. doi:10.5509/
2014871005.
De Castro, Renato. 2014b. “Linking Spokes Together: The Philippines’ Gambit of Harnessing the
United States’ Alliances in Its External Balancing Policy Against an Emergent China.” Paciﬁc
Focus 29 (1): 140–166. doi:10.1111/pafo.12022.
De Castro, Renato. 2014c. “The 21st Century Philippine-US Enhanced Defense Cooperation
Agreement (EDCA): The Philippines’ Policy in Facilitating the Obama Administration’s
Strategic Pivot to Asia.” The Korean Journal of Defense Analysis 26 (4): 427–446.
De Castro, Renato. 2015. “The Philippines Confronts China in the South China Sea: Power Politics
vs. Liberalism-Legalism.” Asian Perspective 39 (1): 71–100. doi:10.1353/apr.2015.0010.
De Castro, Renato. 2016. “The Philippines Discovers Its Maritime Domain: The Aquino
Administration’s Shift in Strategic Focus from Internal to Maritime Security.” Asian Security
12 (2): 111–131. doi:10.1080/14799855.2016.1195813.
De Castro, Renato. 2017. “Developing a Credible Defense Posture for the Philippines: From the
Aquino to the Duterte Administrations.” Asian Politics & Policy 9 (4): 541–563. doi:10.1111/
ut.12353.
De Castro, Renato. 2018. Duterte Rejects US Assistance During Whitsun Reef Standoﬀ. Asia
Maritime Transparency Institute. https://amti.csis.org/uterte-rejects-u-s-assistance-duringwhitsun-reef-stand-oﬀ/.
De Castro, Renato. 2019. “The Philippines and the Maritime Security Order in Southeast Asia: The
Risk of an Appeasement Policy on an Expansionist China.” Contemporary Chinese Political
Economy and Strategic Relations: An International Journal 5 (3): 1035–1078.
De Castro, Renato. 2021. “Duterte Finally Admits the Importance of the U.S. Alliance”. CSIS Post.
https://amti.csis.org/duterte-ﬁnally-admits-the-importance-of-the-u-s-alliance/.
De Castro, Renato. 2022. “Caught Between Appeasement and Limited Hard Balancing: The
Philippines’ Changing Relations With the Eagle and the Dragon.” Journal of Current
Southeast Asian Aﬀairs, 1–21. doi:10.1177/18681034221081143.

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

689

De Dios, Aurora Javate. 2022. “Democracy Under Strain in the Philippines: The Populist Politics
and Diplomacy of President Rodrigo Duterte.” In From Asia-Paciﬁc to Indo-Paciﬁc, edited by
Robert G. Patman, Patrick Köllner, and Balazs Kiglics, 303–325. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan.
Department of Foreign Aﬀairs. 2013. “Secretary Del Rosario Says PHL Recourse to Arbitration a
Friendly Attempt for Durable Solution to South China Sea Tension.” https://dfa.gov.ph/
authentication-functions/78-newsroom/dfa-releases/217-secretary-del-rosario-says-phl-recourseto-arbitration-a-friendly-attempt-for-durable-solution-to-south-china-sea-tension.
Department of Foreign Aﬀairs. 2021. “Statement of Foreign Aﬀairs Teodoro L. Locsin, Jr. on the
Australia-United Kingdom-United States (AUKUS) Enhanced Trilateral Security Partnership.”
https://dfa.gov.ph/dfa-news/statements-and-advisoriesupdate/29484-statement-of-foreign-aﬀairsteodoro-l-locsin-jr-on-the-australia-united-kingdom-united-states-aukus-enhanced-trilateralsecurity-partnership.
Department of Foreign Aﬀairs. 2022. “Joint Statement of the Inaugural Japan-Philippines Foreign
and Defense Ministerial Meeting (“2+2”).” https://dfa.gov.ph/dfa-news/statements-andadvisoriesupdate/30364-joint-statement-of-the-inaugural-japan-philippines-foreign-and-defenseministerial-meeting-2-2.
Department of Foreign Aﬀairs. n.d. “Philippine-United States Bilateral Relations Fact Sheet.”
Accessed May 12, 2022. https://dfa.gov.ph/dfa-news/dfa-releasesupdate/2695-philippineunited-states-bilateral-relations-fact-sheet.
Domingo, Francis. 2015. “The Contexts of Strategy as a Guide for Defense Planning in the
Philippines.” Defense & Security Analysis 31 (2): 159–167. doi:10.1080/14751798.2015.1069109.
Feng, Huiyun, and Kai He. 2019. “A Dynamic Strategic Culture Model and China’s Behaviour in
the South China Sea.” Cambridge Review of International Aﬀairs, 1–20. doi:10.1080/09557571.
2019.1642301.
Fisher, Richard. 2012. Defending the Philippines: Military Modernization and the Challenges
Ahead.” Center for a New American Security, May 3. https://www.ﬁles.ethz.ch/isn/146734/
CNAS_ESCS_bulletin3.pdf.
Fox, Senan. 2021. Mischief Reef: China, the Philippines, and a Disputed Atoll in the South China
Sea. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan.
Götz, Elias. 2021. “Neoclassical Realist Theories, Intervening Variables, and Paradigmatic
Boundaries.” Foreign Policy Analysis 17 (2): oraa026. doi:10.1093/fpa/oraa026.
Graham, Euan. 2013. “Southeast Asia in the US Rebalance: Perceptions from a Divided Region.”
Contemporary Southeast Asia 35 (3): 305–332.
Gvalia, Girogi, David Siroky, Bidzina Lebanidze, and Zurab Iashvili. 2013. “Thinking Outside the
Bloc: Explaining the Foreign Policies of Small States.” Security Studies 22 (1): 98–131. doi:10.
1080/09636412.2013.757463.
Heydarian, Richard Javad. 2017a. “Evolving Philippines-US-China Strategic Triangle:
International and Domestic Drivers.” Asian Politics & Policy 9 (4): 564–582. doi:10.1111/ut.
12355.
Heydarian, Richard Javad. 2017b. “Tragedy of Small Power Politics: Duterte and the Shifting Sands
of Philippine Foreign Policy.” Asian Security 13 (3): 220–236. doi:10.1080/14799855.2017.
1354569.
Heydarian, Richard Javad. 2022. “Japan Looks to Philippines for a New Era Quad.” Asia Times.
https://asiatimes.com/2022/04/uter-looks-to-philippines-for-a-new-era-quad/.
Hong, Zhao. 2013. “The South China Sea Dispute and China-ASEAN Relations.” Asian Aﬀairs 44
(1): 27–43. doi:10.1080/03068374.2012.760785.
Inquirer. 2021. https://twitter.com/inquirerdotnet/status/1374541759301177344?lang=zh-Hant.
JICA. 2022. “JICA, Philippines Step up Cooperation in Maritime Security, Inspect New Largest
Coast Guard Vessel from Japan.” https://www.jica.go.jp/utertene/uterte/oﬃce/topics/news/
220304_02.html.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee, and Gilbert Rozman. 2015. “Light or Heavy Hedging: Positioning Between
China and the United States.” Joint US-Korea Academic Studies 26: 1–9.
Kurlantzick, Joshua. 2021. Duterte’s Ingratiating Approach to China Has Been a Bust. World
Politics Review. https://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/29697/uterte-s-approach-tochina-philippines-relations-has-been-a-bust.

690

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

Lai, Yew Meng, and Cheng-Chwee Kuik. 2021. “Structural Sources of Malaysia’s South China Sea
Policy: Power Uncertainties and Small-State Hedging.” Australian Journal of International
Aﬀairs 75 (3): 277–304. doi:10.1080/10357718.2020.1856329.
Lee, Terence. 2020. “The Philippines: Civil-Military Relations, from Marcos to Duterte.” Oxford
Research Encyclopedia of Politics. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.1845.
Le Thu, Huong. 2019. “China’s Dual Strategy of Coercion and Inducement Towards ASEAN.” The
Paciﬁc Review 32 (1): 20–36. doi:10.1080/09512748.2017.1417325.
Liang, Ce. 2018. “The Rise of China as a Constructed Narrative: Southeast Asia’s Response to
Asia’s Power Shift.” The Paciﬁc Review 31 (1): 279–297.
Lischin, L. 2022. “The Future of the US-Philippines Alliance: Declining Democracy and Prospects
for US-Philippines Relations After Duterte.” Asia Policy 29 (1): 133–160. doi:10.1353/asp.2022.
0009.
Liu, Feng. 2020. “The Recalibration of Chinese Assertiveness: China’s Responses to the IndoPaciﬁc Challenge.” International Aﬀairs 96 (1): 9–27.
Lobell, Steven E., Norrin M. Ripsman, and Jeﬀrey W. Taliaferro, eds. 2009. Neoclassical Realism,
the State, and Foreign Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Locsin, Teodoro. 2021. Twitter Post. January 27, 2021, 4:57 PM. https://twitter.com/
teddyboylocsin/status/1354352774591389697?lang=en.
Magcamit, M. 2021. “To Feel Is To Believe: China, United States, and the Emotional Beliefs of
Philippines’ Rodrigo Duterte.” Political Science, 1–25. doi:10.1080/00323187.2021.1967764.
Medeiros, Evan, Keith Crane, Eric Heginbotham, Norman Levin, Julia Lowell, Angel Rabasa, and
Somi Seong. 2008. Paciﬁc Currents: The Responses of US Allies and Security Partners in East Asia
to China’s Rise. Santa Monica: Rand Corporation.
Men, Honghua. 2018. “Spread of China’s International Strategic Layout Plan.” In Report of
Strategic Studies in China, edited by Honghua Men, 133–158. Singapore: Springer.
Morris, Lyle J. 2019. “A U.S. Option Playbook for Contingency Planning to Reclaim Scarborough
Shoal.” Rand Corporations, October 9. https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/
perspectives/PE300/PE335/RAND_PE335.pdf.
Murphy, Anne Marie. 2017. “Great Power Rivalries, Domestic Politics and Southeast Asian
Foreign Policy: Exploring the Linkages.” Asian Security 13 (3): 165–182. doi:10.1080/
14799855.2017.1354566.
Nepomuceno, Priam. 2021a. “Australia Has Right to Improve Sub Defense Capability: Lorenzana.”
Philippine News Agency, September 17. https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1153864.
Nepomuceno, Priam. 2021b. PH, US Reaﬃrm Commitment to Enhance Defense Ties, September
11. https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1153229.
Oﬃcial Gazette. 2014. “Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement Between the Philippines and the
United States.” https://www.oﬃcialgazette.gov.ph/2014/04/29/document-enhanced-defensecooperation-agreement/.
Ordaniel, Jeﬀrey, and Alvin Camba. 2018. “The Limits of Duterte’s China Policy.” Paciﬁc Forum,
November 30. https://pacforum.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/181130_PacNet_80_0.pdf.
Ortuoste, Maria. 2013. “The Philippines in the South China Sea: Out of Time, Out of Options?”
Southeast Asian Aﬀairs 2013: 240–256.
Palanca, Ellen, and Austin Ong. 2018. “Philippines–China Relations: Interplay Between Domestic
Politics and Globalization.” In The Sociology of Chinese Capitalism in Southeast Asia, edited by
Yos Santasombat, 93–122. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan.
Pant, Harsh. 2012. “China Shakes Up the Maritime Balance in the Indian Ocean.” Strategic
Analysis 36 (3): 364–368. doi:10.1080/09700161.2012.670447.
Pew Research Centre. 2020. “Around the World, More See the U.S. Positively Than China, But
Little Conﬁdence in Trump or Xi.” https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/01/10/
around-the-world-more-see-the-u-s-positively-than-china-but-little-conﬁdence-in-trump-or-xi/.
Philippine Senate. 2021a. “Surrendering PH Sovereignty Over WPS to China is Duterte’s legacy –
De Lima.” http://legacy.senate.gov.ph/press_release/2021/1229_delima1.asp.
Philippine Senate. 2021b. “Statement of Senator Risa Hontiveros on President Rodrigo Duterte’s
Recognition of 2016 Legal Victory vs China.” http://legacy.senate.gov.ph/press_release/2020/
0923_hontiveros2.asp.

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

691

Philippine Senate. 2022. “Leni-Kiko to Fight for PH Territory: Pangilinan.” http://legacy.senate.
gov.ph/press_release/2022/0330_pangilinan1.asp.
Philippine Statistics Authority. 2012. “Merchandise Export Performance: December 2012.” https://
psa.gov.ph/content/merchandise-export-performance-december-2012.
Philippine Statistics Authority. 2013. “Foreign Trade Statistics of the Philippines: 2012.” https://
psa.gov.ph/content/foreign-trade-statistics-philippines-2012.
Philstar. 2021. “China Hopes to ‘Pass on Our Traditional Friendship from Generation to
Generation’.” https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2021/10/21/2135701/china-hopes-pass-ourtraditional-friendship-generation-generation.
PRC Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs. 2016. “Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs of the
People’s Republic of China on the Award of 12 July 2016 of the Arbitral Tribunal in the
South China Sea Arbitration Established at the Request of the Republic of the Philippines.”
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/nanhai/eng/snhwtlcwj_1/t1379492.htm.
PRC Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs. 2016. “Vice Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin at the Press
Conference on the White Paper Titled China Adheres to the Position of Settling Through
Negotiation the Relevant Disputes Between China and the Philippines in the South China
Sea.” https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/wjdt_665385/zyjh_665391/201607/t20160715_678560.
html.
PRC Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs. 2022. “Xi Jinping Speaks with Philippine President Rodrigo
Duterte on the Phone.” https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/zxxx_662805/202204/t20220409_
10666115.html.
Presidential Communications Operations Oﬃce. 2021. “President Duterte Calls for Sustained
Dialogue, Peaceful Engagement with China.” https://pcoo.gov.ph/news_releases/presidentduterte-calls-for-sustained-dialogue-peaceful-engagement-with-china/?TSPD_101_R0=8171e
0be4361cac471085bc5b1948d35jpU0000000000000000f543afcaﬀf000000000000000000000000
0000627b4cb70023b1b53e082a1376ﬀab20005c97e01b8c7b83243466671fede2e49b2c42d10965
f3d7c0cd0c4b21fadf99de080e780da70a28002fd143c5b17a798ad7e25ed9a42752ebadfd530fa9da
04af42f757201cc7de0c785e34084cd6e87b.
Quintos, Mary Fides A. 2018. “The Philippines: Hedging in a Post-Arbitration South China Sea?”
Asian Politics & Policy 10 (2): 261–282. doi:10.1111/aspp.12394.
Rabena, Aaron Jed. 2018. “The Complex Interdependence of China’s Belt and Road Initiative in
the Philippines.” Asia & the Paciﬁc Policy Studies 5 (3): 683–697. doi:10.1002/app5.257.
Reuters. 2010. “Aquino Vows More Spending for Philippines Defence.” https://www.reuters.com/
article/idUSSGE63L0BR.
Reuters. 2021a. “Philippines’ Defence Chief Says China Intends to Occupy More South China Sea
Areas.” https://www.reuters.com/article/us-philippines-china-southchinasea-idUSKBN2BR07O.
Reuters. 2021b. “Philippines Defence Chief Says Was Urged by China to Drop Review of U.S.
Pact.” https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-paciﬁc/philippines-defence-chief-says-was-urgedby-china-drop-review-us-pact-2021-09-30/.
Reuters. 2022. “Philippines, U.S. Hold Biggest Military Exercises in Seven Years.” https://www.
reuters.com/world/philippines-us-hold-biggest-military-exercises-seven-years-2022-03-28/.
Ripsman, Norrin M. 2009. “Neoclassical Realism and Domestic Interest Groups.” In Neoclassical
Realism, the State, and Foreign Policy, edited by Steven E. Lobell, Norrin M. Ripsman, and
Jeﬀrey W. Taliaferro, 170–193. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ripsman, Norrin M. 2011. Neoclassical Realism. Oxford: Oxford Research Encyclopaedias,
International Studies, Oxford University Press.
Rose, Gideon. 1998. “Review: Neoclassical Realism and Theories of Foreign Policy.” World Politics
51 (1): 144–172.
Ross, Robert. 1999. “The Geography of the Peace: East Asia in the Twenty-First Century.”
International Security 23 (4): 81–118.
Roy, Denny. 2005. “Southeast Asia and China: Balancing or Bandwagoning?” Contemporary
Southeast Asia: A Journal of International and Strategic Aﬀairs 27 (2): 305–322.
Salaverria, Leila. 2012. “Aquino Continues Criticism of Arroyo in Lao People’s Democratic
Republic.” Inquirer, November 5. https://globalnation.inquirer.net/55160/aquino-continuescriticism-of-arroyo-even-in-lao-peoples-democratic-republic.

692

X. WU AND J. C. VELASCO

Santander Trade. 2021. “Philippine: Foreign Investment.” https://santandertrade.com/en/portal/
establish-overseas/philippines/foreign-investment.
Schweller, Randall L. 2004. “Unanswered Threats: A Neoclassical Realist Theory of
Underbalancing.” International Security 29 (2): 159–201.
SCMP. 2016. Duterte Says He’ll Set Aside South China Sea Feud Ruling Against Beijing. https://
www.scmp.com/news/asia/southeast-asia/article/2055433/duterte-says-hell-set-aside-southchina-sea-feud-ruling.
SCMP. 2022. “Philippines’ Marcos Jnr Wants Military Presence to ‘Defend’ South China Sea
Waters.” https://www.scmp.com/news/world/article/3167178/philippines-marcos-jnr-wantsmilitary-presence-defend-south-china-sea?module=hard_link&pgtype=article.
Serapio, Manolo, Jr., and Martin Petty. 2017. “Philippines’ Duterte Says Pointless Discussing South
China Sea Woes at Summit” Reuters, April 27. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-aseansummit-idUSKBN17T11J.
Shoji, Tomotaka, and Hideo Tomikawa. 2017. “Southeast Asia: Duterte Takes Oﬃce, South China
Sea in Flux.” East Asian Strategic Review. http://www.nids.mod.go.jp/english/publication/eastasian/pdf/2017/east-asian_e2017_05.pdf.
Simon, Sheldon. 2013. “US-Southeast Asia Relations: Philippines-an Exemplar of the US
Rebalance.” Comparative Connections 15 (2): 51–59.
Social Weather Station. 2015. “First Quarter 2015 Social Weather Survey: 49% Support
Government Moves in the Scarborough Shaol; 84% Worry Abour Armed Conﬂict with
China.” https://www.sws.org.ph/swsmain/artcldisppage/?artcsyscode=ART-20151211113858.
Social Weather Station. 2021. “Second Quarter 2021 Social Weather Survey On the West PH Sea:
47% of Adult Filipinos Say the Government is Not Doing Enough to Assert the Country’s Rights
in the West PH Sea; 29% Undecided, 24% Disagree.” https://www.sws.org.ph/swsmain/
artcldisppage/?artcsyscode=ART-20210728104853.
State Department. 2021. “Joint Vision for a 21st Century Uni.” https://www.state.gov/joint-visionfor-a-21st-century-united-states-philippines-partnership/ted States-Philippines Partnership.
Storey, Ian. 2008. “Trouble and Strife in the South China Sea Part II: The Philippines and China.”
China Brief 8 (9). http://www.jamestown.org/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=4886.
Storey, Ian. 2016. “Assessing Responses to the Arbitral Tribunal’s Ruling on the South China Sea.”
ISEAS Yusof Ishak Institute, July 28. https://www.iseas.edu.sg/images/pdf/ISEAS_Perspective_
2016_43.pdf.
Storey, Ian. 2021. “The US-Philippines Visiting Forces Agreement: The Duterte Punchbag That
Will Probably Survive the Blows.” Fulcrum, February 19. https://fulcrum.sg/the-usphilippines-visiting-forces-agreement-the-duterte-punchbag-that-will-probably-survive-theblows/.
Summers, Tim. 2021. “Maritime Politics as Discourse in the Indo/Asia-Paciﬁc.” Territory, Politics,
Governance, 1–18. doi:10.1080/21622671.2021.1886977.
Swe, Lim Kheng. 2014. “China-ASEAN Relations: Hamstrung Soft Power in South China Sea?”
RSIS Commentary, September 3. https://www.rsis.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/
CO14174.pdf.
Taylor, Claire. 2011. “Military Balance in Southeast Asia.” UK House of Commons, December 14.
https://www.openbrieﬁng.org/docs/seasiamilitary.pdf.
Thayer, Carlyle. 2010. “Vietnam and Rising China: The Structural Dynamics of Mature
Asymmetry.” Southeast Asian Aﬀairs, 2010, 392–409. doi:10.1355/9789814279833-024.
Tolentino, Elaine, and Myungsik Ham. 2015. “The Entrapment of Asymmetry: The Philippines
Between the US and China.” Bandung: Journal of the Global South 2 (1): 1–15.
Tran, Thi Bich. 2018. Personalising the Philippines’ China Policy: Where Individuals Matter.
Afrasian Research Centre. https://afrasia.ryukoku.ac.jp/phase3/4c95d5f133933809960ee1baba
44b782628a21ed.pdf.
Trung, Nguyen Thanh. 2021. “How China’s Coast Guard Law Has Changed the Regional Security
Architecture.” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, April 12. https://amti.csis.org/howchinas-coast-guard-law-has-changed-the-regional-security-structure/.
USAID. 2021. “Country Development Cooperation Strategy.” https://www.usaid.gov/philippines/
cdcs.

AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

693

US Embassy in the Philippines. 2022. “U.S. and Philippines Forces Successfully Conclude 37th
Balikatan.” https://ph.usembassy.gov/u-s-and-philippine-forces-successfully-conclude-37thbalikatan/.
Van Ham, Peter, Francesco Saverio Montesano, and Frans Paul van der Putten. 2016. A South
China Sea Conﬂict: Implication for European Security. The Hague: Clingendael Institute.
Wiegand, Krista, and Erik Beuck. 2020. “Strategic Selection: Philippine Arbitration in the South
China Sea Dispute.” Asian Security 16 (2): 141–156. doi:10.1080/14799855.2018.1540468.
Wohlforth, William Curti. 1993. The Elusive Balance: Power and Perceptions During the Cold War.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Wu, Charles Chong-Han. 2019. “Why Do States Hedge in East Asia? An Empirical Study on
Hedging.” Asian Perspective 43 (3): 557–584. doi:10.1353/apr.2019.0017.
Xinhua. 2020. “Chinese Tourists Spend More Than 2.3 bln USD in Philippines in 2019.” http://
www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-03/02/c_138836125.htm#:~:text=DOT%20data%20showed
%20that%20a,up%2038.58%20percent%20from%202018.&text=Meanwhile%2C%20she%20
said%20the%20largest,at%20872.13%20million%20U.S.%20dollars.
Yale Law School. 2008. “Mutual Defense Treaty Between the United States and the Republic of the
Philippines; August 30, 1951.” https://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/phil001.asp.
Zakaria, Fareed. 1998. From Wealth to Power: The Unusual Origins of Americas World Role.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Zha, Wen. 2015. “Personalized Foreign Policy Decision-Making and Economic Dependence: A
Comparative Study of Thailand and the Philippines’ China Policies.” Contemporary Southeast
Asia 37 (2): 242–268.
Zhao, Suisheng. 2018. “China and the South China Sea Arbitration: Geopolitics Versus
International Law.” Journal of Contemporary China 27 (109): 1–15. doi:10.1080/10670564.
2017.1363012.
Zhu, Lumin, and Yan Liu. 2016. “The Inﬂuence of Philippine’s Domestic Politics on its Policy
Towards China.” Indian Ocean Economic and Political Review 5: 49–71.

