The Paciﬁc Review

ISSN: 0951-2748 (Print) 1470-1332 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpre20

Middle powers amid Sino-U.S. rivalry: assessing
the ‘good regional citizenship’ of Australia and
Indonesia
Sarah Teo
To cite this article: Sarah Teo (2022) Middle powers amid Sino-U.S. rivalry: assessing the ‘good
regional citizenship’ of Australia and Indonesia, The Paciﬁc Review, 35:6, 1135-1161, DOI:
10.1080/09512748.2022.2075444
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2022.2075444

Published online: 16 May 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1692

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 7 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpre20

THE PACIFIC REVIEW
2022, VOL. 35, NO. 6, 1135–1161
https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2022.2075444

Middle powers amid Sino-U.S. rivalry: assessing
the ‘good regional citizenship’ of Australia
and Indonesia
Sarah Teo
S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies (RSIS), Nanyang Technological University
(NTU), Singapore, Singapore
ABSTRACT

This paper argues that amid intensifying Sino-U.S. rivalry, middle powers in
East Asia have contributed towards regional peaceful change through the
exercise of good regional citizenship, a concept which draws on and modifies
from the more commonly known good international citizenship which is
closely associated with middle powers. Specifically, good regional citizenship
involves proactively strengthening inclusive multilateralism, enhancing the
rules-based order, and contributing to bridging efforts in East Asia. The paper
examines the good regional citizenship of two middle powers, namely
Australia and Indonesia. It finds that while both countries have exercised
good regional citizenship, their specific strategies or the outcomes of their
initiatives on regional dynamics have varied as a result of their relations with
the respective major powers and their general foreign policy approaches.
Australia’s good regional citizenship has supported the preservation of U.S.
leadership in East Asia vis-a-vis the rise of other regional powers, while
Indonesia’s good regional citizenship has helped to narrow the gaps among
regional actors through mechanisms led by the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).

KEYWORDS ASEAN; Australia; Indonesia; good regional citizenship; middle powers; multilateralism

Introduction
How have middle powers in East Asia contributed towards regional peaceful change amid intensifying Sino-U.S. rivalry? As a result of being in the
‘Goldilocks Zone’ of ‘having not too much power but power enough’, middle powers have been known to rely on foreign policy strategies involving
multilateralism and institutions, hedging, as well as coalition building
CONTACT Sarah Teo
islsteo@ntu.edu.sg
S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies (RSIS),
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), 50 Nanyang Ave, Block S4, Level B3, Singapore
639798, Singapore
ß 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

1136

S. TEO

(Gilley, 2016, p. 651). Such strategies are attributed to their inability to take
unilateral action and lack of coercive strength on the one hand, but also
their intellectual and technical capabilities and deft diplomatic skills on the
other (Cooper, Higgott, & Nossal, 1993). Although strategies of middlepowermanship offer insight into how these countries have navigated the
impact of Sino-U.S. rivalry, most of the related research have put the
emphasis more on explaining what drives a middle power to adopt these
strategies and how they serve the middle power’s own interests. Even as
several scholars have underscored the importance for middle powers to
have the ability to influence their external environment, there remains a
gap in terms of explaining how such strategies help to sustain peaceful
change amid the current regional order transition (Carr, 2014; Wilkins, 2017,
pp. 121–122).
This paper suggests that a way to bridge this gap and add to the current
literature on middle powers in East Asia would be through the concept of
‘good regional citizenship’, drawing on the well-documented concept of
‘good international citizenship’ that has been closely associated with middle powers (Abbondanza, 2021; Youde & Slagter, 2013). Like its international-level cousin, good regional citizenship tempers realist power
politics that could lead to war, by focusing on norms and rules, but it does
not blindly hold on to idealist aspirations that may not necessarily align
with facts on the (East Asian) ground (Wheeler & Dunne, 1998, p. 854). This
paper proposes to alter the concept of good regional citizenship from good
international citizenship in two ways: first, to (re)emphasise the link
between national interests and the pursuit of such a strategy; and second,
to stress the regional focus that considers characteristics which are particular to East Asia. Specifically, good regional citizenship involves proactively
supporting inclusive multilateralism and strengthening the rules-based
regime in the region, as well as bridging between conflicting parties, in particular the major powers. Focusing on the good regional citizenship of middle powers allows us to go beyond a discussion of what drives middle
powers to employ certain foreign policy strategies, to look at how these
countries have actually contributed towards regional peaceful change.
Within the context of worsening Sino-U.S. competition, the paper examines the good regional citizenship of two middle powers, namely Australia
and Indonesia. Based on the current definitional approaches, both countries
are regarded to qualify as middle powers. Their economies are ranked fairly
high up in the world, they have projected a middle power identity and
have had this identity reaffirmed by others, and in accordance with expectations about middle power behaviour, both countries have been active in
institution and architecture building in East Asia. Australia and Indonesia
are certainly not the only regional countries to fulfil such middle power

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1137

criteria, but these are the two middle powers that have been the most proactive among their peers. Compared to Australia and Indonesia, another
conventionally acknowledged middle power in the region – South Korea
(which is examined in Pempel’s article in this issue) – has not demonstrated
as much leadership in the broader regional architecture for the period
under study. One might also challenge the inclusion of Australia in an ‘East
Asian’ region, but it would be useful to recall that regional boundaries are
often fluid. Both Australia and Indonesia, for example, are founding members of the East Asia Summit (EAS) and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) forum, and have also been relatively early adopters of the IndoPacific concept. In terms of such a region, loosely defined, the contributions
of Canberra and Jakarta to the institutional architecture are evident, as we
will see later in this paper. However, there are also differences between
both middle powers that have shaped their approaches towards the region.
This paper aims to make a modest but constructive contribution to the literature on the role of middle powers caught amid Sino-U.S. strategic competition in East Asia. Theoretically, the paper introduces the notion of good
regional citizenship by modifying from the concept of good international citizenship, and looks at how it characterises the contributions of middle powers
towards peaceful change in East Asia. Empirically, the paper compares and
contrasts the good regional citizenship of two different types of middle powers
in the region, namely Australia and Indonesia. Given the context of Sino-U.S.
rivalry, it would be useful to assess the extent to which the impact of the
good regional citizenship of these two middle powers – with their different
foreign policy orientations and relations with the major powers – are similar or
different. The paper finds that while both middle powers have exercised strategies of good regional citizenship to contribute towards peaceful change in
East Asia since the late 2000s, the effectiveness or outcomes of their initiatives
have varied. Australia’s good regional citizenship has supported the preservation of U.S. hegemony, or at least leadership, in the region vis-a-vis the rise of
other regional powers, while Indonesia’s good regional citizenship has helped
to narrow the gaps between diverging visions for the region through mechanisms led by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The paper is organised as follows. Following this introduction, the
second section briefly relates the good regional citizenship of middle
powers to the theme of peaceful change in East Asia, and explains how the
concept builds on but is distinct from good international citizenship. The
third section identifies the three dimensions of the good regional citizenship framework and discusses some of the key assumptions. This framework
is then applied to Australia and Indonesia’s strategies in light of Sino-U.S.
competition. The paper concludes with some implications for the contributions of middle powers towards peaceful change in East Asia.

1138

S. TEO

Good regional citizenship for a ‘mini-max’ peaceful change
This study focuses on the time period after the global financial crisis in the
late 2000s, when academic and policy discussions about a rising China and
relatively declining United States became more prominent (see, for
example, Beeson & Gilson, 2010; Layne, 2009). The intricacies of Sino-U.S.
rivalry are well documented in the relevant literature (including in the other
articles in this special issue) and need not be repeated here. Suffice to note
that although such debates have generally concurred that some form of
structural change is occurring, views have been divided on whether such
change would result in instability or if there is potential for a peaceful transition (see, for example, Ikenberry, 2018; Mearsheimer, 2010). The possibility
of peaceful change has typically been dismissed by realists and embraced
more by liberals and constructivists. Building on these debates, T. V. Paul
conceptualises peaceful change based on a continuum. A minimalist definition of peaceful change would be ‘change in international relations and
foreign policies of states, including territorial or sovereignty agreements
that take place without violence or coercive use of force’, while a maximalist definition would be ‘transformational change that takes place non-violently at the global, regional, interstate, and societal levels due to various
material, normative and institutional factors, leading to deep peace among
states, higher levels of prosperity and justice for all irrespective of nationality, race or gender’ (Paul, 2020, p. 4; see also Paul in this issue).
In between the two extremes is a ‘mini-max’ definition that adopts the
formulation by Karl Deutsch and collaborators, which is ‘the resolution of
social problems mutually by institutionalized procedures without resort to
largescale physical force’ (as cited in Paul, 2020, p. 4). Given that the conditions for ‘deep peace’ remain largely elusive in East Asia on the one hand,
and that regional institutions have been rather entrenched on the other,
this paper’s argument is premised on the ‘mini-max’ definition of peaceful
change. In particular, the objective is to examine how middle powers have
contributed towards ‘mini-max’ peaceful change amid intensifying Sino-U.S.
rivalry. This adds to the extant middle power literature that focuses on how
such countries could shape their external environment and contribute
towards regional stability, despite not being major powers (Carr, 2014;
Wilkins, 2017, pp. 121–122). Through the exercise of good regional citizenship, middle powers help to facilitate and institutionalise the peaceful management of regional dynamics. While not yet reaching the level of
‘transformational change’ and ‘deep peace’ promulgated by a maximalist
understanding of peaceful change, such efforts go beyond a minimalist
peaceful change and are expected to regulate positive changes in foreign
policy behaviour via multilateral and institutional channels (Paul, 2020,
p. 4).

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1139

The good regional citizenship framework advanced in this paper draws
on the concept of good international citizenship, which has been closely
related with the study of middle powers (Abbondanza, 2021; Youde &
Slagter, 2013). While the notion of international citizenship typically incorporates assumptions about its constitutive nature, the focus here is on its
foreign policy behavioural dimensions. The origins of the good international
citizenship concept date back to at least the 1960s, when Canada’s
Governor-General Daniel Roland Michener (1967) said in a speech reflecting
on the country’s international standing:
Our record as a middle power, independent and influential but not decisive
in world affairs, our freedom from the much echoed taint of imperialism, our
role in peacekeeping operations under the United Nations, our devotion to
the just settlement of international differences, and our substantial aid to
developing countries, have combined to win us friendship and respect. …
We are a good international citizen worthy of trust and capable
of leadership.

About 20 years later, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Australia’s
Foreign Minister Gareth Evans identified good international citizenship as
one of the major priorities in Canberra’s foreign policy (Evans, 1989, pp.
12–13). For Evans, being a good international citizen means ‘being willing
to engage in cooperative international action to advance global public
goods … those which are by their nature beyond the capacity of any one
state, however great and powerful, to individually solve’ (Evans, 2017, pp.
109–110). These include issues such as the environment, pandemics, and
transnational crime. Over time, this conceptualisation of good international
citizenship has gained widespread acceptance in the literature. Similar to
Canada, Australia’s pursuit of good international citizenship during Evans’
tenure as foreign minister was also part of efforts to position the country as
a proactive and credible middle power.
While the criteria for good international citizenship may vary slightly
across those who have promoted or theorised the concept, there are several common strands that most accounts are in agreement on. For example,
Nicholas Wheeler and Tim Dunne characterise good international citizenship as ‘a mutual interdependence between the provision of national security, the strengthening of international order and the promotion of human
rights’, Suzanne Graham defines the concept as a ‘willing[ess] to place international society’s welfare ahead of the incessant pursuit of its national interests’, and Jeremy R. Youde and Tracy Hoffmann Slagter suggest the
connotations of morality and responsibility associated with the concept
(Graham, 2008, p. 88; Wheeler & Dunne, 1998, p. 854; Youde & Slagter,
2013, p. 124). In a study of Australia’s good international citizenship, Alison
Pert sets out five attributes of this profile, namely compliance with

1140

S. TEO

international law, support for multilateralism, willingness to ‘pitch in’ to
international tasks, displays of morality or ethics, as well as demonstration
of leadership (Pert, 2012, p. 96). More recently, Gabriele Abbondanza also
identifies five dimensions of good international citizenship, specifically
respect for international law, promotion of multilateralism, pursuit of
humanitarian and idealist goals, advocation of international law and the
rules-based order, and an alignment of domestic and foreign policies
(Abbondanza, 2021). This paper’s conceptual framework draws on these
existing elements of good international citizenship, but – acknowledging
that such ideas have typically been associated with the behaviour of
Western-oriented middle powers at the global level – modifies it slightly
towards an alternative ‘good regional citizenship’ that may be better suited
to examine the contributions of middle powers towards peaceful change in
East Asia in light of Sino-U.S. rivalry.
The first modification involves (re)emphasising the link between national
interests and the pursuit of good regional citizenship. A big part of the literature on good international citizenship has been heavily linked to
humanitarian issues and notions of morality tied to Western liberal internationalism (Abbondanza, 2021, pp. 187–188; Efstathopoulos, 2018, p. 54).
Evans himself asserted that ‘[o]f all the strands of good international citizenship, we give special emphasis to human rights’ (Evans, 1989, p. 13). As
others have pointed out, however, the good international citizenship of
Australia and Canada – generally treated as the exemplar middle powers of
the post-World War II period – have been called into question on several
occasions. For example, Abbondanza points to Australia’s controversial offshore processing of seaborne asylum seekers and its ‘tolerance towards
illegal US interrogation and detention practices’ in the ‘War on Terror’, while
P. Whitney Lackenbauer and Andrew F. Cooper explain that Canada’s selfimage as a good international citizen on human rights is challenged by ‘the
flaws in its own record’ on Indigenous issues (Abbondanza, 2021, p. 185;
Lackenbauer & Cooper, 2007, p. 99). These suggest that the path towards
good international citizenship is often tied to domestic politics and crucial
external relations.
Given these complex and interrelated interests, it is useful to also recall
Evans’ clarification that good international citizenship ‘is not the foreign
policy equivalent of boy scout good deeds’ (Evans, 1989, p. 12). Rather, it
should be treated as ‘an exercise in enlightened self-interest’ based on the
acknowledgement of international interdependence and how that relates
to a state’s primary national interests (Evans, 1989, p. 13). The concept of
good regional citizenship formulated here puts this notion at its core, and
departs from traditional – and often controversial – associations of good
international citizenship with humanitarian issues. Distancing good regional

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1141

citizenship from assumptions about morality and ethics allows us to move
past debates about whether middle powers are more virtuous than major
powers, or whether countries that do not engage in humanitarian activism
could be described as middle powers. Rather, the emphasis is on how middle powers have served as good regional citizens in more strategic terms,
particularly in terms of their contributions towards facilitating a peaceful
order transition in the region.
Accepting that a state’s good regional citizenship is premised on its
national interests also aligns with one of the key elements of middle power
behaviour, namely, niche diplomacy. While the idea of ‘niche diplomacy’
harks back to discussions on Canadian foreign policy in the late 1940s,
Cooper and Evans have been instrumental in relating it to middle power
behaviour in the post-Cold War period (Cooper, 1997; Evans, 2011). The
claim is that due to their limited resources, middle powers should direct
their ‘resources in specific areas best able to generate returns worth having’
(Evans, 2011). Cooper adds that according to the premises of niche diplomacy, a state’s ‘standing with respect to specific forums of decision-making
rested on specialized interests and task-related experience’ (Cooper, 1997,
p. 4). A middle power should thus limit its involvement to issues in which it
could presumably wield the most influence, depending on its resources
and reputation. While the specific issues of concerns would depend on the
interests, specialised skills and other-perceptions of each middle power, for
middle powers in East Asia dealing with the effects of Sino-U.S. rivalry, we
can reasonably expect a focus on reinforcing behavioural norms and rules
especially via multilateralism and institutions (see, for example, Emmers &
Teo, 2018; Gilley & O’Neil, 2014).
The second modification that distinguishes good regional citizenship
from good international citizenship involves, as their names suggest, the
level of analytical focus. This draws on arguments that dynamics within a
specific region are neither completely identical to global-level nor other
regions’ dynamics, and thus should be studied as ‘a distinct level of analysis’
(Buzan & Waever, 2003, p. 27). Examples of such works in the East Asian
context would include Christopher Hemmer and Peter Katzenstein’s examination of the different development of security multilateralism in Europe
and Asia during the Cold War years, as well as Evelyn Goh’s study on the
normative and social underpinnings of the post-Cold War East Asian order
(Goh, 2013; Hemmer & Katzenstein, 2002). This argument for treating the
region as a distinct level of analysis certainly does not preclude global-level
dynamics shaping regional developments; in fact, regional and international
developments are often interlinked (Hurrell, 2007, p. 130). Nevertheless, my
focus on how regional middle powers have contributed to peaceful change
in East Asia necessitates a narrowing down of the good international

1142

S. TEO

citizenship concept in a way that would take into account characteristics
particular to the region. Consequently, although issues of morality and
human rights have been a crucial dimension of good international citizenship, they are not a primary feature in this paper’s good regional citizenship
framework. This more targeted scope allows us to focus on the elements
that contribute specifically towards peaceful change in East Asia amid
major power rivalry.

Three dimensions of good regional citizenship
Let us now proceed to identify three central attributes of good regional citizenship within the context of Sino-U.S. rivalry in East Asia. These three
attributes are not mutually exclusive, and as we will see, overlap with each
other in various ways.
First, good regional citizenship would involve strengthening inclusive
multilateralism in the region. This reasoning is based on the recognition of
interdependence and acknowledgement that multilateral efforts are
required to work towards a sustainable resolution of regional challenges
(Abbondanza, 2021, pp. 185–186; Evans, 1990). On the part of middle
powers, their preference for multilateralism emerges from the perception
that these platforms encourage a more equal and legitimate decision-making process, and could help to restrain major powers from imposing their
preferences on middle powers and the smaller states (Emmers & Teo, 2018,
pp. 28–33). Ideally, power and influence would thus be more diffused and
not concentrated solely in the hands of Washington and/or Beijing.
Moreover, between middle powers that ‘tend to have more opportunities
for leadership’ in such areas and smaller states that are generally unable to
lead in these efforts, it is also important for the former to facilitate the
inclusion of the latter in multilateral decision making (Gilley & O’Neil, 2014,
p. 12). Inclusivity is thus important in this facet of good regional citizenship,
as a way to ensure that the smaller states get a say too.
Second, good regional citizenship in the context of Sino-U.S. rivalry
would involve reinforcing the regional rules-based order (Abbondanza,
2021, pp. 188–189). This dimension is important because it sets out the
rules and norms that govern state behaviour and interstate conflict, regardless of the economic sizes or military capabilities of the parties involved. It
is therefore not so much the rejection of Sino-U.S. competition, but that the
competition occurs ‘within the framework of international law [rather than]
through corruption, interference or coercion’ (Turnbull, 2017). For middle
powers, an order based on rules and norms is viewed to work more to their
advantage than one based on (material) power where they would mostly
come up short against the major powers. Similar to multilateralism, a rules-

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1143

based order thus offers middle powers a way to protect themselves and
smaller states against the unilateral or unpredictable tendencies of the
major powers. In this sense, by promoting and encouraging other regional
states to comply with regional rules and standards, middle powers could
contribute towards more stable regional dynamics.
Last but not least, good regional citizenship amid Sino-U.S. rivalry would
involve bridging efforts (Efstathopoulos, 2018, pp. 56–57; Spero, 2009).
Specifically with regard to Beijing and Washington, this means that middle
powers could attempt to offer acceptable solutions to both parties or serve
as a mediator during disagreements or disputes. Beyond the two major
powers, middle powers could also assume bridge-building roles to narrow
differences between other parties with diverging interests or with different
perspectives (Mo, 2016, pp. 591–592). Such efforts are aimed towards ensuring that the region does not become deeply divided as a result of Sino-U.S.
competition.
It is also important to note that in order to be regarded as a good
regional citizen, a middle power ‘must do more than merely fulfil its minimum … obligations’ (Pert, 2012, p. 96). The crux of ‘good’ regional citizenship, vis-a-vis ‘average’ regional citizenship, is some form of leadership or
initiative in the listed dimensions above (Pert, 2012, p. 97). It is insufficient
to simply participate in multilateralism or comply with international law;
middle powers have to take proactive steps to strengthen these institutions. Likewise, middle powers have to take the initiative in bridge building
in the region. Effective good regional citizenship ‘moderates the realist
struggle for power’ amid structural transitions (Wheeler & Dunne, 1998, p.
854). Proactive efforts by middle powers towards bolstering inclusive multilateralism, supporting a rules-based regional order and bridge building
among conflicting parties would reinforce the rules, norms and practices
that underlie regional diplomacy, in support of peaceful change. There is
undeniably an element of liberal bias in the three strategies of good
regional citizenship identified here. The middle powers surveyed in this
paper, Australia and Indonesia, being democratic and free-market states,
are likely to approach ‘good’ regional citizenship differently from other middle powers with different political and economic attributes. In this sense,
the good regional citizenship formulated here is expected to facilitate a
regional context that is largely favourable to democratic capitalist states,
but the conduciveness of this approach may not necessarily be viewed in
the same way across the board.
As a related point, it should be acknowledged that the outcomes of
these strategies of good regional citizenship are also subjected to the
responses of others. Middle powers might seek to conduct good regional
citizenship, but whether their initiatives are recognised and accepted as

1144

S. TEO

‘good’ is ultimately a social act. As Hurrell (2000, pp. 2–3) rightly points out
in the context of ‘Great Power’ status:
You can claim Great Power status but membership of the club of Great
Powers is a social category that depends on recognition by others – by your
peers in the club, but also by smaller and weaker states willing to accept
the legitimacy and authority of those at the top of the
international hierarchy.

Similarly, the success or effectiveness of a middle power in achieving its
objectives is contingent on whether it is able to persuade its counterparts
to support its initiatives, which, to some extent, depends on whether its
efforts are perceived by others to be ‘good’. This speaks to broader debates
regarding intersubjective understandings about behaviour and identity. To
use an oft-cited example from Alexander Wendt contrasting the differing
U.S. threat perceptions towards the possession of nuclear weapons by the
United Kingdom and North Korea respectively, what is considered
‘threatening’ to Washington is not shaped merely by the material, but also
by shared understandings about amity and enmity (Wendt, 1995, p. 73). In
this vein, the outcomes of what a middle power may consider ‘good’
regional citizenship are also dependent on general perceptions of the middle power, its relations with regional counterparts, and its past behaviour.
Such perceptions affect the responses of others towards the middle power’s
exercise of good regional citizenship, and consequently shape outcomes.
A brief note about how middle powers have been defined in this paper
would be relevant here. Although there is no consensus within
International Relations on what a middle power is, the literature suggests
three primary ways – by material capabilities, identity and behaviour – to
approach the concept. The details of these approaches are well captured in
the extant middle power literature (see, for example, Carr, 2014, pp. 71–77);
suffice to highlight that both the countries of focus for this paper, Australia
and Indonesia, fulfil all three aspects of ‘middlepowerness’ to a large extent.
In terms of material capabilities – following Bruce Gilley and Andrew
O’Neil’s observation that those countries ‘with a ranking roughly in the
tenth to thirtieth range’ qualify as potential middle powers – Australia and
Indonesia certainly fit the quantitative criteria of being a middle power
(Gilley & O’Neil, 2014, p. 5). Since 2010, the former has ranked between the
12th and 14th spots in global GDP rankings, while the latter has hovered
around the 16th to 19th places (The World Bank, 2021). Australia and
Indonesia have also both projected a middle power identity, although it
should be acknowledged that there are domestic contestations over this
status (Teo, 2018, p. 229; Teo, 2022, pp. 155–157). Last but not least,
Australia and Indonesia have demonstrated behavioural features of middlepowermanship. Both countries have advocated the benefits of

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1145

multilateralism, and have undertaken institution-building efforts in the
region. Jakarta is often considered ‘first among equals’ in ASEAN based not
only on its population and economic size but also its historical leadership
role in regional institutions, while Australia’s initiatives in regional multilateralism – APEC and the Asia Pacific Community (APC) come to mind – have
likewise been reflective of its proactive approach. As middle powers in a
region characterised by ongoing transitions and some uncertainty, both
Australia and Indonesia have arguably pursued strategies for a ‘mini-max’
formulation of peaceful change.
In the next two sections, we turn our attention to the good regional citizenship of Australia and Indonesia. As we will see, while Canberra and
Jakarta have worked towards strengthening inclusive multilateralism, supporting the rules-based order, and contributing to bridging efforts in the
region, the specific details of their initiatives have played out slightly differently. This is mainly due to their different relations with the major powers,
as well as the differences in perceptions of their place in the region which
affect the reception of their initiatives. Australia is a formal U.S. ally while
Indonesia relies on a free and active foreign policy centred on non-alignment and the rejection of military alliances. Australia has also struggled
with its belonging in East Asia, whereas Indonesia’s central place in the
region has generally not been questioned due to its leadership role in
ASEAN and Southeast Asia. As a result, Jakarta has leveraged its role in
ASEAN as a way to assert its middle power influence in East Asia, while
Canberra – despite engaging with ASEAN-led platforms – has been more
inclined to initiate mechanisms outside the ASEAN framework that preserve
U.S. primacy in the region.

Australia’s good regional citizenship
This section surveys Australia’s good regional citizenship against the three
dimensions identified in the preceding section. Despite the debates surrounding its status as an Asian country, Australia has been an active promoter of regional multilateralism and institution building since the end of
the Cold War. Many of its initiatives have been based on inclusiveness and
norms promotion, but have nevertheless also prioritised ensuring U.S. presence in the regional architecture which would in turn secure Canberra’s
own place in the region. From Australia’s perspective, strong U.S. engagement with East Asia would create a regional climate that is conducive for
its own interests. Consequently, Australia’s good regional citizenship has
contributed towards a regional order that continues to be led by the
United States and accords important roles to U.S. allies and partners visa-vis other non-like-minded countries. This has also meant that while

1146

S. TEO

Canberra has been relatively proactive in supporting regional multilateralism and strengthening the rules-based framework, it has either displayed
less initiative or seen less success in bridging between Beijing
and Washington.

Strengthening inclusive multilateralism
Australia’s contributions towards inclusive multilateralism in the region are
well documented. These are exemplified by its leadership role in the formation of APEC in the late 1980s, as well as its advocacy for a region-wide
multilateral security dialogue in the early 1990s prior to the formation of
the ASEAN Regional Forum. As a pragmatic supporter of ASEAN-led mechanisms that include both China and the United States, Australia has continued to be proactive in bolstering inclusive multilateralism in the region
since the late 2000s. Canberra is the only one of ASEAN’s dialogue partners
to have co-chaired an Experts’ Working Group in all four three-year cycles
of the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus work plan thus far. The
inaugural ASEAN-Australia Summit in 2018, as well as the first ASEANAustralia Defence Ministers’ Informal Meeting in 2020, also reflect
Canberra’s support of the open ASEAN-led multilateral architecture in the
region. This is despite its wariness of and problems with a more assertive China.
Australia’s acknowledgment of the need to ‘accommodate China’s rise in
the region’ is also demonstrated in former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s APC
(He, 2011, p. 273). Although ill-fated, the APC embodied Australia’s efforts
to facilitate regional engagement of China as a rising power even as it pursued stronger U.S. commitment to the region. Rudd announced the APC initiative in June 2008, with administration officials observing that while there
were, at that point, several multilateral institutions that underpinned the
regional architecture, there were gaps that needed to be addressed. Most
significantly from Australia’s perspective, APEC did not include India and
the EAS did not include the United States at the time (Official Committee
Hansard, Commonwealth of Australia, 2010, p. 105). As a regional institution
that would span ‘the entire Asia-Pacific region’ – including China, India,
Indonesia, Japan and the United States – the APC aimed to address these
gaps and ‘encourage the development of a genuine and comprehensive
sense of community whose habitual operating principle is cooperation’
(Rudd, 2008). In leaked diplomatic cables on the APC, officials explained
that Australia wanted to avoid having Chinese dominance and U.S. absence
in the regional architecture – a scenario that would be detrimental to
Australia’s own place in the region (Australia Canberra, 2009; Secretary of
State, 2009). Admittedly, the APC drew criticism for its potential threat to

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1147

ASEAN centrality in the regional architecture and ultimately failed to obtain
widespread regional support. The idea itself eventually faded, although
some have subtly suggested that the subsequent U.S. entry into the EAS –
prized for its annual convening of the leaders of 18 regional countries –
could be associated with the momentum generated by Australia’s initiative
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Singapore, 2010; Natalegawa, 2018, p. 98).

Supporting the rules-based order
Australia has also been vocal in championing the rules-based order in the
region, which it regards as essential for ensuring that ‘the sovereignty of all
states, large and small, is respected’ (Reynolds, 2020). As Sino-U.S. competition has extended across more areas, such as technology, economics, and
even in dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic, Australia has expressed active
support for international institutions such as laws and treaties. For instance,
it has been at the forefront of calls for a ‘robust, independent and comprehensive’ inquiry on early responses to the COVID-19 pandemic – much to
Beijing’s ire (Hurst, 2020). On the South China Sea, Canberra submitted a
note verbale to the United Nations (UN) Secretary-General in July 2020 stating its position on the issue. This has been regarded as a shift from its neutral position on the territorial disputes, to a stronger stance ‘reject[ing] any
claims by China that are inconsistent with the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea’ (Permanent Mission of the
Commonwealth of Australia to the United Nations, 2020; see also Thayer,
2020). Additionally, when the United States withdrew from the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP) in 2017, it was Australia – along with Japan and New
Zealand – that led the charge towards concluding a TPP-11, otherwise
known as the Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership
(CPTPP) (‘Japan, Australia’, 2017). Australia’s then Minister for Trade,
Tourism and Investment, Steven Ciobo, described the signing of the CPTPP
as ‘a significant moment for open markets, free trade and the rules-based
international system’ (Ciobo, 2018).
In recent times, Australia has also sought to bolster the rules-based order
through smaller groupings of like-minded partners. These include the
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (QSD, also known as the Quad) involving
Australia, India, Japan and the United States, the Australia-United KingdomUnited States (AUKUS) security arrangement, as well as other minilateral
channels such as the Australia-India-Japan and Australia-India-France dialogues. To some extent, Canberra’s interest in such minilateral cooperation
has been driven by what it sees as the failure of broader multilateral institutions in the region to adequately address strategic and traditional security
issues (Wallis, 2020, p. 14). At first glance, the exclusiveness inherent in

1148

S. TEO

minilateralism may seem to pose a challenge to inclusive multilateralism in
the region. Given the differences in the processes and agendas of multilateralism and minilateralism, however, it is arguable that both forms of
cooperation are firstly, not mutually exclusive, and secondly, serve to fulfil
different but equally necessary functions towards regional stability.
Australia’s cooperation with India and Japan to achieve supply chain resilience in the region, even as it has signed on to larger multilateral trade
deals such as the CPTPP and the Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership – the latter which includes China – reflect an example of the
dual strategies. Nevertheless, Australia’s proactiveness in promoting a rulesbased regime with like-minded partners has conceivably helped to move
the region towards a stronger commitment to established rules and norms
in the face of major power unilateralism. It is moreover interesting to note
that, while participating in a collective movement to support the rulesbased order would be considered an act of ‘good’ regional citizenship from
the perspective of the United States and some regional countries, others –
most obviously China – have not responded well to Australia’s attempts in
this field. This has affected Canberra’s ability to bridge major power relations, as we will see in the next sub-section.

Bridging
When it comes to bridging, one could make the case that the options for
Australia here have narrowed since the late 2010s as its relations with
China have progressively worsened. The fallout from the row over foreign
interference in Australia, Canberra’s call for a global investigation into the
origins of the COVID-19 pandemic, and Beijing’s trade sanctions on
Australia have arguably destroyed the notion of any kind of bridging role
that the middle power could potentially assume between China and the
United States. Prior to this downturn in relations, some of Australia’s leaders
and diplomats had appeared partial to the idea of being an honest broker
between the two major powers. During his tenure as prime minister, for
example, Rudd indicated that Australia could serve as a bridge between
China and the United States or the West in issues such as climate change
and nuclear arms reductions (Banham, 2007; Reuters Staff, 2007). Similarly,
Bob Carr, in an interview in 2011 before being appointed as foreign minister, underscored Australia’s interests in facilitating peaceful Sino-U.S. relations (Clark & Kerin, 2012).
As others note, however, these aspirations to serve as a neutral intermediary were ‘seriously at odds’ with Australia’s U.S. alliance (Manicom &
O’Neil, 2010, p. 35). Despite the rhetoric of not wanting to choose between
China and the United States, John Lee, who was adviser to former

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1149

Australian Foreign Minister Julie Bishop, underscores that ‘Australia has
chosen to be in the US’s camp’ (Lee, 2012). The potential value of Rudd’s
overtures to serve as a mediator between the two major powers, for
instance, quickly faded as the Sino-Australian relationship took an unpleasant turn around 2009 as a result of claims in Australia’s Defence White
Paper that China’s military modernisation had ‘the potential to give its
neighbours cause for concern’, the controversy over Rio Tinto, as well as
the dispute over Australia’s granting of a visa to Uighur leader Rebiya
Kadeer (Department of Defence, Australian Government, 2009, p. 34). Then
Foreign Minister Stephen Smith asserted that Australia ‘will not compromise
on [its] values and virtues’ despite positive relations with China (House of
Representatives, Commonwealth of Australia, 2009, p. 12285). Such differences have subsequently become characteristic of Sino-Australian ties, arguably inhibiting any of Canberra’s aspirations to mediate between Beijing
and Washington. Australia’s participation in the U.S.-backed Quad and
AUKUS have further narrowed the space for it to be regarded as an honest
broker between the major powers. Amid worsening Sino-Australian relations since 2020, China-based sources have also been vocal in criticising
Australia for being a ‘puppet’ of the United States (see, for example, Wang,
2020). Given this context, any attempts by Canberra to conduct good
regional citizenship by bridging Sino-U.S. relations would be unlikely to
have been well received by China. It is thus not surprising that in practical
terms, Australia has neither been proactive nor seen much success in terms
of bridging Sino-U.S. relations.
Overall, while Canberra’s efforts have propped up inclusive multilateralism and the rules-based order in the region, it has been less effective in
bridging between Beijing and Washington. The extent to which Australia’s
good regional citizenship has helped to facilitate peaceful change amid
Sino-U.S. competition has therefore been mixed. As a middle power,
Australia has relied on its credibility, initiative and resources to strengthen
multilateralism and the rules-based framework in the region, but its own
problems with China, alongside its status as a U.S. ally, has circumscribed
its role as an honest broker.

Indonesia’s good regional citizenship
Traditionally regarded as the leader of Southeast Asia and ASEAN,
Indonesia has proactively worked towards strengthening inclusive multilateralism, promoting a rules-based order, and contributing to bridging efforts
in the region. Jakarta’s greatest contributions to regional institution building has been through the ASEAN platform, which it has utilised to commit
larger regional powers – including China and the United States – to peace

1150

S. TEO

in Southeast Asia and the broader region. Although Indonesia has encountered disinterest or resistance from some ASEAN member states towards
several of its initiatives that has led it to look beyond ASEAN in recent
times, the organisation remains one of the key pillars of its foreign policy.
As we will see below, Indonesia has been relatively effective in all three features of good regional citizenship, thus highlighting its contributions
towards regional peaceful change amid worsening Sino-U.S. competition.

Strengthening inclusive multilateralism
Indonesia’s leadership of ASEAN has been instrumental in reinforcing an
inclusive multilateral architecture. To a certain extent, this has been a natural extension of the country’s ‘free and active’ foreign policy which prioritises non-alignment and rejects military alliances. Indonesia hosted the
inaugural ASEAN Summit in 1976 and has played a formative role in shaping the organisation. Additionally, Jakarta was a crucial driver of the ASEAN
community-building process from the early 2000s, especially in terms of
forming a security community aimed at shaping ‘a regional architecture
that is open, transparent and inclusive, while remaining actively engaged,
forward-looking and non-discriminatory’ (ASEAN Secretariat, 2009, p. 2).
Similarly, Indonesia’s advocacy of the Indo-Pacific has been based on a
regional architecture that would be ‘open, transparent and inclusive, promoting the habit of dialogue, promoting cooperation and friendship, and
upholding international law’ (Septiari, 2018). Jakarta has nevertheless faced
challenges in gathering regional support for its Indo-Pacific vision, as
reflected in Singapore’s reported hesitancy in endorsing Indonesia’s proposal of an ASEAN position on the Indo-Pacific (Septiari, 2019). This relates
to the earlier point about how a middle power’s perceptions of and
approach towards its good regional citizenship may not always align with
the views and responses of the others.
Amid rising Sino-U.S. rivalry, Indonesia has sought to engage with and
commit various regional powers to stability in Southeast Asia, and by extension, the broader East Asian region. During discussions to form the EAS in
the mid-2000s, for example, Indonesia – alongside others such as Japan
and Singapore – pushed for the new mechanism to include Australia, India
and New Zealand. This was in contrast to the preferences of Malaysia and
China for a more exclusive ‘East Asian’ grouping comprising only the
ASEAN member states, as well as China, Japan and South Korea. Former
Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa recalls that Indonesia’s case
to include Australia, India and New Zealand was based on considerations of
‘“dilut[ing]” … the increasing influence of any particular state’ and establishing behavioural norms among its participants (Natalegawa, 2018, p. 90).

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1151

Later, amid talks to invite Russia and the United States to join the EAS,
Natalegawa developed his concept of ‘dynamic equilibrium’ that would be
achieved ‘through the management of the exercise of power and the promotion of predictability of interstate behaviour’ (Natalegawa, 2018, p. 101).
As ASEAN Chair in 2011, Indonesia became the first country to host the
expanded 18-member EAS. By promoting inclusive multilateralism, Jakarta
helped to ensure that power and influence were more diffused among participants, and that collective decision making would be more equal. The
vision of a more equal partnership between ASEAN and its dialogue partners has also been underscored in Indonesia’s Strategic Plan 2015–2019
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, 2015, p. 6).

Supporting the rules-based order
Indonesia has also taken the lead to strengthen the rules-based order in
the region, although its efforts have either lacked consistency or been met
with resistance. Jakarta played a significant role in negotiations for the
ASEAN Charter in the 2000s and was reportedly ‘behind much of the wording’ of the final document (Heiduk, 2016, p. 12). As a document targeted at
‘codif[ying] ASEAN norms, rules and values’ and ‘present[ing] accountability
and compliance’, the ASEAN Charter is intended to bolster the rules-based
regime in the region (ASEAN Secretariat, 2020). However, Jakarta was disappointed by the resistance from some of its fellow ASEAN member states
towards its attempt to incorporate human rights and democratic principles
in the charter, which led to a watered-down final document (Emmers,
2019). Its suggestion in 2004 to establish an ASEAN peacekeeping force
was also opposed by some of the other member states in light of complex
domestic politics and the view that peacekeeping was not among ASEAN’s
primary functions. Another proposal to bolster the rules-based order that
did not generate sufficient regional interest involved Natalegawa’s suggestion for an ‘Indo-Pacific wide treaty of friendship and cooperation’ in 2013.
Building on the EAS’ adoption of the ‘Bali Principles’ for mutually beneficial
relations under Indonesia’s chairmanship in 2011, Natalegawa reasoned
that a treaty signed by the EAS participants – among which existed several
‘trust-deficit[s]’ and territorial disputes – would serve as a commitment to
build confidence, solve disagreements peacefully, and regard security as a
common good (Natalegawa, 2013). This idea eventually ‘disappeared into
the black hole of ASEAN bureaucracy’ (Weatherbee, 2019, p. 3).
Under President Joko Widodo, Indonesia has appeared to attach less
importance to ASEAN in its rules-promotion efforts, arguably as a consequence of the above-mentioned resistance that Jakarta encountered in the
past. An example of this shift is illustrated through Indonesia’s approach

1152

S. TEO

towards the South China Sea issue. Under former President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono, Indonesia sought to make progress on the long-stalled negotiations between ASEAN and China for a Code of Conduct (COC) on the
South China Sea. Natalegawa drew up a ‘zero draft COC’ that was presented
to the ASEAN foreign ministers in 2012 and ‘doggedly pressed Beijing to
come to the diplomatic table to complete a [COC] agreement’ (Thayer,
2013; Weatherbee, 2016a, p. 8). In contrast, the Widodo administration has
approached the COC in ‘an almost pro forma fashion’ with ‘no Indonesian
actions or initiatives to drive the process forward’ (Weatherbee, 2016b, p.
61). Jakarta’s reaction to the arbitral tribunal ruling on the maritime territorial dispute between China and the Philippines in 2016 has been described
by as ‘bland’ and ‘lacklustre’, with an accompanying lack of interest by
Indonesia to drive a collective ASEAN response towards the ruling
(Laksmana, 2016, p. 382; see also Almuttaqi, 2020, pp. 43–44). An alternative
argument here is that, far from giving in to violations of the rules-based
order in the South China Sea, Jakarta has continued its advocacy for rules
but has preferred to ‘go it alone’ (Connelly, 2016, p. 10; see also
Weatherbee, 2016b, p. 66). It has certainly not shied away from taking a
hardline stance, as evidenced by its sinking of foreign vessels – including
from China and Vietnam – found illegally fishing in Indonesian waters. As
Ahmad Ibrahim Almuttaqi observes, ‘President Widodo would only get
involved when Indonesia’s sovereignty was directly threatened. Otherwise,
he was happy to withdraw himself’ (Almuttaqi, 2020, p. 44). This would
arguably cast a shadow on the good regional citizenship of the Southeast
Asian middle power.

Bridging
Last but not least, Indonesia has exercised leadership in bridging – not so
much between China and the United States, but rather, among conflicting
parties in the region. Continuing with the example on the South China Sea,
Indonesia has since the 1990s established ‘track two’ workshops to encourage multilateral dialogue, develop technical cooperation, and enhance
peaceful management of the disputes (Laksmana, 2018, p. 163).
Natalegawa’s brokerage efforts in 2012 following the ASEAN foreign ministers’ failure to issue a joint communique also reflects the influential role
that Indonesia has played in helping to narrow divergences. Although the
‘Six-Point Principles on the South China Sea’ that was produced following
Natalegawa’s 36-hour shuttle diplomacy was ‘essentially a restatement of
the [Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea]’ and the
positive effects of the South China Sea workshops have been debated,
Indonesia’s efforts in this matter have demonstrably contributed towards a

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1153

better climate for stability, especially from an ASEAN-level perspective
(Weatherbee, 2016b, p. 61; see also Laksmana, 2018, p. 163). Under the
Yudhoyono administration, Indonesia also set its sights on becoming a
bridge-builder in the context of democracy promotion by establishing the
Bali Democracy Forum (BDF) in 2008. In contrast to the U.S.-led Asia-Pacific
Democracy Partnership that emerged around the same time and only
included states with democratic political systems, the BDF embraced nondemocratic countries in its membership. This has led to criticisms of the
BDF’s weak legitimacy and effectiveness. Yet, Jakarta has regarded the
BDF’s non-exclusionary membership as necessary for bridge-building and
sharing best practices towards democratisation (Karim, 2017, pp. 394–397).
The continuing interest in the BDF and its growing membership bear testament to Indonesia’s bridge-building role.
A more recent example would be Indonesia’s bridging efforts in formulating the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP). Amid the ‘free and
open’ Indo-Pacific strategies promoted by Japan and the United States
since the late 2010s that have resulted in concern from several ASEAN
member states about the potential sidelining of the association, Indonesia
has sought to put forth an ASEAN vision of the Indo-Pacific that would
retain ASEAN centrality in the region and narrow the gaps among various
regional countries towards the Indo-Pacific concept. Beijing, moreover, has
been a vocal critic of the U.S.-led Indo-Pacific strategy given its aim of counterbalancing China’s influence in the region. In contrast to the more exclusive U.S. vision, Jakarta called for an inclusive Indo-Pacific – in line with
ASEAN’s principles – and circulated a draft vision document to its fellow
ASEAN member states in August 2018. Despite initially ‘underwhelming’
and lukewarm responses from other regional countries, the AOIP was eventually issued in June 2019 (Weatherbee, 2019, p. 5). Subsequently, the leaders-led EAS – which includes China and the United States – ‘noted’ ASEAN’s
adoption of the AOIP and said it ‘looked forward’ to further discussions and
collaboration in the areas identified in the document (ASEAN, 2019, pp.
8–9). While some critics have charged that the AOIP offers little in terms of
clear and concrete measures, the issuance of the AOIP suggests the success
of Indonesia in overcoming initial resistance and brokering among the differing interests (Chong, 2019; Sothirak, 2019). This has, in turn, helped to
create a more conducive regional environment for cooperation amid competing visions of the region.
In the context of Sino-U.S. rivalry, Indonesia has contributed towards
enhancing inclusive multilateralism, maintaining a rules-based order, as
well as narrowing differences through its bridging initiatives. Jakarta has
made use of its good offices and non-aligned profile to exercise leadership
in the regional architecture, especially in terms of ensuring that the region

1154

S. TEO

does not become split between two opposing camps led respectively by
China and the United States. Although there is not always uniform acceptance of Indonesia’s leadership in ASEAN and Southeast Asia, its good
regional citizenship has been relatively effective at ensuring regional peaceful change and facilitating positive relations among regional countries.

Conclusion
Amid intensifying Sino-U.S. competition, this paper has examined the contributions of Australia and Indonesia towards peaceful change in East Asia.
Viewed through the lens of good regional citizenship, middle powers are
expected to facilitate peaceful change by strengthening inclusive multilateralism, bolstering the rules-based order, as well as bridging among diverse
interests or diverging parties in the region. This is a result of their ‘middling’
capabilities and profiles on the international stage, but more importantly,
suggests the ability of middle powers to shape regional dynamics. Based
on the above discussion, the good regional citizenship of Australia and
Indonesia have broadly contributed towards a conducive climate for
regional stability in the face of Sino-U.S. rivalry but the specific details of
their strategies and consequent outcomes have differed slightly. These differences arguably boil down to their relations with the respective major
powers and general foreign policy approaches.
Australia’s good regional citizenship has focused primarily on strengthening inclusive multilateralism and upholding the rules-based order, with
less success in bridging between China and the United States. Its status as
a U.S. treaty ally, as well as its history as a founding member of various
international institutions such as the UN, explain why Canberra has collaborated closely with like-minded partners to ensure a regional order based on
rules and to support U.S. presence in East Asia – as a counterbalance
against what it regards as rising Chinese assertiveness and challenge to the
regional status quo. As a result, this has also meant that, despite occasional
indications of its willingness to serve as an intermediary between Beijing
and Washington, Canberra has not found much success in such a role.
Meanwhile, Indonesia’s good regional citizenship has been shaped by its
free and active foreign policy and its longstanding status as de facto leader
of Southeast Asia and ASEAN. Through the latter, Jakarta has thus sought
to maintain the inclusivity of the regional multilateral architecture and
ensure a rules-based order. Due to resistance Indonesia has faced from
some ASEAN member states regarding its initiatives, however, the Widodo
government has – in contrast to its predecessor – appeared to prefer a
more unilateral advancement of regional rules. This contrasts with typical
middle power behaviour, which tends to prioritise cooperation and

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1155

collaboration. Nevertheless, Indonesia has also relied on ASEAN as a platform to narrow the divergences between China and other regional actors,
as evident in its advocacy of the AOIP and its efforts in managing South
China Sea tensions.
The paper has contributed to the literature on the stabilising role of middle powers amid major power competition in two main ways. First, it has
introduced the concept of good regional citizenship, by modifying from the
concept of good international citizenship. Unlike the latter, good regional
citizenship in this context takes on a more strategic dimension – reinforcing
the link between such a strategy and national interests – and takes into
account the characteristics particular to the region. In this context, the good
regional citizenship of Australia and Indonesia serve both their respective
interests through shaping a more peaceful regional environment amid SinoU.S. competition. The strategies and outcomes of their good regional citizenship have also been affected by what the two middle powers, as well as
other regional countries, regard as appropriate within East Asia. Second, the
paper has juxtaposed the good regional citizenship of two different middle
powers and found that, as a result of their different foreign policy orientations and relations with the major powers, their attempts at ‘good’ regional
citizenship and the responses to their initiatives have differed as well.
Following from this, this paper concludes with two implications for the
contributions of middle powers in terms of facilitating peaceful change in
East Asia. First, given the dynamics and relations within East Asia, it seems
that there is a potential clash between efforts to advocate for a rules-based
order and bridging. To an extent, this is presumably because calls for a
rules-based order have been typically associated with Western or U.S.-led
attempts to chastise China and constrain its influence. Consequently, if a
middle power is a strong advocate for rules in the context of Sino-U.S.
rivalry, it is unlikely to be able to take up the role as a neutral intermediary
between the conflicting major powers. This is reflected in the case of
Australia, which has pursued like-minded coalitions with other U.S. allies
and partners and has sought to consistently ensure that the United States
remains the preeminent power in the region. In contrast, Indonesia has
mostly tried to reinforce a rules-based regime through ASEAN, which is
regarded as less threatening. While Indonesia’s promotion of a rules-based
regime has not drawn too much concern from the larger regional powers,
the downside is that Indonesia’s efforts here have often encountered resistance or disinterest from others in the region. Nevertheless, Jakarta’s nonaligned profile has allowed it to assume bridging roles without much
controversy.
For middle powers in general, this suggests that attempts to exercise
good regional citizenship will have to be carefully calibrated. A middle

1156

S. TEO

power that seeks an accepted bridging role may have to be slightly more
circumspect in its advocacy of a rules-based order – especially one that is
perceived to preserve existing power hierarchies and limit the rise of new
powers. Meanwhile, a middle power pursuing a greater commitment to
rules in the region may have to contend with the fact that it is likely to
meet with resistance or disinterest from others which may affect its broader
foreign relations. Certainly, middle powers which are among the United
States’ strongest allies may find it challenging to serve as a bridge between
Beijing and Washington, especially as major power rivalry worsens.
Although this ineffectiveness at bridging may appear to weaken the middle
power’s role in facilitating peaceful change, it is also key to note that the
efforts towards good regional citizenship should be evaluated as a whole
across the three dimensions, rather than individually in isolation.
This leads us to the second implication of the paper’s analysis, which is
that middle powers have the ability to shape the regional climate, even if
they lack the (hard) power resources of the major powers. As the study of
Australia and Indonesia has shown, middle powers do possess some diplomatic clout to shape regional cooperation and developments. This, combined with the view that such countries are more likely than the major
powers to align with the positions of smaller states, offer middle powers
the opportunity to exercise their initiative in promoting peaceful change.
Certainly, the outcomes of good regional citizenship are rarely attributed to
unilateral actions. Middle powers would have to convince, persuade, and
coax their regional counterparts to support their proposals. As highlighted
above, the efforts of Australia and Indonesia did not always succeed as
other actors on occasion withheld their support. For middle powers in East
Asia seeking to play an instrumental role in facilitating a peaceful region
that could withstand the uncertainty arising from Sino-U.S. relations, it
would thus be useful to have a clear sense of their comparative advantage(s) vis-a-vis other regional countries. This would aid them in garnering
support for their initiatives and enhance their contributions to peaceful
change in East Asia.

Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to participants of the RSIS Workshop on ‘Sources of Peace in
East Asia’, as well as the journal’s anonymous reviewers, for their comments and
feedback on earlier drafts.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1157

Notes on contributor
Sarah Teo is an Assistant Professor and Coordinator of the Regional Security
Architecture Programme at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies (RSIS),
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. Her research interests include
multilateral security and defence cooperation in ASEAN and the Asia Pacific, middle
powers in the Asia Pacific, as well as IR theory.

References
Abbondanza, G. (2021). Australia the ‘good international citizen’? The limits of a traditional middle power. Australian Journal of International Affairs, 75(2), 178–196.
doi:10.1080/10357718.2020.1831436
Almuttaqi, A. I. (2020). Jokowi’s Indonesia and the world. Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing.
ASEAN. (2019, November 4). Chairman’s statement of the 14th East Asia Summit,
Bangkok/Nonthaburi. Retrieved from https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/
11/FINAL-Chairman-Statement-14th-EAS_CLEAN.pdf
ASEAN Secretariat. (2020). ASEAN charter. Retrieved from https://asean.org/about-us
ASEAN Secretariat. (2009). ASEAN Political-Security Community blueprint. Retrieved
from https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/images/archive/5187-18.pdf
Australia Canberra. (2009, December 11). Australia raises concerns about China’s assertiveness, regional architecture proposals and bilateral issues. Wikileaks Cable:
09CANBERRA1089_a. Retrieved from https://wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/
09CANBERRA1089_a.html
Banham, C. (2007, December 8). PM calls on China to accept US ships. The Sydney
Morning Herald. Retrieved from https://professional.dowjones.com/factiva
Beeson, M., & Gilson, J. (2010). Still on track? East Asia at a time of crisis. The Pacific
Review, 23(3), 287–293. doi:10.1080/09512748.2010.481050
Buzan, B., & Waever, O. (2003). Regions and powers: The structure of international
security. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carr, A. (2014). Is Australia a middle power? A systemic impact approach. Australian
Journal of International Affairs, 68(1), 70–84. doi:10.1080/10357718.2013.840264
Chong, J. I. (2019, September 3). ASEAN needs more than an ‘outlook’ on the IndoPacific. East Asia Forum. Retrieved from https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2019/09/
03/asean-needs-more-than-an-outlook-on-the-indo-pacific
Ciobo, S. (2018, March 8). A new Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement. Minister
for Trade, Tourism and Investment: The Hon Steven Ciobo MP. Retrieved from
https://www.trademinister.gov.au/minister/steven-ciobo/media-release/new-transpacific-partnership-tpp-agreement
Clark, A., & Kerin, J. (2012, March 3). US should back off China: Carr. Australian
Financial Review. Retrieved from https://professional.dowjones.com/factiva
Connelly, A. L. (2016, December 5). Indonesia in the South China Sea: Going it alone.
Lowy Institute Analysis. Retrieved from https://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/
indonesia-south-china-sea-going-it-alone
Cooper, A. F. (1997). Niche diplomacy: A conceptual overview. In A. F. Cooper
(Ed.), Niche diplomacy: Middle powers after the Cold War (pp. 1–24). Hampshire:
MacMillan Press.
Cooper, A. F., Higgott, R. A., & Nossal, K. R. (1993). Relocating middle powers: Australia
and Canada in a changing world order. Vancouver: UBC Press.

1158

S. TEO

Department of Defence, Australian Government. (2009, May 2). Defending Australia
in the Asia Pacific century: Force 2030 (Defence White Paper 2009). Retrieved from
https://www.defence.gov.au/whitepaper/2009
Efstathopoulos, C. (2018). Middle powers and the behavioural model. Global Society,
32(1), 47–69. doi:10.1080/13600826.2017.1351422
Emmers, R. (2019, June 25). Democratization, national identity and Indonesia’s foreign policy. Asan Special Forum. Retrieved from http://www.theasanforum.org/
democratization-national-identity-and-indonesias-foreign-policy
Emmers, R., & Teo, S. (2018). Security strategies of middle powers in the Asia Pacific.
Carlton: Melbourne University Publishing.
Evans, G. (1989). Australian foreign policy: Priorities in a changing world. Australian
Journal of International Affairs, 43(2), 1–15.
Evans, G. (1990, March 6). Foreign policy and good international citizenship. Gareth
Evans. Retrieved from http://www.gevans.org/speeches/old/1990/060390_fm_
fpandgoodinternationalcitizen.pdf
Evans, G. (2011, June 29). Middle power diplomacy. Gareth Evans. Retrieved from
http://www.gevans.org/speeches/speech441.html
Evans, G. (2017). Incorrigible optimist: A political memoir. Carlton: Melbourne
University Publishing.
Gilley, B. (2016). Conclusion: Delusions of grandeur in the Goldilocks zone.
International Journal: Canada’s Journal of Global Policy Analysis, 71(4), 651–658.
doi:10.1177/0020702016684859
Gilley, B., & O’Neil, A. (2014). China’s rise through the prism of middle powers. In B.
Gilley & A. O’Neil (Eds.), Middle powers and the rise of China (pp. 1–22).
Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Goh, E. (2013). The struggle for order: Hegemony, hierarchy, and transition in post-Cold
War East Asia. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Graham, S. (2008). Gold star or bottom of the class: Is South Africa a good international citizen? South African Journal of International Affairs, 15(1), 87–97. doi:10.
1080/10220460802217983
He, B. (2011). The awkwardness of Australian engagement with Asia: The dilemmas
of Australian idea of regionalism. Japanese Journal of Political Science, 12(2),
267–285. doi:10.1017/S1468109911000077
Heiduk, F. (2016, April). Indonesia in ASEAN: Regional leadership between ambition
and ambiguity. SWP Research Paper, 6. Retrieved from https://www.swp-berlin.
org/en/publication/indonesia-in-asean
Hemmer, C., & Katzenstein, P. J. (2002). Why is there no NATO in Asia? Collective
identity, regionalism, and the origins of multilateralism. International Organization,
56(3), 575–607. doi:10.1162/002081802760199890
House of Representatives, Commonwealth of Australia. (2009, November 19).
Australia’s foreign relations. Retrieved from https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/
search/display/display.w3p;query=Id:%22chamber/hansardr/2009-11-19/0105%22
Hurrell, A. (2000). Some reflections on the role of intermediate powers in international institutions. In Latin American Program (ed.), Paths to power: Foreign policy strategies of intermediate states (pp. 1–10). Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars. Retrieved from https://www.wilsoncenter.org/
publication/244-paths-to-power-foreign-policy-strategies-intermediate-states
Hurrell, A. (2007). One world? Many worlds? The place of regions in the study of
international society. International Affairs, 83(1), 127–146. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2346.
2007.00606.x

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1159

Hurst, D. (2020, December 28). Australia insists WHO inquiry into Covid origin must
be robust, despite China tensions. The Guardian. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/dec/29/australia-insists-who-inquiry-into-covid-origin-mustbe-robust-despite-china-tensions
Ikenberry, G. J. (2018). Why the liberal world order will survive. Ethics & International
Affairs, 32(1), 17–29. doi:10.1017/S0892679418000072
Japan, Australia, NZ leading efforts to revive TPP. (2017, May 22). The Straits Times.
Retrieved from https://www.straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/japan-australia-nz-leading-efforts-to-revive-tpp
Karim, M. F. (2017). Role conflict and the limits of state identity: The case of
Indonesia in democracy promotion. The Pacific Review, 30(3), 385–404. doi:10.
1080/09512748.2016.1249908
Lackenbauer, P. W., & Cooper, A. F. (2007). The Achilles heel of Canadian international citizenship: Indigenous diplomacies and state responses. Canadian
Foreign Policy Journal, 13(3), 99–119. doi:10.1080/11926422.2007.9673445
Laksmana, E. A. (2016). The domestic politics of Indonesia’s approach to the tribunal
ruling and the South China Sea. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 38(3), 382–388.
Laksmana, E. A. (2018). Drifting towards dynamic equilibrium: Indonesia’s South
China Sea policy under Yudhoyono. In U. Fionna, S. D. Negara, & D. Simandjuntak
(Eds.), Aspirations with limitations: Indonesia’s foreign affairs under Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono (pp. 153–175). Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Layne, C. (2009). The waning of U.S. hegemony – myth or reality? A review essay.
International Security, 34(1), 147–172. doi:10.1162/isec.2009.34.1.147
Lee, J. (2012, March 5). Carr must junk flawed idea of three players in Asia. The
Australian. Retrieved from https://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/opinion/carr-must-junk-flawed-idea-of-three-players-in-asia/news-story/1ea4179db3ed0d5a67aa7fe091ee74c2
Manicom, J., & O’Neil, A. (2010). Accommodation, realignment, or business as usual?
Australia’s response to a rising China. The Pacific Review, 23(1), 23–44. doi:10.1080/
09512740903398322
Mearsheimer, J. J. (2010). The gathering storm: China’s challenge to US power in
Asia. The Chinese Journal of International Politics, 3(4), 381–396. doi:10.1093/cjip/
poq016
Michener, D. R. (1967, November 30). Canada’s new status. Empire Club of Canada.
Retrieved from https://speeches.empireclub.org/details.asp?ID=60628&n=13
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia. (2015). Rencana Strategis 20152019 [2015-2019 strategic plan]. Retrieved from https://kemlu.go.id/download/
L3NpdGVzL3B1c2F0L0RvY3VtZW50cy9BS0lQL0tlbWVudGVyaWFuJTIwTHVhciUyME5lZ2VyaS9SZW5jYW5hJTIwU3RyYXRlZ2lzJTIwS2VtbHUlMjAyMDE1LTIwMTkucGRm
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Singapore. (2010, June 16). Transcript of joint press conference by Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith and Singapore Minister for
Foreign Affairs George Yeo. Retrieved from https://www.mfa.gov.sg/Newsroom/
Press-Statements-Transcripts-and-Photos/2010/06/Transcript-of-Joint-Press-Conferenceby-Australian-Foreign-Minister-Stephen-Smith-and-Singapore-Mini
Mo, J. (2016). South Korea’s middle power diplomacy: A case of growing compatibility between regional and global roles. International Journal: Canada’s Journal of
Global Policy Analysis, 71(4), 587–607. doi:10.1177/0020702016686380
Natalegawa, M. (2013, May 20). An Indonesian perspective on the Indo-Pacific. The
Jakarta Post. Retrieved from https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2013/05/20/
an-indonesian-perspective-indo-pacific.html

1160

S. TEO

Natalegawa, M. (2018). Does ASEAN matter? A view from within. Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing.
Official Committee Hansard, Commonwealth of Australia. (2010, February 11).
Senate: Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Legislation Committee. Retrieved from
https://www.aph.gov.au//media/Estimates/Live/commttee/S12759.ashx
Paul, T. V. (2020). The study of peaceful change in world politics. In T. V. Paul, D. W.
Larson, H. A. Trinkunas, A. Wivel, & R. Emmers (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of
peaceful change in international relations (pp. 3–26). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Permanent Mission of the Commonwealth of Australia to the United Nations. (2020,
July 23). Retrieved from https://www.un.org/depts/los/clcs_new/submissions_
files/mys_12_12_2019/2020_07_23_AUS_NV_UN_001_OLA-2020-00373.pdf
Pert, A. (2012). The good international citizenship of the Rudd government. The
Australian Year Book of International Law Online, 30(1), 93–145. doi:10.1163/
26660229-030-01-900000005
Reuters Staff. (2007, December 6). Australia’s PM offers to bridge climate gap. Reuters.
Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/article/environment-climate-australiachina-dc/australias-pm-offers-to-bridge-climate-gap-idUSSYD12903920071206
Reynolds, L. (2020, July 2). Speech – Australian Strategic Policy Institute. Australian
Government, Department of Defence. Retrieved from https://www.minister.defence.
gov.au/minister/lreynolds/speeches/speech-australian-strategic-policy-institute
Rudd, K. (2008, June 4). It’s time to build an Asia Pacific community. Australian
Government Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. Retrieved from https://
pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/release/transcript-15947
Secretary of State. (2009, March 28). Secretary Clinton’s March 24, 2009 conversation
with Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Wikileaks Cable: 09STATE30049_a.
Retrieved from https://wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/09STATE30049_a.html
Septiari, D. (2018, August 15). RI pushes for shared ASEAN position on Indo-Pacific.
The Jakarta Post. Retrieved from https://professional.dowjones.com/factiva
Septiari, D. (2019, June 17). Singapore ‘holds back’ adoption of ASEAN Indo-Pacific
concept. The Jakarta Post. Retrieved from https://professional.dowjones.com/
factiva
Sothirak, P. (2019, July 20). Re-thinking ‘Asean Outlook on Indo-Pacific’. Bangkok
Post. Retrieved from https://www.bangkokpost.com/opinion/opinion/1715795/rethinking-asean-outlook-on-indo-pacific
Spero, J. B. (2009). Great power security dilemmas for pivotal middle power bridging.
Contemporary Security Policy, 30(1), 147–171. doi:10.1080/13523260902760355
Teo, S. (2018). Middle power identities of Australia and South Korea: Comparing the
Kevin Rudd/Julia Gillard and Lee Myung-Bak administrations. The Pacific Review,
31(2), 221–239. doi:10.1080/09512748.2017.1371210
Teo, S. (2022). Middle power awkwardness? Indonesia’s norm entrepreneurship in
ASEAN. In G. Abbondanza & T. S. Wilkins (Eds.), Awkward powers: Escaping traditional great and middle power theory (pp. 151–176). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Thayer, C. A. (2013, October 9). New commitment to a Code of Conduct in the South
China Sea? National Bureau of Asian Research. Retrieved from https://www.nbr.
org/publication/new-commitment-to-a-code-of-conduct-in-the-south-china-sea
Thayer, C. (2020, July 27). Australia abandons its neutrality on the South China Sea
maritime disputes. The Diplomat. Retrieved from https://thediplomat.com/2020/
07/australia-abandons-its-neutrality-on-the-south-china-sea-maritime-disputes

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1161

The World Bank. (2021). GDP (current US$). Retrieved from https://data.worldbank.
org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
Turnbull, M. (2017, June 2). Address to the 16th IISS Asia Security Summit,
Singapore. Parliament of Australia. Retrieved from https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/
parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id:%22media/pressrel/5318996%22
Wallis, J. (2020). Is it time for Australia to adopt a ‘free and open’ middle-power foreign policy? Asia Policy, 27(4), 7–20. doi:10.1353/asp.2020.0053
Wang, Q. (2020, July 20). Australia to ‘shoot itself in the foot’ by mulling ban on
Chinese apps: Experts. Global Times. Retrieved from https://www.globaltimes.cn/
content/1195029.shtml
Weatherbee, D. E. (2016a, April 21). Re-assessing Indonesia’s role in the South China
Sea. ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute Perspective, 18. Retrieved from https://www.iseas.
edu.sg/images/pdf/ISEAS_Perspective_2016_18.pdf
Weatherbee, D. E. (2016b). Understanding Jokowi’s foreign policy. Trends in Southeast
Asia, 12. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Weatherbee, D. E. (2019, June 7). Indonesia, ASEAN, and the Indo-Pacific cooperation
concept. ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute Perspective, 47. Retrieved from https://www.
iseas.edu.sg/images/pdf/ISEAS_Perspective_2019_47.pdf
Wendt, A. (1995). Constructing international politics. International Security, 20(1),
71–81. doi:10.2307/2539217
Wheeler, N. J., & Dunne, T. (1998). Good international citizenship: A third way for
British foreign policy. International Affairs, 74(4), 847–870. doi:10.1111/1468-2346.
00048
Wilkins, T. (2017). Australia and middle power approaches to Asia Pacific regionalism.
Australian Journal of Political Science, 52(1), 110–125. doi:10.1080/10361146.2016.
1238870
Youde, J. R., & Slagter, T. H. (2013). Creating ‘good international citizens’: Middle
powers and domestic political institutions. Seton Hall Journal of Diplomacy and
International Relations, 14(2), 123–133.

