doi:10.1111/disa.12542

Military humanitarian and disaster
governance networks in Southeast Asia:
framework and analysis
Angelo Paolo L. Trias Associate Research Fellow, S. Rajaratnam School of
International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, and
Alistair D.B. Cook Senior Fellow and Coordinator, Humanitarian Assistance and
Disaster Relief Programme, Centre for Non-Traditional Security Studies, S. Rajaratnam
School of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Behind humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HADR) efforts are governance networks
of actors working together to facilitate, coordinate, and deliver joint aid and response initiatives.
Militaries are key stakeholders in these networks because of their unique capabilities, particularly
in Southeast Asia. This paper explores the role of military governance networks in shaping
HADR affairs. It presents a framework for examining military-to-military relational structures
in humanitarian and disaster contexts using network theory and social network analysis. It also
assesses the nature of military ties and their influence on two capability areas essential to humanitarian activities in the region: (i) the distribution of military assets and equipment used in HADR;
and (ii) the coordination of HADR exercises and training. This paper seeks to provide insights
into how governance network features and properties affect the capacity of ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) militaries to use available resources efficiently and to achieve
shared objectives in regional disaster response.
Keywords: Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), disaster relief,
governance, humanitarian assistance, military, network, Southeast Asia

Introduction
Challenges in regional humanitarian and disaster governance efforts
Southeast Asia is one of the most disaster-prone parts of the world due to its physical
location and geographical features (Shi et al., 2015; UNOCHA, 2016). Widespread
and recurring disaster-related damage and losses continue to impede socioeconomic
development gains and threaten the human security of states and communities in this
geographical area (Uitto and Shaw, 2016; CRED and UNDRR, 2020). The 10
Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) remain committed to developing strategies and institutions in order to create a more secure and
resilient region; there is a consensus that they can accomplish more together (ASEAN,
2016b; Rum, 2016). The Member States are Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam
(ASEAN, 2008).
Disasters, 2023, 47(1): 205−241. © 2022 The Authors Disasters © 2022 ODI

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

ASEAN is an intergovernmental regional grouping, established, on 8 August 1967,
to promote sociocultural, economic, political, and security cooperation among its
Member States (ASEAN, 2020). One of its milestones is the ratification of the ASEAN
Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency Response (AADMER) in 2009
(Ferris and Pentz, 2013). The AADMER is the world’s first legally-binding regional
treaty on disaster management cooperation that provides the framework and arrangements for coordinating humanitarian assistance and facilitating joint disaster relief
efforts in Southeast Asia (Cook, 2018; Simm, 2018; Center for Excellence in Disaster
Management and Humanitarian Assistance, 2019). Through the AADMER, and
amidst other competing regional priorities, humanitarian assistance and disaster management efforts receive dedicated and ongoing political, financial, and administrative support (ASEAN, 2006). Sustained progress and the continuous investment of
ASEAN Member States in humanitarian assistance and disaster management efforts
led to a growing preference for nationally-led, regionally-supported, and internationalas-necessary disaster governance models (ASEAN, 2016c; Cook and Chen, 2019,
p. 23). The AADMER also set forth a grander ‘one ASEAN, one response’ vision to
move towards faster and collective responses to disasters inside and outside the region
(ASEAN, 2016a).
There are, however, two key challenges that can undermine regional humanitarian
and disaster governance efforts. The first pertains to the increasing uncertainty of
disasters in our new climate reality that can overwhelm national capacities and worsen
regional transboundary effects (Hore et al., 2017; Glasser, 2020). It also appears that
the changing climate is contributing to the tightening of linkages between different
hazards, amplifying risks and generating new ones, and facilitating cascading or
compounding disasters (Hallegatte, 2014; Cradock-Henry et al., 2020). Regional
organisations, such as ASEAN, that play an intermediary role between global cooperation and national sovereignty are well positioned to respond constructively and
creatively to evolving risks at different governance levels (Hollis, 2015; O’Donnell,
2017; Cook and Chen, 2022). ASEAN will have to invest continuously in enhancing
mechanisms and strengthening regional cooperation vital to preparing for potentially
more extreme hazards and simultaneous disaster impacts in the region (Fetzek,
Fleishman, and Rezzonico, 2021). The prospect of more extreme hazards and simultaneous disasters has implications for militaries in the wider Asia-Pacific, both as
first responders and as contributors to climate change. This is increasingly shaping
security narratives, including military strategy (Bateman and Bergin, 2020; Jayaram,
2021; Kameyama and Ono, 2021).
ASEAN militaries have considerable influence, even control, over the structure and
culture of civilian national disaster management organisations (NDMOs). Several
civilian NDMOs in the region are often headed by former, even active, defence
officials, and their organisational practices are partly, if not predominantly, military
(Malešič, 2015). The military’s role in humanitarian and disaster governance in
Indonesia, for example, continues to expand. Military officers were assigned to lead
the national and local response to the Central Sulawesi earthquake and tsunami on

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

206

28 September 2018, not civilian NDMO staff (AHA Centre, 2018a). The military’s
operational command of the airbridges to affected sites meant that access, coverage, and prioritisation of aid and relief efforts were also under its control (Trias and
Cook, 2021). A few months later, on 8 January 2019, Presidential Regulation No.1/2019
was signed, concerning the National Disaster Management Agency, and from then on,
members of the Indonesian National Armed Forces and National Police were legally
permitted to hold the position of Head of the NDMO (President of the Republic of
Indonesia, 2019).
The militarisation of humanitarian and disaster governance is reflected at the
regional level. The ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
disaster management (AHA Centre), responsible for facilitating cooperation and coordination of disaster management within the union, is governed by the NDMO of
Member States (AHA Centre, 2022). Therefore, operationalising the AHA Centre’s
mandate requires the support of the armed forces given their influence and control
over several NDMOs, and is subsequently shaped by political-security factors. The
activities of the AHA Centre cannot be considered as strictly neutral and impartial
given the embeddedness and active participation of militaries in ASEAN response.
For instance, the ASEAN Standard Operating Procedure for Regional Standby
Arrangements and Coordination of Joint Disaster Relief and Emergency Response
Operations (SASOP) relies on military assets (AHA Centre, 2018b). A key satellite
warehouse of the Disaster Emergency Logistics System for ASEAN (DELSA) is inside
a military camp (Embassy of Japan in the Philippines, 2019). When the AHA Centre
assisted during the Siege of Marawi in 2017, it fully adhered to the strict guidelines,
priority items, and limited access set by the Government of the Philippines through
its Armed Forces—the assistance was not mainly driven by the needs expressed by
the affected communities (Trias and Gong, 2020).
These governance challenges are likely to extend to climate security-related activities owing to mounting interest and the future engagement of the military due to
the geopolitical and security implications (Smith, 2011; Reppert, 2021). The main
concerns are not whether disaster relief is optimal under military leadership or
whether humanitarian assistance can be neutral and impartial when militaries are
involved. Rather, a deeper understanding of the different ways and the extent to
which more authoritative, centralised, and top-down approaches that characterise
military operations may stifle or overpower inclusive, decentralised, and participatory methods adopted by civilians is more important because risk reduction and
disaster management require a whole-of-society effort and diverse solutions. Military
response, although beneficial in the immediate term, does not necessarily strengthen
local capacities and meet the longer-term needs of disaster-affected populations
(Clifford, 2021).
At least in Southeast Asia, military engagement in humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief (HADR) will continue, and there are no signs that indicate otherwise.
What is needed is a reassessment of four areas: (i) balancing of the dual-function
doctrine of the military; (ii) dependencies of civilian institutions on the military;

207

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

(iii) laws to regulate military involvement in policy implementation; (iv) and frameworks to oversee military engagement in civilian affairs in risk and disaster contexts
(Sebastian, Syailendra, and Indrabayu, 2018).
The second key challenge that can also undermine regional humanitarian and disaster governance efforts, and which is the focus of this paper, is the increasing plurality
of actors engaged in humanitarian and disaster-related affairs ( Jones, Manyena, and
Walsh, 2015; Duda, Kelman, and Glick, 2020). Disaster risk reduction and management require the participation of multiple actors—operating at different spatial scales
and in different jurisdictions and sectors—because it is a complex societal problem
that cannot be addressed by hierarchical decision-making and linear policymaking
processes only (Raschky, 2008).
The various interactions of different stakeholders present more opportunities for
building partnerships and collective action. But they also produce many competing
interests that contradict inclusive and participatory approaches that make humanitarian and disaster management activities more relevant and sustainable (Trias, Lassa,
and Surjan, 2019; Clark-Ginsberg, 2020). Regional organisations such as ASEAN not
only represent networks of diverse affinities and connections, but they also ‘reflect
a wider range of shared risks’ (O’Donnell, 2017, p. 328). Regional organisations need
to continue learning more about the humanitarian and disaster governance networks
of which they are part and surrounded by so that they can utilise them effectively and
better serve at-risk and disaster-affected populations.
Humanitarian and disaster governance networks:
focus on the military and HADR
A diverse and vast network of actors, including governments, multilateral bodies,
non-governmental organisations (NGOs), faith groups, local communities, and academia, co-govern humanitarian aid and disaster management efforts (Lassa, 2011).
Militaries are vital to this network due to their unique capabilities—for instance,
having the equipment and skills to conduct strategic airlifts quickly, such as the
Lockheed C-130 Hercules turboprop aircraft that can operate in hard-to-reach and
chaotic disaster contexts (Ferris, 2012). This was glaringly evident by the number
of foreign actors and military assets deployed following Typhoon Haiyan in 2013
and the Central Sulawesi earthquake and tsunami in 2018 (UNOCHA, 2013; AHA
Centre and UN OCHA, 2018). However, research on how defence forces connect
and interact among themselves and with other network actors is limited, creating a
gap in public understanding and oversight of military engagement in humanitarian
and disaster affairs.
Humanitarian and disaster governance networks have economic, social, and political dimensions (Tierney, 2012; Barnett, 2013). The effectiveness of these networks
largely depends on the capacity of actors to cooperate with each other to enable,
coordinate, and implement the overall assistance and response to disasters at different
scales and levels of society (Forino, Bonati, and Calandra, 2018). Poor governance and

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

208

institutional failures resulting from a lack of cooperation among stakeholders are
primary drivers of risk and susceptibility to disasters (Ahrens and Rudolph, 2006).
The economic features of governance networks revolve around resource dependencies among actors and the controlled exchange of assets and supplies needed for aid
and relief efforts (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978; Jackson, 2010). Social aspects of governance networks include cultural affinities and shared traits that facilitate or limit
associations and cooperation between actors (Tajfel and Turner, 1986; Melo Zurita
et al., 2015). The political dimensions of governance networks centre on power and
influence and their application to coerce or persuade other actors what, how, and
why to prioritise certain humanitarian and disaster activities over the rest (Parsons,
1963; Kahler, 2009).
Similarly, the different militaries planning and conducting HADR missions are
linked together by a complex web of relationships. HADR is a military construct
widely used in the defence and security sector—it is not a humanitarian concept or
a disaster management term. HADR activities assist with saving lives, alleviating
suffering, and maintaining public safety. But it is essentially a military mission driven
by other factors such as defence capabilities, security alliances, domestic politics, and
foreign policy (Yates and Bergin, 2011; Canyon, Ryan, and Burkle, Jr., 2020). One
should note that we use ‘military humanitarian and disaster governance networks’
and ‘military HADR networks’ interchangeably in this paper.
The military deployments to support aid efforts around the world are increasing
despite several guidelines advising the use of defence forces only as a matter of last
resort (UNOCHA, 2007; APC-MADRO, 2014). The growing use of militaries
results from the widening gap between the affected populations’ needs and resource
demands, and civilian capacity to meet both in rapid onset and large-scale emergencies and disasters (Hofmann and Hudson, 2009; Canyon, Ryan, and Burkle, Jr.,
2017). Militaries continue to be the primary responders of ASEAN Member States
during crises and calamities and are among the first to be mobilised when Southeast
Asian governments send or receive HADR missions (Ear, Cook, and Canyon, 2017;
ROAP, UN OCHA, 2018).
The centrality of Southeast Asian militaries means that efforts seeking to improve
regional humanitarian and disaster governance cannot fully succeed without military
cooperation. This requires an understanding of the HADR governance networks of
which they are part and the nature of their ties in emergency and disaster settings.
There is, however, a shortage of studies outside of military institutions that offer
such insights. Most HADR reports by military institutions focus on a single or a few
militaries only, such as those published by the Center for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance (2022) about foreign missions of the United
States and partner militaries. Non-military organisations such as the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs share data on the foreign military assets involved in a response, usually in an infographic (UNOCHA, 2013; AHA
Centre and UNOCHA, 2018). But nothing beyond that can help map the military
HADR network in Southeast Asia.

209

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Most military involvement in HADR mainly occurs in three areas: emergency
preparedness; emergency response; and assisting in the transition to recovery (Gaydos
and Luz, 1994; Caballero-Anthony, Cook, and Chen, 2021). This engagement is
captured in the Asia-Pacific Regional Guidelines for the Use of Foreign Military Assets in
Natural Disaster Response Operations (APC-MADRO, 2014). This paper explores military HADR networks in Southeast Asia using network theory and social network
analysis (SNA). It investigates two military activities used to build and strengthen
relations that are critical to enhancing HADR cooperation. One is supplying or
transferring HADR-related assets and equipment, as well as the support to operate
and maintain them. The other is conducting or participating in HADR exercises and
training to enhance confidence-building (trust) and interoperability.
The paper aims to offer insights into the ways in which military governance networks shape HADR by asking who is supplying what to whom and who is participating with whom in what. It examines the ties (i) between ASEAN militaries, their
HADR assets and equipment, and the militaries providing it, and (ii) between ASEAN
militaries, the HADR exercises and training they conduct or participate in, and the
militaries that host or coordinate such exercises and training. It seeks to widen our
understanding of the structure and dynamics of military HADR governance networks
in Southeast Asia in particular and provide a basis to assess the larger humanitarian
and disaster governance landscape in general.
The study attempts to address two main questions. The first is: how does the
distribution of military HADR assets and equipment affect the capacity of ASEAN
militaries to equip themselves sufficiently and mobilise for a regional response? Here
we consider the resource dependencies and supply directions that can facilitate or
limit the use of equipment and interoperability in aid and relief efforts. The second
question is: how does participation in military HADR exercises and training affect
the capacity of ASEAN militaries to prepare adequately and participate in a regional
response. We consider close associations, cultural affinities, and shared traits that can
influence the organisation of HADR cooperation and mould regional HADR objectives. How militaries interact in HADR activities and in the relationships that arise
from them can indicate how well they can cooperate in actual HADR missions.
Military HADR cooperation requires confidence-building and the ability to work
in conjunction—both of which are formed and nurtured through pre-existing relationships before a regional response. Answering these two questions can generate
knowledge about the ways certain military activities contribute to developing trust
and enabling interoperability for regional HADR cooperation. Such knowledge can
provide a better understanding of how to improve the governance of HADR networks
for the benefit of at-risk and affected communities.
This paper focuses on exercises and training because the effectiveness of and cooperation in HADR missions, like other forms of disaster response, depend on the
levels of emergency preparedness among the actors involved and trust among them
(Tan, 2012). Exercises and training help strengthen emergency preparedness because
they offer participating militaries the opportunity to test contingency plans together,

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

210

familiarise themselves with each other’s concept of operations, and observe how partner militaries use their assets (Puckett, 2021). These activities establish what militaries call ‘interoperability’, the ability of military equipment or groups to operate
in conjunction.
Exercises and training also assist in confidence-building. The seeds of cooperation,
especially in response contexts, are planted much earlier. Pre-existing relationships
or social ties formed during ‘peacetime’ facilitate cooperation during a response.
Trust among responders is nurtured through shared experiences before disasters, such
as participating in exercises and training (Cook, 2018). It is essential, therefore, to
study the networked interaction of militaries through their participation in exercises
and training. The extent to which defence forces can use available resources efficiently
and achieve shared objectives in regional disaster response depends on the levels of
interoperability and trust—both of which are developed by participating in exercises
and training (RCG, 2017; Spandler, 2022).
Similarly, the distribution of military assets used in HADR is also an indicator
of trust and interoperability. Several military assets are dispatched during HADR
missions. But they are primarily designed for combat operations. A given military
will not supply or donate military assets to another military unless their defence
agenda and security interests are aligned, or at the very least support each other. A
commonality in military equipment has some disadvantages, such as restricting innovation in design or affecting operational capability because of forced design compromises (Held, Newsome, and Lewis, 2011). However, commonality of military
equipment can also increase operational flexibility and reduce procurement and
logistical burden (Held, Newsome, and Lewis, 2011). Such factors can enhance the
interoperability of partner militaries in foreign missions, including HADR.
Analysing humanitarian and disaster governance networks
A network is a structure of interconnected people or things that relate to or transact with each other to fulfil objectives and gain advantages by operating as a whole
(Barabási, 2002; Newman, 2010). It has three main components: nodes representing
social or physical entities; the links referring to the ties and associations of nodes;
and an overall structure that emerges from how the nodes are connected (Newman,
Barabási, and Watts, 2006; McCulloh, Armstrong, and Johnson, 2013). Network
theory offers frameworks, methods, and tools to view, interpret, and study the webs
of relationships behind many complex political, social, and economic systems that we
are part of and depend on (Lewis, 2009; Barabási, 2016).
The basis of network thinking was introduced together with graph theory in
mathematics back in the 1730s (Biggs, Lloyd, and Wilson, 1986). But it was only
during the 1930s that a systematic approach to the study of networks emerged in the
field of sociology (Freeman, 2004). Soon after recognising the ubiquity of networks
and the value of understanding them, various disciplines started to contribute to
developing the science of networks (Biagini, Kauermann, and Meyer-Brandis, 2019).

211

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Following the advent of computational advancements in the 1970s and increased
access to large datasets in the 1990s, network science eventually became a distinct
and separate discipline at the turn of the twenty-first century (National Research
Council, 2005).
SNA applies network science to explore social processes and phenomena such as
the spread of behaviours, diffusion of practices, and organisation of groups (Scott,
1991; Christakis and Fowler, 2009). The basic assumptions of SNA are: (i) all social
actors and their activities are interconnected; (ii) social actors and their ties shape
how their social environment functions; and (iii) the social environment, in turn,
influences how the social actors behave (Wasserman and Faust, 1994; Kadushin, 2012).
The idea behind using SNA is that a better understanding of the structure and
dynamics of social networks can enable us to maximise their utility, such as creating
common ground for interaction or reducing their unwanted effects like blocking the
transfer of negative sentiments (Scott and Carrington, 2011; Borgatti, Everett, and
Johnson, 2013).
SNA in humanitarian and disaster studies started to pick up in the 2000s, and the
literature continues to grow. The use of social network paradigms and ideas to
unpack humanitarian issues is not new (Stephenson, Jr., 2006; Seybolt, 2009). But
humanitarian research that applies SNA seems to focus on two themes: (i) information exchange and inter-organisational coordination in humanitarian assistance; and
(ii) increased efficiency and operational performance of humanitarian logistics (Moore,
Eng, and Daniel, 2003; Ngamassi, Maitland, and Tapia, 2014; Tacheva and Simpson,
2019). Work that engages with other areas of humanitarian action, such as protection and advocacy, receives less attention (Hajiheydari, Salehi, and Goudarzi, 2018;
Cachia and Ramos, 2020). SNA in disaster studies is quite developed, more so than
in humanitarian studies. SNA applies across different phases of the disaster lifecycle
and governance levels of disaster practices, including at the individual, community,
and national level ( Jones and Faas, 2017; Du et al., 2020).
However, we observe that there is limited SNA-related humanitarian and disasterrelated research that examines these three elements together: inter-organisational
networks; at the regional level; and focusing on military cooperation. This is a
critical gap because humanitarian and disaster-related efforts are complex and huge
undertakings that require not only the participation of one or a few organisations,
but also often involve groups of different kinds of organisations working together.
Previous studies demonstrate that complex connections and interactions of various
organisations exist in pre-disaster, during disaster, and post-disaster contexts (Kapucu,
Arslan, and Collins, 2010; Lassa, 2015; McCann et al., 2016).
Humanitarian and disaster SNA studies at the regional level are few and far between
—another significant research gap. Regional institutions, the intermediaries between
global cooperation and national sovereignty, offer pathways and alternatives to collaborative and innovative responses to crises and risks. For example, ASEAN convinced the Government of Myanmar to open up to the international community
and proactively managed foreign assistance during the response to Cyclone Nargis in

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

212

Figure 1. Proposed analytical framework

Source: authors.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

213
Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

2008 (Creach and Fan, 2008; Cook, 2010). Recently, in 2018, the AHA Centre was
assigned for the first time by a Member State, instead of by the United Nations as
a body, to facilitate and coordinate international and non-governmental offers of
assistance during the response to the Central Sulawesi earthquake and tsunami (Trias
and Cook, 2021). The assignment of the ASEAN coordinating centre came at a time
when Indonesia was dealing with simultaneous disasters requiring overlapping
responses. But the experience also highlighted ASEAN’s aspiration to collectively
respond with speed, scale, and solidarity to disasters in the region (AHA Centre,
2017). More network analysis at the regional level, similar to that conducted by Bisri,
Suma, and Malole (2019), is needed to gain a deeper understanding of the evolving
role and operational limitations of the regional group as it strives towards a ‘one
ASEAN, one response’ model.
The centrality of Southeast Asian militaries in humanitarian and disaster governance means that efforts to improve regional aid and relief endeavours cannot fully
succeed without military cooperation. Cooperating with militaries requires an understanding of the social networks and the nature of their ties in humanitarian and
disaster contexts. But it appears that a relatively low proportion of SNA-related
humanitarian and disaster research centres on military-to-military cooperation.
HADR networks of militaries are understudied, and publicly available research tends
to explore the military’s role at the national and local level, not at the regional and
international level (Zaw and Lim, 2017; Azhar, Malik, and Muzaffar, 2019). Studies
on the networks behind civil-military relations in humanitarian and disaster contexts are not that many either, mostly focusing on ways to improve the interface in
similar functional areas like command and control and logistics, rather than on ways
in which the actors interact and the relational patterns that emerge (Tatham and
Rietjens, 2015; Wolbers, 2016). We propose a framework for analysing regional
military HADR governance networks as a contribution to ongoing efforts to narrow
the said research lacunae (see Figure 1 above).

Methods and tools
This research follows a six-step exploratory SNA process utilised by researchers who
studied disaster risk governance networks in the Asia-Pacific (Trias, Lassa, and Surjan,
2019). The six steps are data selection, collection, preparation, conversion, network
analysis, and network visualisation and exploration.
Data selection and collection
We gathered our research data from Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessments. Janes is a global
agency for open-source intelligence, specialising in military equipment and capabilities, defence industry and markets, and country risk and threat appraisals relevant to
national security (Janes, 2022c). It provides timely and verified information to government agencies, national militaries, defence manufacturers, and security companies

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

214

to help them make insightful decisions. We selected Janes for our research because
it has one of the most comprehensive and updated military capabilities and equipment inventory databases, covering 190 countries (Janes, 2022b). Using Janes allowed
us to gather unclassified profiles and standardised assessments of ASEAN Member
State militaries and to compare similar data needed for our research with one another
( Janes, 2022a).
Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessments, in particular, contain independent analysis of
military structure, administration, assets, and capabilities (Jane’s by IHS Markit, 2019).
They offer unclassified and structured data and evaluations of national military deployments, tasks, operations, training areas, military exercises, core assets, equipment-inservice, and partner militaries. They supply data on what military assets are procured,
supplied, or donated for HADR, as well as information on HADR exercises and
training that militaries attend, coordinate, or host.
Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessments do not provide structured information specifically on military cooperation in humanitarian and disasters contexts. Therefore, there
are missing attributes in the data, such as who reached out to whom first, indicating
the direction of the social tie. But the data are sufficient for the research because
this study only focuses on whether militaries interact with each other vis-à-vis the
HADR activities that we are interested in examining and how frequently they do so
—an emphasis on the strength of their social ties.
Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessments of the militaries of the 10 ASEAN Member States
—Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, and Vietnam—were gathered online between November 2018 and January
2019. There are three security assessments for each Member State: one for their army;
one for their navy; and one for their air force. Relevant data from 30 Jane’s Sentinel
Security Assessments were reviewed and included in this research in total (10 ASEAN
Member States multiplied by three assessments each, one for each military branch).
We used convenience and purposive sampling strategies, and purposefully selected
Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessments of ASEAN Member State militaries only because
they are our research focus. Although we examine their HADR partnerships with
other foreign defence forces in the region, we do so based on their HADR-related
social ties to ASEAN Member State militaries only.
Data preparation and conversion
We cleaned the raw data before coding it into frequency tables and node–link (affiliation) lists using Microsoft Excel spreadsheets. Cleaning entailed, for instance, merging
duplicates and creating standardised names for the entries. Coding involved sorting
and categorising data to facilitate analysis.
To filter out the data relevant to military HADR cooperation in Southeast Asia,
we reviewed the Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessments of the three military branches of
each ASEAN Member State. The result is a consolidation of two sets of information:
HADR assets and equipment; and HADR exercises and training. The following

215

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Table 1. Nodes and links list (affiliation list)
Column A

Column B

Column C

Node (actor)

Links (connections and interactions)

Node (actor)

ASEAN Member State
militaries

 Assets and equipment they utilise for HADR 

Partner militaries supplying or
donating the assets

ASEAN Member State
militaries

 HADR exercises and training they participate in 

Partner militaries coordinating the
activities/co-hosting the event

Source: authors.

keywords aided the search for research data: humanitarian; disaster; assistance; relief;
HADR; search; and rescue. Then, we coded them into node–link lists, a format that
an SNA software can read and process (see Table 1).
For example, when we saw a report of a joint exercise between the Philippines and
the United States military that had a HADR element, we recorded it. Similarly, we
documented the military assets used by the Armed Forces of the Philippines for HADR
missions, such as the C-130. We coded the following data in this manner: the Philippines (AESAN Member State military/coordinator or host)  Balikatan (exercise
with HADR component)  the US (partner military), and the Philippines (ASEAN
Member State military/user)  C130 (a military asset used in HADR missions) 
the US (partner military/source). The result is a node–link list (affiliation list) that
indicates: (i) who is supplying or donating what HADR assets and equipment to
whom; and (ii) who is participating with whom in what HADR exercise and training.
Data network analysis and network visualisation and exploration
Gephi 0.9.2 software was used to run standard SNA metrics and to produce and navigate graphs representing networks (Bastian, Heymann, and Jacomy, 2009). First, we
analysed the raw data using descriptive statistics to identify interesting patterns and
points for network analysis. Next, we examined the macro features of the network
structure and the micro properties of its nodes and links. (Table 2 provides a summary
of the SNA metrics and guiding questions used in our research.) Lastly, we explored
network visualisations to reveal context and spot details about the network that can be
overlooked when using only aggregated and static numerical measures and graphs.

Results and findings
Overview of the data
This research reviews 30 Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessments—one profile per military
branch of 10 ASEAN Member States. Our keywords tag more than 40 foreign militaries involved in regional HADR efforts (see Figure 2a). It appears that only a few
non-ASEAN defence forces participate regularly in Southeast Asian HADR activities,
and that 80 per cent of the assets and equipment being used for HADR are employed

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

216

Table 2. SNA metrics and guiding questions
Level of analysis

SNA metrics

Description/guiding questions

Macro level
Overall network
structure

A. Size of the network

Refers to the number of nodes and links in the network as
well as the directions and distances of links between nodes.

1. Number of nodes and links

1. How many nodes (military actors) are there and
how many links (HADR connections) are present
between them?
2. Is there a direction associated with the links in
the network?
3. How near/far apart are the two most distant nodes
in the network when traversing the shortest path
between them?
4. What is the average number of links a node passes
through to reach another node along the shortest
path between them?

2. Type of network
3. Network diameter

4. Average path length

B. Connectivity of the network

Refers to the extent to which the nodes are linked in a
network and the distribution of links among the nodes.

5. Network density

5. How close/far off is the actual number of links as
compared to the maximum number of potential links
in the network?
6. What is the average number of links per network node?

6. Average degree
C. Modularity of the network

Refers to the levels of segmentation/integration of the
components of a network.

7. Weakly connected components

10. Number of communities

7. Is there a path between every pair of nodes in the
network when the directions of their links are
disregarded?
8. Is there a path between every pair of nodes in the
network when the directions of their links are
considered?
9. How segmented/integrated are the components of
the network?
10. How many sub-networks exist in the network?

A. Degree centrality

Refers to the number of links a given node has.

1. Degree

1. How many links does a given node have regardless of
its directions?
2. How many links go towards a given node?
3. How many links move out from a given node?

8. Strongly connected components

9. Modularity

Micro level
Individual nodes
and links

2. In-degree
3. Out-degree
B. Betweenness centrality

Refers to the number of times a node serves as a conduit
between two or more distant or disconnected nodes.
4. How often does a node act as a bridge along the
shortest path between two or more nodes in the
network?

Source: authors, adapted from Wasserman and Faust (1994), Lewis (2009), Scott and Carrington (2011),
Kadushin (2012), Borgatti, Everett, and Johnson (2013), and Barabási (2016).

217

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

by just one-half of the ASEAN militaries (see Figure 2b). These findings indicate that
there are only several significant regional HADR actors and that there are considerable differences in the HADR capacities of ASEAN militaries.
Airlifts and sealifts are the most commonly used assets and equipment in HADR.
Rotary-wing types appear more frequently than fixed-wing types, but there is no
common make or model that is as widely used across ASEAN militaries as the
Lockheed C-130 Hercules. There are also no clear patterns in the data suggesting
that specific types of crafts, docks, frigates, ships, and vessels are generally favoured
by ASEAN militaries for HADR (see Figure 2b).
Figure 2a. National militaries tagged by HADR keywords (frequency)

Figure 2b. HADR assets/equipment of ASEAN militaries: use (left) and types (right)

Figure 2c. HADR exercises and training attended by ASEAN militaries (frequency)

Source: authors.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

218

The 10 most attended HADR-related exercises and training account for an overwhelming 85 per cent of the total search hits (see Figure 2c). This means that militaries participate regularly in only a very few regional HADR events, which also seem
to be coordinated or hosted by just a handful of influential actors. ASEAN navies
appear to be the most active military branch in HADR. Not only do they assume
leadership roles in high-profile and large multilateral exercises with HADR elements,
such as KOMODO, MILAN, and RIMPAC, but they also engage frequently in bilateral training with allies.
Macro-level network analysis
We conducted a micro-level network analysis to explore how militaries are interconnected in the HADR governance network and what are the structural patterns
that emerge from their relationships. Table 3 provides a summary of the overall network features of the (i) military-to-military network in Southeast Asia, (ii) military
HADR network: assets and equipment, and (iii) military HADR network: exercises
and training, based on data sourced from ASEAN military security assessments.
The size of a social network refers to the presence and scale of relational pathways that allow actors to strengthen commonalities, channel influence, and transfer
resources (Lewis, 2009; Barabási, 2016). We see from the number of nodes and links
as well as the network diameters that the military HADR exercises and training
network is the largest of all the networks under review. The same network also has
the lowest node–link ratio and a relatively low average path length considering its high
number of links compared to the other two HADR networks. Militaries appear to
be more open to interacting with each other in HADR exercises and training than
transacting HADR assets and equipment or building military relations in general.
All HADR networks studied here have average path lengths that do not exceed
three, which means that there are only three degrees of separation at most among
militaries. Also common among the three HADR networks, though, is that their
links are, by and large, directed. Many military interactions seem imbalanced or
non-mutual despite the close distances of militaries in the HADR networks, indicating that certain social preferences, power dynamics, or resource dependencies are
affecting HADR relationships.
The connectivity of a social network refers to the extent and the distribution of
links between and among actors (Wasserman and Faust, 1994; Scott and Carrington,
2011). We observe from density measures that more than 90 per cent of potential
connections in all three networks are unfulfilled. On average, militaries in the HADR
networks have between 1.5 and 4 links with other militaries. But low network densities suggest that their connections may be narrow in scope or concentrated among
those with which they are already familiar.
The modularity of a social network refers to the ways in which the components
of the network are segmented and integrated (Kadushin, 2012; Borgatti, Everett, and
Johnson, 2013). We observe that there are no separate components in the three networks.

219

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Table 3. Summary of macro-level network analysis
Military-to-military
network in
Southeast Asia

Military HADR
network: assets
and equipment

Military HADR
network: exercises
and training

Total number of nodes

53

82

87

Total number of links

348

152

776

Type of network

Directed

Directed

Directed

Network diameter

3

4

7

Average path length

1.54

1.71

2.98

Network density

0.086

0.020

0.036

Average degree

4.472

1.659

3.103

Weakly connected components

1

1

1

Strongly connected components

45

80

63

Modularity

1.136

0.529

0.378

Number of communities

4

10

7

Metrics

Size of the network

Connectivity of the network

Modularity of the network

Source: authors.

Even if a given military has only one link to another in the same network, it can, in
principle, use that direct connection to reach out to, or be reached by, any other military in the network through existing relational pathways, ignoring the directionality
of links.
Communities are groups of nodes, or sub-networks of actors, that have denser connections between themselves because they either have strong dependencies with each
other, a close alignment of objectives, or shared attributes. The higher number of
communities and strongly connected components of the military HADR assets and
equipment network—despite having the lowest number of links and average degree
in comparison to the other two networks—suggests that militaries become more
cliquish and particular in who they relate with when acquiring, transferring, or supplying HADR-related resources.
Micro-level network analysis
We also conducted a micro-level network analysis to examine how the militaries are
embedded in the network and the nature of their relationships with each other.
Table 4 provides a summary of the properties of ASEAN nodes and links in the
(i) military-to-military network in Southeast Asia, (ii) military HADR network:
assets and equipment, and (iii) military HADR network: exercises and training, based

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

220

Table 4. Summary of micro-level network analysis
Military

Degree

In-degree

Out-degree

Betweenness
centrality

ASEAN military network in Southeast Asia
Brunei

37

6

31

29.2036

Cambodia

13

8

5

0.8452

Indonesia

48

7

41

71.4536

Laos

15

6

9

0.4000

Malaysia

44

7

37

38.8583

Myanmar

23

5

18

6.7976

Philippines

36

6

30

16.1369

Singapore

27

7

20

4.8274

Thailand

42

8

34

71.8583

Vietnam

21

9

12

19.6190

ASEAN military HADR network: assets and equipment
Brunei

4

0

4

0.0000

Cambodia

1

0

1

0.0000

Indonesia

12

1

11

28.0000

Laos

0

0

0

0.0000

Malaysia

10

0

10

0.0000

Myanmar

5

0

5

0.0000

Philippines

15

0

15

0.0000

Singapore

14

3

11

67.0000

Thailand

13

0

13

0.0000

Vietnam

5

0

5

0.0000

ASEAN military HADR network: exercises and training
Brunei

13

5

8

184.6777

Cambodia

13

7

6

100.1442

Indonesia

10

5

5

285.6825

Laos

6

5

1

12.0876

Malaysia

13

8

5

341.0204

Myanmar

11

7

4

165.7819

Philippines

17

7

10

261.3478

Singapore

13

11

2

211.6289

Thailand

15

9

6

368.7540

Vietnam

13

9

4

216.8749

Source: authors.

221

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

on data sourced from ASEAN military security assessments. Degree and betweenness centrality measures allow us to assess how significant, influential, and critical a
given military is in HADR governance networks.
Militaries with high degrees are significant because they have more connections
that accord them with more means to access HADR resources and to participate in
HADR activities. Those with high in-degrees have more HADR connections going
towards them and are strategically poised to influence others seeking to interact with
them. Those with high out-degrees make more HADR connections than their peers
and have more opportunities to shape HADR efforts as they actively reach out to
others in the network.
Militaries with high betweenness centrality are critical to governance networks
because they are conduits for the passing of essential HADR resources and activities
to other militaries in the network. They are a bridging point between nodes that
do not have connections or are distant from each other. They hold the network structure together; without them, certain network functions will be disrupted, reduced,
or lost.
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand have the most connections overall among ASEAN
militaries, whereas Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia are the least connected. Defence
forces with which ASEAN militaries are well-connected are those of Australia, China,
the US, Canada, France, India, South Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the
Russian Federation (Russia), and the United Kingdom. Vietnam, Thailand, and
Cambodia have the most incoming links in Southeast Asia, whereas the Philippines,
Laos, and Myanmar have the lowest in-degrees. ASEAN military out-degrees seem
to reflect the same ranking as degree measures. It also appears that most of Southeast Asia’s military links are directed towards Australian, Chinese, and US defence
forces. Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia have high betweenness centrality overall, whereas Singapore, Cambodia, and Laos have low scores as compared to other
ASEAN militaries.
We observe that the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand have the most overall
and outgoing HADR assets and equipment-related links among ASEAN militaries.
Brunei, Cambodia, and Laos consistently have low degree, in-degree, out-degree,
and betweenness centrality rankings in this network. We also discern that the US
military has the single highest number of connections—up to 50 per cent more than
the most connected ASEAN military. France, Russia, Spain, and UK defence forces
have a relatively high number of connections with ASEAN militaries. The same foreign militaries have the highest number of incoming links. Singapore and Indonesia
are the only Southeast Asian militaries that are not at the bottom of in-degree rankings. Both of them also have relatively high betweenness centrality scores in comparison to their regional peers.
Looking at the HADR exercises and training network, we see that the Philippines,
Thailand, and Malaysia have the highest number of overall connections among
ASEAN militaries. The militaries of Myanmar, Indonesia, and Laos are the least connected in Southeast Asia. Foreign militaries involved in regional HADR exercises and

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

222

training direct most of their links to Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. Not so
many non-ASEAN military links go towards Brunei, Indonesia, and Laos. However,
in terms of out-degree rankings, Singapore drops down to near Laos, whereas Brunei
climbs up the list to close to the Philippines.
Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia frequently act as bridging points between
those that host and participate in regional HADR exercises and training. Myanmar,
Cambodia, and Laos rarely function as conduits for such events. Non-ASEAN
militaries that scored high with respect to centrality measures in the two previous
networks also occupy the top ranks in this network. The only main difference is
that Japan has climbed up the list and Russia has dropped down to the middle.
Network visualisation and exploration
The Fruchterman–Reingold layout makes it easier to spot who the central actors are
because it pulls in highly significant, influential, and critical nodes towards the centre
of the network. The size of the nodes indicates their degree or betweenness centrality ranking. The bigger the node, the more connections it has, or the more it acts as
a bridging point between nodes. The lines represent the links between nodes. The
thicker the line, the stronger the connection. For example, an arrow from the US
pointing to the Philippines denotes that the US is supplying a HADR asset or coordinating a HADR exercise with the Philippines.
Figure 3 offers a visualisation of the network of relations of the ASEAN and foreign militaries involved in Southeast Asian affairs. In the degree graph, we see that
Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia have significantly more means of accessing material resources flowing into the network, such as military intelligence and equipment.
They are well-positioned to circulate themselves and influence others in the network.
Brunei and the Philippines appear to have more connections than Singapore, but
both are not as central. Other ASEAN militaries have visibly smaller node sizes and
are scattered around the centre. The betweenness centrality graph highlights the
critical positions that Thailand and Indonesia occupy in the network. Both of their
militaries seem to create and maintain the greatest number of links that bring in and
hold together ASEAN and other defence forces operating in the region.
The superiority of the US as the single most connected and central actor with
respect to the military HADR assets and equipment network in Southeast Asia is
demonstrated in Figure 4. Thailand and the Philippines are closest to the US among
ASEAN militaries; Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore surround the centre. We
observe wider distances in the node positions of ASEAN militaries as compared to
the previous network; several are now farther away and found at the fringes. Looking
at the betweenness centrality graph, we note the increase in the node size of Singapore, whereas the US and other ASEAN militaries, except Indonesia, have become
smaller. These observations point up (i) strong resource dependencies in the network,
and (ii) considerable differences in the capacity of ASEAN militaries to acquire, transfer, or supply assets and equipment for HADR.

223

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Figure 3. Military network in Southeast Asia
Degree centrality		

Betweenness centrality

Source: authors.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook
224

Degree centrality		

Betweenness centrality

Source: authors.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Figure 4. Military HADR network: assets and equipment

225
Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Figure 5. Military HADR network: exercises and training
Degree centrality		

Betweenness centrality

Source: authors.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook
226

The regional military HADR exercises and training connections network visualisation (see Figure 5) depicts that the Thai and Philippine militaries are once again
well-connected and central actors. Malaysia and Indonesia are the closest nearby
countries among regional peers. Both also often function as bridging points in this
network. We notice that more foreign militaries are closer to the centre as compared
to the previous two networks, indicating greater participation in training and exercise than in the military network in Southeast Asia (see Figure 3) and the military
HADR network: assets and equipment (see Figure 4). The US military, though, is
the only non-ASEAN actor found at the core. KOMODO, RIMPAC, Cobra Gold,
EXCOORES, and MILAN are the most attended regional military HADR events.
Turning to the betweenness centrality graph, Instruction Support considerably increased
in node size. Multilateral exercises may have a wider participant base and a large platform for shaping HADR efforts, but bilateral activities like peer-to-peer training
can also offer many pathways to directly influencing HADR actors.

Discussion
Governance is essentially about power, relationships, and accountability or who decides,
who influences, and who are held accountable (Hodgson, 2006). Disaster governance is known to have political, social, and economic dimensions (Tierney, 2012).
Similarly, humanitarian governance ‘is the attempt to regulate the humanitarian
field—including rules, structures, and mechanisms’, with power and inequality being
its central aspects (Aalen, 2020). Networks, representing a web of relationships of
collective actors or structures that shape behaviour and practice, are critical to understanding how power is generated or reduced, how agency is increased or decreased,
and how governance becomes effective or ineffective (Kahler, 2009). In this section,
we analyse how the overall network structure and the nature of military HADR
relations, such as resource dependencies, their direction, close associations, and shared
traits, can facilitate or limit the capabilities, interoperability, partnerships, and operational readiness that affect regional HADR governance.
The research results indicate that military governance networks in Southeast Asia
have no separate components. Several clusters and communities exhibit high assortativity and denser inter-group relations (Tajfel and Turner, 1986). Using Gillmann’s
(2010) typology for inter-agency coordination of humanitarian efforts during disasters, the network of interest visibly shows that there are relatively few central and
dominant actors (‘lead agency type’, with some actors deciding and controlling network activities). Yet, a fully connected network also suggests that all militaries are
linked to each other somehow, disregarding the directions of ties. This is advantageous from a governance standpoint because the extent to which actors in a network
can cooperate largely depends on whether a path exists between them (Myerson,
1977). Militaries in these networks can access or reach any other military through
their current connections in principle. Therefore, the network of interest provides

227

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

many channels to bring about a ‘lead partnership type’ structure wherein several
actors take part in joint strategic and operational decisions (Gillmann, 2010). This
network feature affords opportunities to form, facilitate, and strengthen military
HADR cooperation, even though it appears to revolve and function around a few
central and dominant actors. A network analysis study using Gillman’s (2010) typologies reveals that humanitarian operations—considering the coherence, coverage,
and connectedness of the aid and relief efforts—seem to perform better under lead
partnership types rather than lead agency types (Bisri, 2016).
Looking at the nature of individual ties of militaries in the network, several issues
are evident that can create HADR governance challenges. Only a few significant,
influential, and critical actors shape and influence regional HADR efforts. Resources
are a basis of power, resource dependence and power are correlated, and power over
resources is relational (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978; Jackson, 2010). We observe that
militaries that occupy central positions in the HADR assets and equipment network
come from countries that are home to global arms suppliers or thriving defence
industries, such as France and the UK. Significant actors like the US Armed Forces
establish more connections because of their control over the exchange of the most
used HADR resources in the region. Having more connections increases their interactions and capacity to influence others, which in turn makes them even more
central to the network. This social process, known as the ‘rich get richer’ dynamic,
can perpetuate and widen positional inequality and restricts less connected actors
from reaping the benefits that social networks present (Coleman, 1988; Christakis
and Fowler, 2009).
Our findings confirm the primacy of the US military in the region, not just in
HADR matters, because HADR is only a component of defence. The relational properties of the US in the network of interests illustrates that it is still the dominant
security provider. The command and control-like structures and response-oriented
practices favoured by the US military will likely remain operational despite the push
of the larger humanitarian and disaster management community to move towards
more proactive disaster risk reduction activities like prevention, mitigation, and
recovery efforts (Canyon, Ryan and Burkle, Jr., 2017). But the current set-up can
also enable the US military to put into practice the ‘unified action’ and ‘whole of
government’ approaches it is promoting for success in relation to foreign humanitarian assistance ( Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2019). Militaries in the region with defence
agreements and security alliances with the US, including Japan, the Philippines,
and Thailand, will continue to benefit the most, HADR-wise, from the current USled order.
Similarly, militaries with high centrality in the network can use their dominant
and influential positions to restrict changes to the status quo and limit the HADR
capabilities of defence forces not aligned with them. For instance, foreign military
powers can block the distribution or supply of assets and equipment with sensitive
military technology to those armed forces they deem as ‘hostile’ and ‘unfriendly’. This
can disrupt the interoperability of militaries engaged in HADR missions seeking

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

228

to serve at-risk and disaster-affected populations in the region, because using similar
assets and equipment can potentially increase resource efficiencies and reduce logistical and procurement burdens. And it can marginalise and limit the participation of
other military HADR actors that do not have the same kinds of assets and equipment.
Geopolitical flashpoints, such as the territorial disputes in the South China Sea
(SCS), are mainly driven by military modernisation and the growing assertiveness
of the parties involved. For instance, the struggle for dominance between China and
other major powers with a vested interest in the region, most notably the US, continues to heighten the risk of escalation and regional conflict (Kim, 2015; International
Crisis Group, 2021). ASEAN Member States themselves have multiple unresolved
competing maritime claims in the SCS (Raine and Le Mière, 2013). However, geopolitical tensions in the region also present an opportunity for the regional group
to push for more independence and sovereignty in defence and mitigate the various
pressures applied by foreign powers competing in Southeast Asia. One way to do
this is to support each other in developing a regional defence economy. ASEAN militaries seeking to lessen their dependencies and positional disadvantage in this network
need to reduce their reliance on foreign military support. Indonesia and Singapore
are cases from which other ASEAN Member States can learn. Both countries have
major defence imports, but they continue to create investment incentives that revitalise their local defence industries (Grevatt and Rahmat, 2018; Matthews and Koh,
2019). This partly explains why the betweenness centrality of Indonesia and Singapore in military HADR assets and equipment is significantly higher than that of the
other ASEAN Member States.
Militaries that are significant and influential in regional HADR exercises and
training networks tend to be those that organise and host such events and activities.
Multilateral events such as KOMODO, RIMPAC, Cobra Gold, EXCOORES, and
MILAN create repeated connections and multiplexity in their ties because they
usually involve similar sets of participants. This reflects the ‘orchestrated alliances’
typology, wherein some central actors function as consensus builders and intermediators between less central actors (Gillmann, 2010). That said, we also observe that
bilateral HADR activities such as instructional support and joint missions create
pathways to high profile large-scale HADR events. This network property resembles
the ‘loose alliances’ typology that enables actors to operate more fluidly between
emergent structures (Gillmann, 2010). These peer-to-peer cooperation platforms
not only allow militaries from more distant middle powers like Australia and New
Zealand to participate in HADR affairs in the region, but they also allow them to
mobilise other defence forces towards their HADR priorities and objectives without
actively competing with other actors at the same time.
Several studies use network analysis to explore interorganisational networks in
humanitarian and disaster contexts besides those mentioned in the previous paragraphs.
Scholars such as Naim Kapucu and colleagues have comprehensively studied interorganisational network coordination in crises and disasters (Kapucu, 2005; Kapucu
et al., 2010; Kapucu, Arslan, and Collins, 2010). Network analysis has also been used

229

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

to study how responders, both individual entities and agencies, communicate in emergency response and how brokerage roles form and function (Kapucu, 2006; Butts,
Petrescu-Prahova, and Cross, 2007; Lind et al., 2008). These studies, though, focus
only on the local and national level and do not look into military cooperation in any
particular way. Similarly, some research uses network analysis to study military cooperation in humanitarian and disaster contexts (Zaw and Lim, 2017; Azhar, Malik, and
Muzaffar, 2019), but it is also limited to the local and national levels of governance.
The article by Trias, Lassa, and Surjan (2019) is the closest to our work because,
although it concentrates on civilian actors and not military cooperation, it analyses
the network features and properties of interorganisational networks at the regional
level. It considers the impact of network structures and the nature of ties on regional
disaster governance. We observe two similar findings in our network analysis study
and that of Trias, Lassa, and Surjan (2019). First, both of the overall structures of the
networks we explored have no separate components. This indicates that even though
the humanitarian and disaster governance networks are growing, global–local interactions may also be getting denser (Lassa, 2011). No actor in the network is truly left
out, connection-wise. Second, both networks only have a few actors with relatively
high degree and betweenness centrality that can shape the distribution of resources
and associations in the network. This signifies considerable positional inequality in
the network that disproportionately benefits dominant and influential actors. Yet, it
is also an opportunity for those closely connected to them to become more central,
since it shortens the path that a given actor needs to move around the network.
The main difficulty in investigating military HADR governance networks derives
from the fact that HADR is also a form of regional force projection and security
competition by proxy that allow rivalries to play out (Chong and Chang, 2016). It can
be used as a tool for hard and soft power because national interests can find expression in HADR missions (Chong, 2015). HADR enables assisting states to flex their
military muscles and project technological superiority by displaying their strategic
lifts and loitering capability. It also presents the military with opportunities to collect intelligence on other militaries and to test capabilities outside of simulations.
Furthermore, national militaries use HADR missions to demonstrate their adaptability and relevance to citizens, improve their image in a foreign country, and reinforce military alliances (Yates and Bergin, 2011; Canyon, Ryan, and Burkle, Jr., 2020).
By displaying unique HADR capabilities, defence forces can rationalise efforts to
augment military budgets and gain support for maintaining overseas military deployments. These considerations make it difficult to ascertain a military’s HADR capabilities based on access to assets and equipment and participation in HADR exercises
and training alone.
But before we can enhance HADR governance networks in Southeast Asia, we
need to ensure first that the responding actors are adequately equipped and trained
for joint HADR missions. Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and
Thailand appear to have more HADR capabilities than other ASEAN militaries in
terms of availability of resources and preparedness to respond. Operationalisation of

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

230

the ‘one ASEAN, one response’ vision cannot be fully achieved until all ASEAN
militaries, especially Cambodia and Laos, have sufficient HADR-related assets and
equipment and actively participate in HADR exercises and training. An alternative
implementation of the vision would require collective agreement to deploy niche
capacities on behalf of ASEAN (Melo Zurita et al., 2015). The second Joint Task
Force to Promote Synergy with Other Relevant ASEAN Bodies on Humanitarian
Assistance and Disaster Relief (JTF on HADR), part of the ASEAN Militaries Ready
Group, proposed the development of guidelines on the use of the ASEAN flag or logo
when deploying assets and human resources to humanitarian emergencies. If the
ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting implements this proposal, it can assist in moving
the debate beyond simple differentiation between bilateral and multilateral efforts
and what constitutes a ‘one ASEAN, one response’ (Cook, 2017).
The networks under review here give us an idea of what resources militaries
involved in HADR can use and how they can contribute to joint HADR missions in
Southeast Asia. Such information can serve as an evidence base for further assessments
of the HADR capabilities of military actors, specifically those from the ASEAN
region. Our network analysis shows the points of convergence or divergence that
support or constrain the efficient use of available HADR resources besides current
regional standby arrangements. It also presents alternative pathways to achieving
shared HADR objectives beyond existing cooperation platforms. We cannot completely harness the collective strengths of military HADR actors unless we first have
a better understanding of their resources and operational readiness. Our research is a
step towards enhanced comprehension of how military HADR actors interconnect.

Limitations and recommendations
In general, military involvement in foreign HADR missions can be studied in two
ways. The first is to examine military engagement within the established and formal coordination architecture of disaster response. The Multinational Coordination
Centre (MNCC), tested and used in the ASEAN region for years, is an example
(Jumamil-Mercado et al., 2015). The MNCC is a recognised operational framework
for coordinating foreign military assistance (RCG, 2017), which operates under the
guidance of the affected state’s military—when activated—to achieve common situational awareness and unity of effort ( Jumamil-Mercado et al., 2015). It is also the
primary platform for facilitating information sharing, joint planning, and task division between civilian humanitarian and military actors (RCG, 2017). The Center
for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance (2022), a unit
directly reporting to the United States Indo-Pacific Command, and the Regional
Consultative Group (RGC) on Humanitarian Civil-Military Coordination for Asia
and the Pacific, regularly reports on the development of the MNCC.
The second way is to explore the informal networks that arise from the relationships between and the interactions of militaries involved in HADR. This is the focus
of our research, which centres on the network features and properties arising from

231

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

military connections that do not necessarily occur in an MNCC when activated.
There are various forms of military HADR cooperation, but our research focuses
on other types, such as those demonstrated in the distribution of assets and equipment and participation in exercises and training. We believe that studying these
networks generates insights that may not be captured or noticeable when assessing
only military engagement in an MNCC. We hope that policymakers and practitioners working to improve the MNCC and developing mechanisms to strengthen
military HADR cooperation find our research results helpful.
There is currently no dedicated and publicly available database that records and
publishes military HADR activities similar to what we have analysed here. However,
this is not an isolated case. There is a lack of transparent sharing of military HADR
cooperation data, in general, especially with people outside of the defence establishment. There could be several reasons for this. One possible explanation is the primacy of confidentiality and the secrecy surrounding military missions. The strict
‘need to know’ basis for sharing information in the military may be one of the factors
why limited access to and uniformity of data relating to military cooperation in
HADR missions persist.
Another possible reason is that military missions have political and security dimensions (as mentioned earlier in this paper). Information about defence capabilities is
sensitive because they relate to security alliances, domestic politics, and foreign policy. Governments sending their militaries to cooperate in HADR missions may be
actively competing in other defence-related areas, such as selling military equipment
to affected states. It is critical to reflect on these factors when considering military
HADR cooperation.
But these issues are not entirely exclusive to the military. The civilian humanitarian community is also grappling with similar data governance challenges associated
with transparency, data protection, implications for donor funding, and data security
and misuse (Bell et al., 2021). The International Committee of the Red Cross has
developed and revised the Handbook on Data Protection in Humanitarian Action since
2015, but the humanitarian community as a whole has been slow in developing and
implementing relevant protocols and guidelines and in working with governments
to develop appropriate legal frameworks. Consequently, access to and protection of
disaggregated humanitarian data remain piecemeal and ad hoc.
As there is no specific and readily available data on military HADR governance
networks, we explored connections and interactions that reflect military cooperation in HADR, such as those indicated by the distribution of assets and equipment
and participation in exercises and training. The study of these activities identifies
the points of convergence or divergence that support or constrain the efficient use of
available HADR resources besides regional standby arrangements. It also presents
alternative pathways to achieving shared HADR objectives beyond existing cooperation platforms. We have demonstrated that alternative data, such as Jane’s Sentinel
Security Assessments, can be useful even if not optimal. HADR reporting is not
standardised and this can affect the accuracy and quality of network analysis. Some
assessments contain more or less HADR information than others. Data on HADR

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

232

assets, equipment, exercises, and training are not uniform and consistently recorded.
It is advisable, therefore, to develop and maintain an open and standardised HADR
database to document the evolution of military HADR networks and capabilities
in the region as the global risk environment and humanitarian landscape change.
All network studies can be expanded. Although we considered the HADR links
between ASEAN militaries and foreign counterparts, it is not the primary objective
of our research to scrutinise the extent and character of such ties outside of Southeast Asian affairs. Future research, however, can use our HADR network visualisations as a reference for investigating prospects for inter-regional partnerships, such
as the recent push for stronger disaster governance cooperation between Southeast
Asian and Southwest Pacific countries (Cook and Chen, 2019, 2022).
By concentrating our network analysis on the ways in which regional HADR
actors are connected rather than separated, we run the risk of oversimplifying the
Southeast Asian context and dynamics. While the ASEAN community is relatively
small, it is incredibly diverse. There are also many opportunities for new studies to
engage in meaningful comparative analysis by narrowing the focus and scope of
HADR network studies. For instance, contrasting the subregional networks of mainland versus maritime Southeast Asia can reveal distinct HADR governance approaches
and issues related to geography.
Another consideration is that ASEAN militaries have different HADR-related
capabilities because their security functions vary. Some defence forces specialise in
military medicine (Brunei), emergency engineering support (Malaysia and Vietnam),
humanitarian mine action (Cambodia and Laos), swift and deepwater rescue (Thailand), critical infrastructure protection and urban response operations (Singapore),
and village-level counterinsurgency operations (Indonesia and the Philippines). It
might also be of interest to appraise the various HADR roles of special forces and
reservists in Southeast Asia. Niche research on the local behaviour and activities of
ASEAN militaries may offer us novel ideas on how to improve the regional functions and dynamics of HADR governance networks.
Our research and this paper are only the first steps towards a collective effort to
conduct more comprehensive and sophisticated network analysis studies. These progress through four stages. First is the ‘description’ stage, where the features and properties of a network of interest are analysed using SNA metrics and visualisation
techniques. Second is the ‘explain’ stage, where the analysis focuses on how a network functions by applying relevant theories. When we know more about a given
network, we can start to develop frameworks by detailing associations. Third is the
‘prediction’ stage, where the goal is to understand network behaviour and generate
models for comparative studies. Here, researchers can test the reliability of their
conclusions and make inferences through simulations. Fourth is the ‘manage’ stage,
where the aspiration is to learn how to optimise the network of interest and gain the
capability to study multilayered and dynamic networks of similar nature. Our research
is a contribution to stage one. We sincerely hope that other researchers and future
work continue the effort to analyse military HADR governance networks in stages
two, three, and four.

233

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Conclusion
This paper explores the structures behind HADR governance networks in Southeast Asia and the nature of ties between ASEAN militaries and their military partners.
While the overall military HADR network is fully connected, with no separate
components, only a few significant, influential, and critical actors are shaping and
influencing regional HADR efforts. In the region, these are Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. The HADR capabilities of ASEAN militaries
vary—several are not sufficiently equipped and adequately prepared to participate in
regional humanitarian responses. Globally, Australia, Canada, China, France, India,
New Zealand, Russia, Spain, the UK, and the US militaries occupy central positions
in the network, as they control the supply and transfer of HADR-related assets and
equipment and coordinate and host HADR exercises and training.
We have proposed and demonstrated the use of an analytical framework to assist
researchers and policymakers seeking to learn about the ways in which militaries
connect and interact in HADR governance networks and the structural patterns that
emerge from their relationships. This paper offers insights into how defence forces
can build HADR relations, balance HADR positional inequalities in the networks,
and narrow HADR capability gaps. It also puts forward suggestions for future studies
because research on military HADR networks is not a one-off effort, but an ongoing
endeavour to acquire further understanding of HADR governance as an essential
component of the global risk environment and international humanitarian landscape.

Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.

Correspondence
Alistair D.B. Cook, S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Block S4, Level B3, Singapore 639798.
E-mail: iscook@ntu.edu.sg

References
Aalen, L. (2020) ‘Governance’. In A. De Lauri (ed.) Humanitarianism: Keywords. Brill, Leiden. pp. 84–86.
AHA Centre (ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management)
(2017) ASEAN Joint Disaster Response Plan. September. AHA Centre, Jakarta.
AHA Centre (2018a) Situation Update No. 7: M 7.4 Earthquake & Tsunami. Sulawesi, Indonesia. Friday,
5 October 2018, 19:00 hrs (UTC+7). AHA Centre, Jakarta.
AHA Centre (2018b) Standard Operating Procedure for Regional Standby Arrangements and Coordination of
Joint Disaster Relief and Emergency Response Operations (SASOP). Version 2. AHA Centre, Jakarta.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

234

AHA Centre (2022) ‘About the AHA Centre’. Website. https://ahacentre.org/about-us/ (last accessed
on 15 September 2022).
AHA Centre and UN OCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs)
(2018) Central Sulawesi Earthquake: International Deployed Assets (as of 07 October 2018). https://reliefweb.
int/report/indonesia/central-sulawesi-earthquake-international-deployed-assets-07-october-2018
(last accessed on 15 September 2022).
Ahrens, J. and P.M. Rudolph (2006) ‘The importance of governance in risk reduction and disaster
management’. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management. 14(4). pp. 207–220.
APC-MADRO (Asia-Pacific Conferences on Military Assistance to Disaster Relief Operations)
(2014) Asia-Pacific Regional Guidelines for the Use of Foreign Military Assets in Natural Disaster Response
Operations. Version 8.01, 14 January 2014. United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Bangkok.
ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) (2006) ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management and
Emergency Response. ASEAN Secretariat, Jakarta.
ASEAN (2008) The ASEAN Charter. First reprint. January. https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/
images/archive/publications/ASEAN-Charter.pdf (last accessed on 15 September 2022).
ASEAN (2016a) ASEAN Declaration on One ASEAN, One Response: ASEAN Responding to Disasters as
One in the Region and Outside the Region. 9 September. https://asean.org/asean-declaration-on-oneasean-one-response-asean-responding-to-disasters-as-one-in-the-region-and-outside-the-region/
(last accessed on 15 September 2022).
ASEAN (2016b) ASEAN Vision 2025 on Disaster Management. https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/
2021/01/fa-220416_DM2025_email.pdf (last accessed on 15 September 2022).
ASEAN (2016c) Joint Statement of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) for the World
Humanitarian Summit: National Leadership & Regional Partnership for Resilient ASEAN. 25 May.
https://asean.org/joint-statement-of-the-association-of-southeast-asian-nations-asean-for-theworld-humanitarian-summit-national-leadership-regional-partnership-for-resilient-asean/ (last
accessed on 15 September 2022).
ASEAN (2020) ‘Our communities’. Website. https://asean.org/our-communities (last accessed on
15 September 2022).
Azhar, A., M.N. Malik, and A. Muzaffar (2019) ‘Social network analysis of army public school
shootings: need for a unified man-made disaster management in Pakistan’. International Journal of
Disaster Risk Reduction. 34 (March). pp. 255–264.
Barabási, A-L. (2002) Linked: How Everything is Connected to Everything Else and What it Means for
Business, Science, and Everyday Life. Perseus Books Group, New York, NY.
Barabási, A-L. (2016) Network Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Barnett, M.N. (2013) ‘Humanitarian governance’. Annual Review of Political Science. 16 (May). pp. 379–398.
Bastian, M., S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy (2009) ‘Gephi: an open source software for exploring and
manipulating networks’. In E. Adar et al. (eds.) Proceedings of the Third International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. San Jose, California, USA. 17–20 May 2009. AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
pp. 361–362.
Bateman, S. and A. Bergin (2020) ‘Naval, national security and defence issues from climate change’.
In J. McDonald, J. McGee, and R. Barnes (eds) Research Handbook on Climate Change, Oceans and
Coasts. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham. pp. 409–424.
Bell, D., M. Lycett, A. Marshan, and A. Monaghan (2021) ‘Exploring future challenges for big data
in the humanitarian domain’. Journal of Business Research. 131 ( July). pp. 453–468.
Biagini, F., G. Kauermann, and T. Meyer-Brandis (2019) ‘Introduction’. In F. Biagini, G. Kauermann,
and T. Meyer-Brandis (eds.) Network Science: An Aerial View. Springer, Cham. pp. 1–4.
Biggs, N., E.K. Lloyd, and R.J. Wilson (1986) Graph Theory: 1736–1936. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY.

235

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Bisri, M.B.F. (2016) ‘Comparative study on inter-organizational cooperation in disaster situations
and impact on humanitarian aid operations’. Journal of International Humanitarian Action. 1 ( July).
Article number: 8. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41018-016-0008-6.
Bisri, M.B.F., D. Suma, and Y. Malole (2019) ‘Regional centrality and the shift of humanitarian
landscape: the case of ASEAN’. In A. Kamal et al. (eds.) ARMOR: ASEAN Risk Monitor and
Disaster Management Review. ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster
management, Jakarta. pp. 147–172.
Borgatti, S.P., M.G. Everett, and J.C. Johnson (2013) Analyzing Social Networks. Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA.
Butts, C.T., M. Petrescu-Prahova, and B.R. Cross (2007) ‘Responder communication networks in
the World Trade Center disaster: implications for modeling of communication within emergency
settings’. Journal of Mathematical Sociology. 31(2). pp. 121–147.
Caballero-Anthony, M., A.D.B. Cook, and C. Chen (2021) ‘Re-imagining the global humanitarian
system: emerging dynamics in the Asia-Pacific’. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction. 56
(April). Article number: 102098. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2021.102098.
Cachia, R. and D.H. Ramos (2020) ‘Network analysis as a tool for humanitarian protection: research
and practice’. Journal of International Humanitarian Action. 5 (June). Article number: 5. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s41018-020-00071-7.
Canyon, D.V., B.J. Ryan, and F.M. Burkle, Jr. (2017) ‘Military provision of humanitarian assistance
and disaster relief in non-conflict crises’. Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management.
14(3). Article number: 20170045. https://doi.org/10.1515/jhsem-2017-0045.
Canyon, D.V., B.J. Ryan, and F.M. Burkle, Jr. (2020) ‘Rationale for military involvement in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief ’. Prehospital and Disaster Medicine. 35(1). pp. 92–97.
Center for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance (2019) ASEAN Disaster
Management Reference Handbook. Center for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian
Assistance, Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, HI.
Center for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance (2022) ‘Latest news and
featured publications’. Website. https://www.cfe-dmha.org/ (last accessed on 15 September 2022).
Chong, A. (2015) ‘Smart power and military force: an introduction’. Journal of Strategic Studies. 38(3).
pp. 233–244.
Chong, A. and J.Y. Chang (2016) ‘Security competition by proxy: Asia Pacific interstate rivalry in the
aftermath of the MH370 incident’. Global Change, Peace and Security. 28(1). pp. 75–98.
Christakis, N.A. and J.H. Fowler (2009) Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social Networks and How
They Shape Our Lives. Little Brown and Company, New York, NY.
Clark-Ginsberg, A. (2020) ‘Disaster risk reduction is not “everyone’s business”: evidence from three
countries’. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction. 43 (February). Article number: 101375.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2019.101375.
Clifford, J. (2021) ‘Bridging the gap between intentions and outcomes in military humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief missions’. In D. Messelken and D. Winkler (eds.) Health Care in Contexts
of Risk, Uncertainty, and Hybridity. Springer, Cham. pp. 145–166.
Coleman, J.S. (1988) ‘Social capital in the creation of human capital’. American Journal of Sociology. 94
(Supplement). pp. S95–S120.
Cook, A.D.B. (2010) ‘Positions of responsibility: a comparison of ASEAN and EU approaches towards
Myanmar’. International Politics. 47 (May). pp. 433–449.
Cook, A.D.B. (2017) ‘One ASEAN, one response: ADMM and ADMM-plus contributions to humanitarian assistance’. In S. Teo and B. Singh (eds.) Roundtable on the Future of the ADMM/ADMM-Plus
and Defense Diplomacy in the Asia-Pacific. S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. pp. 38–39.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

236

Cook, A.D.B. (2018) ‘Siloes, synergies and prospects for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief
in Southeast Asia’. In A. Chong (ed.) International Security in the Asia-Pacific. Palgrave Macmillan,
Cham. pp. 357–375.
Cook, A.D.B. and C. Chen (2019) ASEAN Strategic Policy Dialogue on Disaster Management: Building
ASEAN’s Resiliency to Disaster. Event report: 21 August 2019. S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Cook, A.D.B. and C. Chen (2022) ‘Disaster governance and prospects of inter-regional partnership
in the Asia-Pacific’. The Pacific Review. 35(3). pp. 446–476.
Cradock-Henry, N.A., J. Connolly, P. Blackett, and J. Lawrence (2020) ‘Elaborating a systems methodology for cascading climate change impacts and implications’. MethodsX. 7 (April). Article number:
100893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mex.2020.100893.
Creach, Y-K. and L. Fan (2008) ‘ASEAN’s role in the Cyclone Nargis response: implications, lessons
and opportunities. Humanitarian Exchange. 41 (December). pp. 5–7.
CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters) and UNDRR (United Nations Office
for Disaster Risk Reduction) (2020) Human Cost of Disasters. An Overview of the Last 20 Years: 2000–
2019. CRED, Louvain-la-Neuve, and UNDRR, Geneva.
Du, L., Y. Feng, L. Yaning Tang, W. Kang, and W. Lu (2020) ‘Networks in disaster emergency management: a systematic review’. Natural Hazards. 103 (August). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-02004009-5.
Duda, P., I. Kelman, and N. Glick (2020) ‘Informal disaster governance’. Politics and Governance. 8(4).
pp. 375–385.
Ear, J., A.D.B. Cook, and D.V. Canyon (2017) Disaster Response Regional Architectures: Assessing Future
Possibilities. September. Daniel K. Inouye Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies, Honolulu, HI.
Embassy of Japan in the Philippines (2019) ‘Launching ceremony of the Disaster Emergency Logistics
System for ASEAN (DELSA) satellite warehouse’. Website. Japan Information and Culture Center
Press Release No. 52. 1 July. https://www.ph.emb-japan.go.jp/itpr_en/00_000908.html (last accessed
on 15 September 2022).
Ferris, E. (2012) Future Directions in Civil-Military Responses to Natural Disasters. ACMC Paper 5/2012.
Australian Civil-Military Centre, Canberra, ACT.
Ferris, E. and D. Pentz (2013) In the Neighborhood: The Growing Role of Regional Organizations in Disaster
Risk Management. February. The Brookings Institution – London School of Economics Project on
Internal Displacement, Washington, DC.
Fetzek, S., R. Fleishman, and A. Rezzonico (2021) Climate Security and the Strategic Energy Pathway in
Southeast Asia: Part of the ‘World Climate and Security Report 2020’ Briefer Series. Product of the Expert
Group of the International Military Council on Climate and Security. February. Center for Climate
and Security, Council on Strategic Risks, Washington, DC.
Forino, G., S. Bonati, and L.M. Calandra (2018) Governance of Risk, Hazards and Disasters: Trends in
Theory and Practice. Routledge, Abingdon.
Freeman, L. (2004) The Development of Social Network Analysis: A Study in the Sociology of Science.
Empirical Press, Vancouver, BC.
Gaydos, J.C. and G.A. Luz (1994) ‘Military participation in emergency humanitarian assistance’.
Disasters. 18(1). pp. 48–57.
Gillmann, N. (2010) Interagency Coordination During Disaster: Strategic Choices for the UN, NGOs, and
Other Humanitarian Actors in the Field. Nomos, Baden-Baden.
Glasser, R. (2020) ‘The climate change imperative to transform disaster risk management’. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science. 11 (April). pp. 152–154.
Grevatt, J. and R. Rahmat (2018) ‘Indonesia’s defence market poised to expand’. EMS Now website.
5 November. https://www.emsnow.com/indonesias-defence-market-poised-to-expand/ (last
accessed on 15 September 2022).

237

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Hajiheydari, N., M. Salehi, and A. Goudarzi (2018) ‘Optimizing humanitarian aids: formulating
influencer advertisement in social networks’. In L. Rezgui, H. Afsarmanesh, and Y. Rezgui (eds.)
Collaborative Networks of Cognitive Systems. Springer, Cham. pp. 101–110.
Hallegatte, S. (2014) Natural Disasters and Climate Change. Springer, Cham.
Held, T., B. Newsome, and M.W. Lewis (2011) The Advantages and Disadvantages of Seeking Commonality
in Military Equipment. Research Brief RB-9623-A (2011). RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
Hodgson, G.M. (2006) ‘What are institutions’. Journal of Economic Issues. 11(1). pp. 1–25.
Hofmann, C-A. and L. Hudson (2009) ‘Military responses to natural disasters: last resort or inevitable
trend?’. Humanitarian Exchange. 44 (September). pp. 29–31.
Hollis, S. (2015) The Role of Regional Organizations in Disaster Risk Management: A Strategy for Global
Resilience. Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Hore, K., I. Kelman, J. Mercer, and J-C. Gaillard (2017) ‘Climate change and disasters’. In H. Rodríguez,
W. Donner, and J.E. Trainor (eds.) Handbook of Disaster Research. Springer, Cham. pp. 145–159.
International Crisis Group (2021) Competing Visions of International Order in the South China Sea. Asia
Report No. 315. 29 November. International Crisis Group, Brussels.
Jackson, M.O. (2010) Social and Economic Networks. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Jane’s by IHS Markit (2019) Jane’s Military and Security Assessments Intelligence Centre. Jane’s by IHS
Markit, Washington, DC.
Janes (2022a) ‘Military assessments’. Website. https://www.janes.com/country-risk-intelligence/
military-assessments (last accessed on 15 September 2022).
Janes (2022b) Military capabilities’. Website. https://www.janes.com/military-threat-intelligence/
military-capabilities (last accessed on 15 September 2022).
Janes (2022c) ‘About Janes’. Website. https://www.janes.com/about-janes/what-we-do (last accessed
on 15 September 2022).
Jayaram, D. (2021) ‘“Climatizing” military strategy? A case study of the Indian armed forces’. International Politics. 58 (August). pp. 619–639.
Joint Chiefs of Staff (2019) Foreign Humanitarian Assistance. Joint Publication 3-29. 14 May. Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Washington DC.
Jones, E.C. and A.J. Faas (2017) Social Network Analysis of Disaster Response, Recovery, and Adaptation.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Jones, S., B. Manyena, and S. Walsh (2015) ‘Disaster risk governance: evolution and influences’. In
A.E. Collins et al. (eds.) Hazards, Risks and Disasters in Society. Elsevier, Oxford. pp. 45–58.
Jumamil-Mercado, G. et al. (2015) Advances in Civil-Military Coordination in Catastrophes: How the Philippines Turned Lessons Learned from Super Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda) into Best Practices for Disaster Preparedness and Response. Center for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance,
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, HI.
Kadushin, C. (2012) Understanding Social Networks: Theories, Concepts, and Findings. Oxford University
Press, New York, NY.
Kahler, M. (2009) Networked Politics: Agency, Power and Governance. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Kameyama, Y. and K. Ono (2021) ‘The development of climate security discourse in Japan’. Sustainability Science. 16 ( January). pp. 271–281.
Kapucu, N. (2005) ‘Interorganizational coordination in dynamic context: networks in emergency
response management’. Connections: Journal of International Network for Social Network Analysis. 26(2).
pp. 33–48.
Kapucu, N. (2006) ‘Interagency communication networks during emergencies: boundary spanners
in multiagency coordination’. American Review of Public Administration Review. 36(2). pp. 207–225.
Kapucu, N., T. Arslan, and M.L. Collins (2010) ‘Examining intergovernmental and interorganizational response to catastrophic disasters: toward a network-centered approach’. Administration and
Society. 42(2). pp. 222–247.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

238

Kapucu, N., T. Bryer, V. Garayev, and T. Arslan (2010) ‘Interorganizational network coordination
under stress caused by repeated threats of disasters’. Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency
Management. 7(1). https://doi.org/10.2202/1547-7355.1629.
Kim, J. (2015) ‘Territorial disputes in the South China Sea: implications for security in Asia and
beyond’. Strategic Studies Quarterly. 9(2). pp. 107–141.
Lassa, J. (2011) ‘Disaster governance’. In P.K. Bradley and M. Statler (eds.) Encyclopedia of Disaster Relief.
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. pp. 113–114.
Lassa, J. (2015) ‘Post disaster governance, complexity and network theory: evidence from Aceh, Indonesia
after the Indian Ocean tsunami 2004’. PLOS Currents Disasters. 1 ( July). doi: 10.1371/4f7972ecec1b6.
Lewis, T.G. (2009) Network Science: Theory and Practice. John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Lind, B.E., M. Tirado, C.T. Butts, and M. Petrescu-Prahova (2008) ‘Brokerage roles in disaster response:
organisational mediation in the wake of Hurricane Katrina’. International Journal of Emergency Management. 5(1–2). pp. 75–99.
Malešič, M. (2015) ‘The impact of military engagement in disaster management on civil-military
relations’. Current Sociology. 64(7). pp. 980–998.
Matthews, R. and C. Koh (2019) ‘Singapore’s defence–industrial ecosystem’. In K. Hartley and J. Belin
(eds.) The Economics of the Global Defence Industry. Routledge, Abingdon. pp. 527–546.
McCann, H., H. Fünfgeld, J. Brown, and R. Wylie (2016) Social Networks and Disaster Resilience: An
Introduction. Report prepared for the Enhancing Networks for Resilience Project. Southern
Grampians Glenelg Primary Care Partnership, Hamilton, VIC. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/309637981_Social_networks_and_disaster_resilience_an_introduction (last accessed
on 16 September 2022).
McCulloh, I., H. Armstrong, and A. Johnson (2013) Social Network Analysis with Applications. John
Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Melo Zurita, M.d.L., B. Cook, L. Harms, and A. March (2015) ‘Towards new disaster governance:
subsidiarity as a critical tool’. Environmental Policy and Governance. 25(6). pp. 386–398.
Moore, S., E. Eng, and M. Daniel (2003) ‘International NGOs and the role of network centrality in
humanitarian aid operations: a case study of coordination during the 2000 Mozambique floods’.
Disasters. 27(4). pp. 305–318.
Myerson, R.B. (1977) ‘Graphs and cooperation in games’. Mathematics of Operations Research. 2(3).
pp. 209–296.
National Research Council (2005) Network Science. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
Newman, M.E.J. (2010) Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Newman, M.E.J., A-L. Barabási, and D.J. Watts (2006) The Structure and Dynamics of Networks.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Ngamassi, L., C. Maitland, and A.H. Tapia (2014) ‘Humanitarian interorganizational information
exchange network: how do clique structures impact network effectiveness?’. VOLUNTAS:
International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations. 25 (December). pp. 1483–1508.
O’Donnell, I. (2017) ‘Regional organisations doing disaster risk reduction including climate change
adaptation’. In I. Kelman, J. Mercer, and J-C. Gaillard (eds.) The Routledge Handbook of Disaster
Risk Reduction Including Climate Change Adaptation. Routledge, Abingdon. pp. 317–329.
Parsons, T. (1963) ‘On the concept of political power’. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society.
107(3). pp. 232–262.
Pfeffer, J. and G.R. Salancik (1978) The External Control of Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective. Harper and Row, New York, NY.
President of the Republic of Indonesia (2019) Presidential Regulation No. 1 of 2019. https://www.
berkasedukasi.com/2019/02/perpres-nomor-1-tahun-2019-bnpb.html (last accessed on 27 September 2022).

239

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

Angelo Paolo L. Trias and Alistair D.B. Cook

Puckett, L.M. (2021) ‘Civil-military coordination in disaster preparedness and response’. Natural
Hazards Review. 22(2). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)NH.1527-6996.0000446.
Raine, S. and C. Le Mière (2013) Regional Disorder: The South China Sea Disputes. Routledge, Abingdon.
Raschky, P.A. (2008) ‘Institutions and the losses from natural disasters’. Natural Hazards and Earth
System Sciences. 8(4). pp. 627–634.
RCG (Regional Consultative Group) (2017) Regional Consultative Group: Third Session. Humanitarian
Civil-Military Coordination for Asia and the Pacific. Summary Report. RCG, Singapore.
Reppert, C. (2021) Climate Change Response as an Emerging Battlespace in the South China Sea: Earning
Trust and Credibility through HADR Exercises. United States Naval War College, Newport, RI.
ROAP (Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific), UN OCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs) (2018) Disaster Response in Asia and the Pacific: A Guide to International Tools and Services. ROAP, UN OCHA, Bangkok.
Rum, M. (2016) ‘The case of regional disaster management cooperation in ASEAN: a constructivist
approach to understanding how international norms travel’. Southeast Asian Studies. 5(3). pp. 491–514.
Scott, J. (1991) Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. Sage Publications, London.
Scott, J. and P.J. Carrington (2011) The SAGE Handbook of Social Network Analysis. Sage Publications, London.
Sebastian, L.C., E.A. Syailendra, and K. Indrabayu (2018) ‘Civil-military relations in Indonesia after
the reform period’. Asia Policy. 13(3). pp. 49–78.
Seybolt, T.B. (2009) ‘Harmonizing the humanitarian aid network: adaptive change in a complex
system’. International Studies Quarterly. 53(4). pp. 1027–1050.
Shi, P. et al. (2015) ‘World atlas of natural disaster risk’. In P. Shi and R. Kasperson (eds.) World Atlas
of Natural Disaster Risk. Springer, Berlin. pp. 309–323.
Simm, G. (2018) ‘Disaster response in Southeast Asia: the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Response
and Emergency Management’. Asian Journal of International Law. 8(1). pp. 116–142.
Smith, P.J. (2011) ‘The geopolitics of climate change: power transitions, conflict and the future of military activities’. Conflict, Security and Development. 11(3). pp. 309–334.
Spandler, K. (2022) ‘Saving people or saving face? Four narratives of regional humanitarian order in
Southeast Asia’. The Pacific Review. 35(1), pp. 172–201.
Stephenson, Jr., M. (2006) ‘Toward a descriptive model of humanitarian assistance coordination’.
VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations. 17 (March). pp. 40–56.
Tacheva, Z. and N. Simpson (2019) ‘Social network analysis in humanitarian logistics research’.
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management. 9(3). pp. 492–514.
Tajfel, H. and J.C. Turner (1986) ‘The social identity theory of intergroup behaviour’. In S. Worchel
and W.G. Austin (eds.) The Social Identity Theory of Intergroup Behaviour. Nelson-Hall, Chicago, IL.
pp. 7–24.
Tan, S.S. (2012) ‘“Talking their walk”? The evolution of defense regionalism in Southeast Asia’. Asian
Security. 8(3). pp. 232–250.
Tatham, P. and S. Rietjens (2015) ‘Integrated disaster relief logistics: a stepping stone towards viable
civil-military networks?’. Disasters. 40(1). pp. 7–25.
Tierney, K. (2012) ‘Disaster governance: social, political, and economic dimensions’. Annual Review of
Environment and Resources. 37 (November). pp. 341–363.
Trias, A.P.L., J. Lassa, and A. Surjan (2019) ‘Connecting the actors, discovering the ties: exploring
disaster risk governance network in Asia and the Pacific’. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction.
33 (February). pp. 217–228.
Trias, A.P.L. and A.D.B. Cook (2021) ‘Future directions in disaster governance: insights from the 2018
Central Sulawesi earthquake and tsunami response’. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction.
58 (May). Article number: 102180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2021.102180.

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

240

Trias, A.P.L. and L. Gong (2020) Governing Human-induced Disasters in Southeast Asia: Insights from the
2017 Marawi Conflict. Policy Report. April. S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.
Uitto, J.I. and R. Shaw (2016) ‘Sustainable development and disaster risk reduction: introduction’. In
J.I. Uitto and R. Shaw (eds.) Sustainable Development and Disaster Risk Reduction: Introduction. Springer,
Tokyo. pp. 1–12.
UN OCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs) (2007) Oslo Guidelines: Guidelines on the Use of Military and Civil Defense Assets to Support United Nations Humanitarian
Activities in Complex Emergencies. Revision 1.1, November. UN OCHA, Geneva.
UN OCHA (2013) Philippines: Foreign Military Deployed Assets (As of 30 December 2013). https://relief
web.int/report/philippines/philippines-foreign-military-deployed-assets-30-december-2013 (last
accessed on 16 September 2022).
UN OCHA (2016) Major Natural Hazards in Asia and the Pacific. 19 July. https://reliefweb.int/map/
world/major-natural-hazards-asia-and-pacific (last accessed on 16 September 2022).
Wasserman, S. and K. Faust (1994) Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Wolbers, J. (2016) ‘Enhancing network centric operations doctrine to support civil military cooperation in disaster management’. In R. Beeres et al. (eds.) NL ARMS Netherlands Annual Review of
Military Studies 2016. Springer, The Hague. pp. 115–131.
Yates, A. and A. Bergin (2011) More Than Good Deeds: Disaster Risk Management and Australian, Japanese
and US Defence Forces. Special Report. Issue 43 (December). Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
Canberra, ACT.
Zaw, T.N. and S. Lim (2017) ‘The military’s role in disaster management and response during the
2015 Myanmar floods: a social network approach’. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction.
25 (October). pp. 1–21.

241

14677717, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/disa.12542 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Military humanitarian and disaster governance networks in Southeast Asia

