The Paciﬁc Review

ISSN: 0951-2748 (Print) 1470-1332 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpre20

Managing economic statecraft via multilateral
agreements: the roles of ASEAN member states
in shaping Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership
Kaewkamol Pitakdumrongkit
To cite this article: Kaewkamol Pitakdumrongkit (2023) Managing economic statecraft
via multilateral agreements: the roles of ASEAN member states in shaping Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership, The Paciﬁc Review, 36:5, 1120-1147, DOI:
10.1080/09512748.2023.2200022
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2023.2200022

Published online: 10 Apr 2023.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 775

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpre20

The Pacific Review
2023, VOL. 36, NO. 5, 1120–1147
https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2023.2200022

Managing economic statecraft via multilateral
agreements: the roles of ASEAN member states
in shaping Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership
Kaewkamol Pitakdumrongkit
S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

ABSTRACT

Economic statecraft (ES) has been playing an increased role in affecting the
international relations. While armed conflicts decline, states have been weaponising trade, investment, and other economic ties to gain leverage over
their counterparts. In the contemporary world, ES is not only used to galvanise
countries’ influence in specific issue areas but also part of their grand strategy
to achieve broad power-maximisation goals. Despite a proliferation of ES literatures in recent years, extant research tended to focus on great powers’ ES,
leaving small states’ ES under-examined. Also, previous studies usually looked
into how countries unilaterally employ ES. Hence, insufficient attention has
been paid to how regional states work together to collectively alter multilateral
frameworks to advance their ES. Against this backdrop, this paper investigates
small nations’ roles in the development of multilateral cooperative frameworks.
Using the ES lens, it explores how these countries leverage these schemes to
push forward their collective ES. The main argument is that regional states
worked together to craft the terms of multilateral economic agreements to
galvanise their clout over certain governance areas. I validate this argument
by using the case of Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).
This study makes contributions to the research pertaining to ES, small states’
strategies, and economic regionalism. It also yields practical implications for
policymakers involved in fostering international economic governance.

KEYWORDS ASEAN; economic security; economic statecraft; institutional balancing; Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership; small states

I. Introduction
In East Asia, economics is one of the proxy domains for strategic competition. While there has been no inter-state conflict since 1988, this region
has increasingly witnessed the use of Economic Statecraft (ES). In other
CONTACT Kaewkamol Pitakdumrongkit
iskaewkamol@ntu.edu.sg
International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
© 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

S. Rajaratnam School of

The Pacific Review

1121

words, states in recent years have employed economic tools to sustain or
galvanise their influence over others’ policy outcomes or international
regimes.
The existing research tends to focus on how great powers orchestrate
their ES and depict small states as passive victims. Thanks to their superior
national clout usually through military capabilities, more powerful nations
are expected to shape international relations more than their small counterparts. The latter are often cast as the ones with meager capabilities,
rendering them unable to alter outcomes and suffer from sovereignty
infringements by bigger powers (Sutton, 2011; Tillikainen, 2018, p. 141).
This connotes a misperception that small countries are feeble and incapable of impacting the international order (Krasner, 1983). Contrary to this
belief, these players are in fact able to conduct their own ES against more
powerful peers. In short, the former can work together and collectively
affect multilateral frameworks to advance their ES to bolster their clout
in specific issue areas.
Given the rising importance and proliferation of ES in East Asia as well
as the literature gaps, this paper investigates small nations’ roles in the
development of multilateral cooperative frameworks. Using the ES lens, it
explores how these countries leverage these schemes to push forward
their ES. The main argument is that regional states collectively craft the
terms of multilateral economic agreements to galvanise their clout over
certain governance areas. I validate this argument by using the case of
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), which is a free
trade agreement (FTA) among the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and five ASEAN Dialogue Partners (i.e. Australia,
China, Japan, New Zealand, and South Korea).
RCEP was chosen to verify the article’s argument for the following
reasons. First, the pact’s significance stems from the fact that it is the
world’s largest FTA to date. RCEP forms the combined market of 2.3 billion
people or 30 percent of the world’s population and contributes to 30
percent of global GDP (Tan et al., 2020). This arrangement is estimated
to add US$500–504 billion and US$186–209 billion to the 2030 world’s
trade and income respectively (Petri & Plummer, 2020). Second, this bloc’s
impact on the global economy will likely increase over time because its
accession clause allows any state or separate customs territory to join
after RCEP enters into force. It is also a ‘living document’ which can be
amended or upgraded to become a key FTA setting international standards.
Accordingly, RCEP has potentials to alter the future international trade
and trade-related rules as well as the global trading system. Moreover,
this FTA is a platform where the Southeast Asian nations (i.e. ‘regional
states’) interact with powerful extra-regional stakeholders. It is also part
of trade regionalism where inter-state contestation looms large (Solis et al.
2009). As Ravenhill (2010) observes, the proliferation of the post-Asian
Financial Crisis economic arrangements in East Asia was propelled more
by strategic calculations than economic ones. In short, such burgeoning

1122

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

was caused by a ‘political domino effect’, reflecting states’ deliberate use
of these pacts to boost their ES in international economic governance.
Thus, RCEP is a contemporary case enabling me to probe into small state’s
employment of institutional means to execute their ES.
The paper is organised as follows. The second part discusses the related
literatures and identifies gaps in these previous works to exemplify how
my study can advance the existing research. This is followed by the third
part outlining the conceptual framework. The fourth section covers the
methodology such as data collection and method of analysis. The fifth
part features the development of RCEP and its components confirming
the argument. In the nutshell, it shows how the ASEAN member states
moulded some specific details of this scheme to perform their ES vis-à-vis
the non-ASEAN stakeholders. The sixth and final section concludes and
explores future research opportunities.

II. Previous works on small states’ economic Statecraft
My research extends the literatures and makes academic contributions in
several ways. First, with respect to the works on ES, they overwhelmingly
focus on great or middle powers (Drezner, 2019; Lim, Ferguson, & Bishop,
2020; Thurbon and Weiss 2021). A recent example is the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP) spearheaded by the United States (US) (Parker & Sofio,
2017). The analyses of currency internationalisation reveal that in an
attempt to bolster their monetary power, Japan, Germany, and China
actively propagated the use of the Yen, Deutsche Mark and Renminbi
outside their borders (Cohen, 2018). Unlike these studies, this article seeks
to shed light on small states’ conduct of their ES which is characteristically
different from what executed by great or middle powers. Doing so will
further enhance theoretical formulation and understanding of ES employed
by different kinds of countries.
A handful of studies on small nations’ ES deserves mentioning. For
instance, Hoadley (2008) demonstrated that Thailand’s cross-regional FTAs
were partly fueled by the desire to elevate its international status through
trade diplomacy. Moreover, Singapore’s bilateral FTA policy was part of
the city-state’s responses to the security threats posed by its close neighbors, Indonesia and Malaysia (Lee, 2012). In the realm of monetary statecraft, small nations have leeway to manage the challenges of the ‘Impossible
Trinity’.1 Instead of giving up their monetary sovereignty by fixing its
currency to Germany’s Deutsch Mark as Austria did, Canada imposed
capital controls so that it could maintain its monetary policy autonomy
(Pauly, 2006). These works’ richness notwithstanding, they tend to investigate small states’ ES through their individual actions, leaving cooperation
among them unexplored. My paper strives to extend this research strand
by focusing on how these stakeholders work together within international
institutional frameworks to carry out their ES.

The Pacific Review

1123

Most extant literatures pertaining to small countries’ use of institutional
means to perform their ES come from the International Relations (IR) field.
These scholars often relied on military and security cases for their analyses.
The oft-cited strategies in this discipline are institutional hedging and
institutional balancing (Braveboy-Wagner, 2010). Institutional hedging is an
act of leveraging institutional tools to ‘cultivate a middle position that
forestalls or avoids having to choose one side at the obvious expense of
another’ (Goh, 2005, p. 2). Institutional balancing happens when states
resort to the mechanisms to counter a threat. It can be carried out by
including the threat in the schemes (i.e. inclusive institutional balancing)
or excluding it from the schemes (i.e. exclusive institutional balancing) (He,
2008). The inception of the ASEAN Regional Forum attested to the regional
state’s inclusive institutional balancing against China (He, 2015). The
Organization’s adoption of Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN)
could be viewed as exclusive institutional balancing as it results in equal
exclusion of non-ASEAN players in regional security architectures (Acharya
& Tan, 2005, p. 44). Although these studies draw valuable insights, they
have little examined how small states’ institutional responses are in the
economic realm. Hence, my article seeks to fill this literature gap by probing
into how small nations leverage multilateral economic frameworks to undertake their ES. Such analysis not only augments our broad understanding
of these countries’ roles in shaping the international economic order, but
also cultivates inter-disciplinary research between the IR and IPE fields.

III. Conceptual framework—how do small states achieve
inclusive institutional balancing?
One may wonder: Why do the regional states opt for institutional means?
Thanks to the increased number of post-World War II international institutions, lesser powers have more avenues to affect the international system
than before. Taking an institutional path permits them to perform their
balancing act vis-à-vis their more powerful counterparts (i.e. ‘targets’) in
the following ways. First, institutional procedures and rules constrain the
target’s influence over small countries. These processes allow the latter to
punch above their weight which is otherwise impossible given their scant
capabilities. For instance, at the United Nations (UN) Climate Change
Summit in Copenhagen, small parties leaned on the consensus decision-making rule to block the deal colluded by major powers namely
Brazil, China, India, and the US (Monheim, 2016).
Also, small players use multilateral frameworks to decrease transaction
costs and collectively bargain to dampen the target’s power. These costs
incurred on individual small states can be exorbitant. Illustratively, the costs
of collecting and analysing the target’s information and planning to dilute
its clout are prohibitive to these stakeholders. Therefore, joining multilateral
institutions makes the latter ably pool together their resources. Doing so

1124

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

not only reduces transaction costs but also invigorates their combined
capacity to counter the target (Keohane, 1988). At the talks to create the
International Trade Organization (ITO) illustrates, Latin American countries
banded together to confront the US and press for a development approach.
The outcome was in their favour. Washington finally gave in at the Havana
Conference by adding protection and development quotas as well as reasons
to limit imports (Daunton, 2010, p. 73–74). Likewise, Lee (2009) found that
four small economies—Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali—formed the
grouping to shape the cotton negotiation at the World Trade Organization
(WTO). By synchronising their diplomatic capacities and strategies during
the Doha Round, they were able to reap concessions from larger
Western powers.
How do the regional states leverage institutional means to advance
their ES? In several circumstances, greater powers wield their clout or are
perceived to exercise their influence over small nations, entailing the
existence of an actual or perceived threat. Consequently, the latter tend
to adopt institutional balancing (rather than institutional hedging) against
the target (Pitakdumrongkit, 2022).
As mentioned above, small countries may undertake inclusive institutional
balancing which involves incorporating the target as a member of a multilateral framework and devising rules to limit its power. There exist different
ways of crafting the institutional rules to reach this end. First, the regional
states design rules to put them at the core or centre of cooperation. Being
the core matters in determining outcomes. For one thing, it grants these
nations greater say in deciding on not only the contents (e.g. focus and
scope of collaboration) but also processes (e.g. decision-making procedures).
It also facilitates coalition formation by the regional states within the framework, entailing resource pooling and joint mobilisation of the shared
resources. As a result, they are able to push back on major power’s influence
and cut better deals than they separately can (Chasek, 2005).
Why do other powers let the regional states be the core of wider
cooperation? The latter utilise several methods to extract buy-ins from the
former. For instance, they resort to precedents. Previous practices are used
to develop what Thomas Schelling (1960) calls ‘a focal point’ guiding
players to arrive at an agreed solution to a problem. In some circumstances, a precedent serves as an anchor or benchmark for parties to
devise the details of subsequent contracts (Castle, 2022). Consequently,
these stakeholders relying on preceding agreement terms are found to
tip negotiation results in their favour. For instance, Singapore effectively
convinced the Bush Administration to sign a trade deal with it even though
such agreement yielded little economic benefits to Washington. The citystate argued that this bilateral contract would serve as a template which
the latter could use to expand trade liberalisation with other Asian economies (Crump, 2006). In a similar vein, Chile used its prior financial services
arrangement with the European Union (EU) to oppose the US demands.
By citing the treaty, the former pressed Washington to accept the term

The Pacific Review

1125

that allows the former to require the American banks’ capital commitment
before the entities’ establishment in Chile (Crump, 2011).
On other occasions, the regional states lean on pre-existing principles
or norms of an organisation to get the buy-ins (Laatikainen & Smith, 2017).
These players act as norm entrepreneurs promoting institutional principles
(Panke, 2012a). Their ability to affect outcomes heightens when their
behavior converges with the principles or norms they advocate (Björkdahl,
2008, p. 137). The study of the 20-year history of Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) culminates that the Southeast Asian governments
effectively leveraged the pact’s pre-existing norms to push back against
the new ones advocated by the US. To articulate, the latter sought to
transform the APEC’s existing principles of non-legalisation and informality
into legalisation and formalisation. Contrary to the logics of a hegemonic
stability theory, Washington was unable to change the grouping’s norms
as it desired. The regional economies safeguarded the continued use of
informal and non-legal principles. As a result, APEC participation has always
been voluntary and non-binding (Terada, 2013).
Alternatively, the regional states utilise the concept of neutrality. They
capitalise on other stakeholders’ perception of them being neutral players
or honest brokers amidst tensions or rivalries among other powers. Browning
(2006)’s analysis found that these states’ clout in international affairs increased
when they successfully connected their smallness with terms such as ‘honest
broker’ and ‘option for peace’. Neutrality can be earned by, among others,
refraining from joining alliances with great powers (Almezaini & Rickli, 2016),
taking advantage of their geographic distance from and lack of strategic
importance to powerful nations (Berthelon & Freund, 2008; Feyrer, 2009),
and appearing non-threatening against the backdrop of international power
clashes (Wohlforth, De Carvalho, Leira, & Neumann, 2018). For example,
Denmark utilised its impartiality to revise the definition of Vodka in the EU
legislation. Unlike Finland, Sweden and Poland, the country did not possess
a strong Vodka industry. It was thus viewed a neutral party in crafting the
law. Capitalising on its status, Copenhagen successfully introduced the narrow definition of Vodka as drinks which ingredients are confined to cereals
and potatoes (Panke, 2012b).
To sum up, the regional states conduct institutional inclusive balancing
to pursue their collective ES. They do so by altering the agreement components permitting them to be the core of cooperative frameworks.
Therefore, the first hypothesis is:
Hypothesis 1: To achieve inclusive intuitional balancing, the regional states make
or amend rules to put themselves at the core of regional cooperation.

Insights from the Negotiation Analysis discipline illuminates that the
chairs of negotiations play a significant role in shaping institutional outcomes (Pitakdumrongkit, 2015a). The regional states are found to take
advantage of their chair power to alter international agreement terms in
several ways. First, chairs have power to set agendas or impose deadlines,

1126

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

impacting final results. For example, Seychelles while chairing the UN’s
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia organised two plenary
sessions which set directions of constructing the global ocean governance
(Bueger & Wivel, 2018). Likewise, Ireland when serving as the UN Security
Council (UNSC)’s President in 2001 advanced issues such as peace-building
in Burundi, Somalia, and Democratic Republic of the Congo which were
not originally on the body’s agenda (Thorhallsson, 2012). Acting as the
co-facilitators of the UN Rio + 20 process, Ireland and Kenya together
drafted an elements paper to drive discussions on sustainable development
and set deadlines to reap concessions from dissenting stakeholders. In
the end, the latter conceded and endorsed the 2015 Addis Ababa Action
Agenda (Dodds, Donoghue, & Roesch, 2016, chapter 3).
Also, chairs manage bargaining dynamics by controlling the tempo of
discussions and deciding the order of who speaks at meetings. In this
way, they keep the debates focused and dwindle the chance of dispute
escalation (Holmes, Schnurr, & Marra, 2007). Moreover, chairs tend to have
greater access to information about other negotiators’ preferences than
non-chairing participants. They then take advantage of their privileged
access to the data to reach their own objectives (Tallberg, 2010). In other
cases, chairs’ power lies in their authority over venue selection. Because
different discussion fora beget dissimilar negotiation intricacies, chairs
tend to pick the platforms that raise the probability of achieving what
they aspire. For instance, Pitakdumrongkit (2015b) found that Thailand
as the coordinator of ASEAN-China relations deliberately held the ASEANChina Senior Officials’ Meeting Retreat in October 2012 to revive the
dialogues over the South China Sea. Because the Retreat was an informal
gathering, the stakeholders were open to voice their concerns. Bangkok’s
activism was one of the key factors contributing to the first formal negotiation of the Code of Conduct of the South China Sea between the
ASEAN members and Beijing in September 2013.
In addition, chairs act as a mediator when conflicts arise and settle
clashes among disputing parties (Blavoukos & Bourantonis, 2011, p. 654).
For instance, when the WTO was preparing for the Doha Round, its members’ interests were so divergent that the delegates failed to reach a
common ground. The Chair of WTO General Council in 2001 intervened
by presenting a single negotiating text reconciling their differing preferences. The WTO members ultimately arrived at the agreed agenda for the
Doha Round (Odell, 2015). Similarly, Malta used its EU Presidency to
address the other members’ sensitivities concerning fisheries rules and
regulations and brokered a general approach for the bloc’s ocean governance arrangements such as the North Sea Multiannual Plan and the
Sustainable Management of External Fishing Fleets (Politico, 2017).
To summarise, the regional states realise their inclusive institutional
balancing by designing rules that appoint them as chairs of the talks. This
position’s authority enables these nations to alter the development of
regional governance architectures. Consequently, the second hypothesis is:

The Pacific Review

1127

Hypothesis 2: To achieve inclusive intuitional balancing, the regional states make
or amend rules to appoint one or more regional states as the chair(s) of the
negotiations.

The regional states’ inclusive institutional balancing is sometimes accomplished by crafting rules that maintain the participation of other external
powers or open room for the latter’s future partake. This is in line with the
‘borrowing power’ proposition contending that in asymmetrical interactions,
lesser powers add other nations into cooperative frameworks so that the
former can lean on the latter’s clout to check the target (Zartman & Rubin,
2000). Borrowing power can be realised in multiple ways. First, it can be
done through representation. For example, Jordan as an UNSC elected member facilitated the adoption of the Resolution 2216 in 2015. To elaborate,
the state borrowed power from Saudi Arabia by acting as the latter’s representative. Subsequently, Amman effectively pressed the UNSC to endorse
this Resolution demanding the end of violence in Yemen and enforcement
of sanctions on individuals undermining Yemen’s stability (Osorio, 2016).
Borrowing power can be attained through a shelter method. Shelter is
an alliance relationship where the regional states compensate their structural vulnerabilities by partnering with powerful nations or joining the
latter in specific like-minded coalitions within international institutions
(Bailes, Thayer, & Thorhallsson, 2016). For instance, Qatar and the United
Arab Emirates banded with Saudi Arabia to manage the power interplay
between Iran and Iraq. Doha and Abu Dhabi also fostered ties with
Washington to evade Riyadh’s sphere of influence (Almezaini & Rickli, 2016).
Alternatively, the regional states adopt their shelter approach within
an organisation. This is usually driven by fear of retaliation by the target.
It is because their alliances with another power outside institutional frameworks can trigger the target’s revenge (Gvalia, Siroky, Lebanidze, & Iashvili,
2013). On the contrary, when they do it through international cooperative
mechanisms, they can utilise the ‘institutional veils’ to conceal their actions
from the target. If the target questions their moves, they can justify by
claiming that they are outvoted by the majority. Doing so gives them
some leeway to weaken the target without getting hit back by the latter.
Evidence exposes that small nations forming a coalition with middle powers in the institutional settings are able to push back against the target
(Hampson & Reid, 2003). For example, small UN members joined the LikeMinded Group with middle powers to push the discourses of creating the
International Criminal Court amidst the objections by China, France, Russia,
the UK, and the US. This eventually resulted in the actual establishment
of this mechanism in 1998 (Deitelhoff, 2009). At WTO, small economies
rode on India’s clout in the Group of 33 (G-33) and India-Brazil partnership
in the Group of 202 to bargain against the US and EU and safeguard the
developing world’s interests. In other words, G-33 secured the list of special
products exempted from tariff cuts and the clause granting its parties
power to reinstall protectionism under import surges. Similarly, the Group

1128

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

of 20 established the tiered subsidy reduction scheme demanding the
WTO members with greater subsidisation (e.g. the EU and the US) to
execute deeper cuts than those with lesser protection (Hopewell, 2015).
To conclude, the regional states implement inclusive institutional balancing by incorporating other nations into cooperative frameworks. The
former thus borrow the latter’s power to push back against the target.
Hence, the third hypothesis is:
Hypothesis 3: To achieve inclusive intuitional balancing, the regional states make
or amend rules to allow the participation or future participation of other powers
that check the target’s clout.

4. Methodology
I conducted this research using process tracing as the method of analysis.
Process tracing is ‘the technique of looking for the observable implications
of hypothesized causal processes… within a single case’ (Bennett, 2010,
p. 750). Relying on this approach, I was able to establish causal pathways
and reconstruct a phenomenon to test the hypotheses (Beach & Pedersen,
2013). In a nutshell, I used process tracing to shed light on how Southeast
Asian nations executed their inclusive institutional balancing to advance
their ES in trade regionalism.
The archival examination of official documents such as joint statements,
meetings’ reports, newspaper articles, and press releases was carried out
to unveil how these players moulded specific RCEP terms to perform their
inclusive institutional balancing. In-depth interviews with government
officers, academicians, and thinktank experts involved in the talks took
place from September 2021 to April 2022. The information extracted from
the interviews were cross-validated with relevant archival data to buttress
the analysis. Due to the sensitive nature of the issues discussed (e.g.
countries’ strategic calculations, tactics wielded against other states), all
informants were promised confidentiality.

5. Analysis
5.1. Non-ASEAN stakeholders’ policies regarding Asia-Pacific trade
regionalism
Before delving into how the regional states jointly shaped certain elements
of the RCEP text to execute their inclusive institutional balancing, let us
probe into the non-ASEAN parties views of Asia-Pacific trade regionalism.
In this realm, two powers—China and Japan—stood out. It was mainly
because they attempted to assume their leadership in building Asia-Pacific
multilateral trade governance. With regard to China, FTAs are among the
items in its toolbox deployed to exploit its ES. Beijing wanted to take a lead
in building regional trade architectures. This was reflected by its support of

The Pacific Review

1129

the East Asian Free Trade Agreement (EAFTA). EAFTA was envisaged to be a
trade arrangement among ten ASEAN member states together with China,
Japan, and South Korea. In short, this scheme is based on the ASEAN + 3
process established after the Asian Financial Crisis and was originally introduced by the East Asia Vision Group in 2001. Beijing’s advocacy of EAFTA
clearly manifested when it chaired the Joint Expert Group for Feasibility Study
on EAFTA in 2005–2006. This entity conducted the feasibility examination on
EAFTA and delivered the report containing plans to realise it to the ASEAN
+ 3 Economic Ministers in June 2009 (Rillo, Robeniol, & Buban, 2022, p. 2–2).
In a similar vein, Japan aspired to lead the construction of regional trade
architectures. As part of its ES from 2000s onwards, it strived to expand its
influence in crafting trade liberalisation rules (Govella, 2021). Tokyo shepherded an alternative modality to an Asia-Pacific-wide FTA formation.
Illustratively, it introduced the Comprehensive Economic Partnership of East
Asia (CEPEA) in August 2006 which was subsequently presented to the 2nd
East Asia Summit (EAS) in January 2007. The CEPEA idea is based on the
EAS framework where ASEAN + 6 nations (i.e. ten ASEAN member states,
Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, and South Korea) convened to
discuss cooperation on various issues ranging from health to finance. Like
EAFTA, the study group was set up to undertake the feasibility analyses.
This body submitted the report outlining the details of economic liberalisation via CEPEA to the ASEAN + 6 governments in July 2009. Seeing ASEAN
+ 6 as a suitable platform to deepen regional economic integration, the
Japanese authorities ardently propagated CEPEA (Kawai & Wignaraja, 2008).
Unlike Beijing and Tokyo, the other non-ASEAN nations did not clearly
seek to lead in developing Asia-Pacific-wide multilateral trade governance.
With respect to India, it rolled out the ‘Look East Policy’ (LEP) during the
pre-RCEP time. While LEP’s first phase (1991–2002) focused solely on
Southeast Asia, the second phase (2003 onwards) encompassed Australia
and East Asia. Such stance was stipulated by the then-External Affairs
Minister Yashwant Sinha’s speech at Harvard University in 2003. He stressed
that the next step ‘of this policy is characterised by an expanded definition
of “East”, extending from Australia to East Asia, with ASEAN at its core’
(Ministry of External Affairs of India, 2003). One goal of LEP is economic
integration with Australia and East Asia. Instead of going for an Asia-Pacific
wide FTA, New Delhi pursued bilateral arrangements to reach this objective
(Haokip, 2011). Some examples include the India-Singapore FTA in 2005,
India-ASEAN FTA in 2009, and India-Japan Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement in 2011.
As far as South Korea is concerned, it did not step up to drive an AsiaPacific wide FTA. Its FTA strategy during 2000s instead concentrated on
securing bilateral deals rather than multilateral trading blocs. For instance,
it inked trade pacts with Singapore in 2005, the US in 2007, and India and
the EU in 2009. Strategic calculations often underpin its trade deals. The
United States-Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS) is a case in point. Seoul
leaned on KORUS to deepen cooperation with Washington on non-economic

1130

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

matters especially North Korea’s nuclear proliferation (Lee & Moon, 2009).
In addition to its bilateral arrangements, Seoul together with Beijing and
Tokyo envisioned a trilateral China-Japan-Korea FTA (CJK FTA). At the 5th
Trilateral Summit in May 2012, the trio pledged to begin negotiating the
CJK FTA by the end of 2012 (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, 2012). The
first round was launched in 2013. Seoul regarded this trilateral pact as a
tool to enhance ties with its Northeast Asian neighbours and complement
the EAFTA and CEPEA ideas for larger economic integration (Nicolas, 2012).
Australia’s and New Zealand’s strategy towards Asia-Pacific trade regionalism prior to RCEP tended to focus on the US-led TPP. Australis’s main
goal was to be involved in the rule-writing of a new generation of regional
FTAs that are high standard. The struggling Doha Round partly accounted
for Canberra’s desire to find alternative trade liberalisation routes. The
government viewed that TPP enlarges the supply chains by linking production networks and markets from economies to the East with those to
the West, yielding greater economic benefits to Australia. The country also
recognised the ongoing debates about different modalities of an AsiaPacific wide FTA involving ASEAN but chose not to place its bets on them.
The 2008 Report published by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
mentioned the notions of EAFTA, CEPEA, and the Free Trade Area of the
Asia-Pacific (FTAAP). Nevertheless, it concludes that ‘the launch of formal
negotiations for any of these possible agreements is highly unlikely in the
short term’ (Mortimer, 2008, p. 93). Unsurprisingly, Canberra concentrated
on TPP. It announced to join the negotiation in November 2008 (Interview 1).
Like Australia, New Zealand focused on TPP. It was a signatory to the
TPP predecessor named the 2006 Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic
Agreement (TPSEC) or ‘P4’ agreement with Brunei, Chile, Singapore. Also
similar to Canberra, Wellington saw TPP as the most promising avenue to
propel trade liberalisation (Elms & Lim, 2012). Washington’s partake in TPP
in September 2008 elevated the importance of this arrangement to New
Zealand’s economy. The remarks by the then-Trade Minister Phil Goff
embodied the state’s excitement of this development. He posited that ‘[s]
ecuring an FTA negotiation with the U.S., the world’s largest economy,
has been a key trade objective for more than decade’ (Gibson, 2008).

5.2. Advancing ES via RCEP
Let us now turn to the ASEAN members’ vision of an Asia-Pacific-wide
FTA. The Organization has five separate ASEAN + 1 FTAs with the Plus-6
countries—i.e. Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, and South
Korea. To further deepen regional economic integration, the Southeast
Asian stakeholders could have upgraded these existing contracts. So, why
did they decide to go for RCEP instead of the FTA upgrades?
The analysis exemplifies that these players strived to advance their ES
to counteract other powers’ clout in regional trade governance. Such
concerns over comprehensive security motivated the ASEAN members to

The Pacific Review

1131

undertake their collective ES through RCEP. The notion of comprehensive
security focuses on the interconnectedness between security and economic
development, and encompasses both traditional and non-traditional security. Hence, these stakeholders address non-traditional security issues which
may undercut their survival prospects (Foot & Goh, 2019). In this way,
comprehensive security contains economic security which refers to a condition under which states ensure ‘the integrity or robustness of the market
to generate growth and welfare in society’ (Nesadurai, 2005, p. 14).
Accordingly, the Southeast Asian nations’ desire to achieve comprehensive security compels them to sustain or enhance their economic security.
One way to do so is through trade arrangements because they provide
access to foreign markets, increasing the regional states’ exports and overall
economic growth. Consequently, these players seek to influence the agreement details to ensure that the latter bring growth and welfare to their
economies (Interview 4).3 As far as region-wide trade rule-writing is concerned, their ultimate goal was to work together to ‘remain the central
hub of East Asian FTA development’ (Okano-Heijmans, 2014) and build a
multilateral FTA that is ASEAN-led (Interview 3). In short, they aspired to
be key players crafting the components of RCEP. The stakes were high.
Their leadership in this trade rule-making would increase a chance that
RCEP would boost growth and welfare to their countries, hence realising
their economic security.
China’s and Japan’s activism outlined above terrified the Southeast Asian
governments. To recap, both Northeast Asian nations pushed forward their
own ideas about Asia-Pacific trade governance. This sparked the apprehension shared by the regional states that Beijing and Tokyo would eclipse
the former’s influence in affecting the rules. Put differently, if the rules
were to be dominantly concocted by these two powers, the ASEAN members feared that they would lose their leadership in trade regionalism.
This would subsequently shrink their policy sovereignty or space, crippling
their ability to sustain or strengthen their economic security. Overall, the
ASEAN nations identified Beijing and Tokyo as threats to their leadership
pursuit of the region-wide FTA development (Interview 3, 4).
Responding to the threats, the Southeast Asian governments employed
collective ES in a form of inclusive institutional balancing against the
targets—i.e. China and Japan (Interview 3).4 Such balancing was done via
RCEP as manifested by its following elements: (1) counter-proposal of the
RCEP framework based on ASEAN Centrality concept; and (2) the selection
of the Chair of Trade Negotiation Committee (TNC) and the Chair’s power
over Intellectual Property (IP) and Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS)
matters; and (3) Special Accession Clause for India.

5.2.1. Embeddedness of the ASEAN Centrality
The Southeast Asian governments’ push for the RCEP modality to counter
China’s and Japan’s influence over regional trade governance corroborates

1132

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

Hypothesis 1. As shown above, Beijing and Tokyo in the pre-RCEP years
tried to impact the rule-writing of Asia-Pacific-wide trade architectures as
part of their ES. Both powers championed their own frameworks—EAFTA
by China and CEPEA by Japan respectively.
While the ASEAN stakeholders perceived an Asia-Pacific-wide FTA to be
commercially desirable, they recognised both powers’ underlying intention
which was to take a lead in writing regional trade rules. This arrangement
could become another means for Beijing and Tokyo to wield their ES
against the regional states, undercutting the latter’s interests and economic
security. Therefore, the Southeast Asian governments responded to the
moves of China and Japan (i.e. targets) by employing inclusive intuitional
balancing. Why did they choose this approach? It was mainly because to
further deepen regional economic integration and supply chains, one
cannot evade Beijing and Tokyo. They were respectively ASEAN’s single
biggest and second single biggest trading partners at the time when RCEP
talk was about to begin. For example, from 2011 to 2013, ASEAN’s merchandise trade with China and Japan accounted for 12.3–13.9 percent and
9.5–10.7 percent of the former’s total trade with the world (ASEAN
Secretariat 2020, p. 57). Such economic significance eliminated an option
of exclusive institutional balancing. In sum, the creation of an Asia-Pacificwide FTA cannot be realised without the Chinese and Japanese partake.
The ASEAN members therefore decided to incorporate both extra-regional
powers into a trade governance architecture, and hence undertook inclusive institutional balancing (Interview 2, 7).
The regional states’ deployment of inclusive institutional balancing was
as follows. First, instead of choosing between EAFTA and CEPEA or being
caught up in the debate, they in November 2011 counter-proposed the
‘Initiative on Speeding up the Establishment of an East Asia Free-Trade
Area and Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia’ which was a
RCEP predecessor. The Initiative includes both Beijing and Tokyo, reflecting
ASEAN’s attempt to incorporate the former into the scheme to check their
clout (Interview 5). Second, this Initiative established ASEAN as a core of
wider regional integration. Consequently, the Southeast Asian authorities
endorsed the ASEAN Framework for Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership at the 19th ASEAN Summit in November 2011.
The Framework serves a few functions. First, it provides a set of guidelines for consolidating the existing ASEAN + 1 FTAs, effectively ending the
EAFTA-CEPEA parley. Second, it implants ASEAN leadership in the making
of the Asia-Pacific-wide FTA. According to the text, the Southeast Asian
authorities agreed to ‘establish an ASEAN-led process by setting out principles under which ASEAN will engage interested ASEAN FTA partners in
establishing a regional comprehensive economic partnership agreement’
(ASEAN 2011). Moreover, it gives an opportunity for the regional states
to slot in the ASEAN Centrality concept. In other words, this Framework
paved a way for concocting the next document, The Guiding Principles
and Objectives for Negotiating the Regional Comprehensive Economic

The Pacific Review

1133

Partnership, outlining the goals and practices pertaining to RCEP negotiations. Adopted at the 21st ASEAN Summit in November 2012, the Guiding
Principles and Objectives stipulates that the talks ‘will recognize ASEAN
Centrality in the emerging regional economic architecture’ (ASEAN, 2012).
It should be noted that ASEAN Centrality is not a new concept. Rather,
it has been in the ASEAN’s playbook concerning its interactions with nonASEAN players over half of the century. The post-Cold War period marked
the time when the Organization not only underwent its membership
expansion but also increasingly engaged non-ASEAN stakeholders. The
notion has over time become a main approach that the Organization
adopts to conduct its external relations until today.
ASEAN Centrality appears in several official documents. For example,
Article 1 of the ASEAN Charter stipulates that one of the purposes of the
Organization is to ‘maintain the centrality and proactive role of ASEAN as
the primary driving force in its relations and cooperation with its external
partners in a regional architecture that is open, transparent and inclusive’
(ASEAN Secretariat 2008, p. 5). The idea is also mentioned in the texts
pertaining to ASEAN Economic Community 2025 (AEC 2025) which is the
Organization’s economic integration project. The AEC 2025 Blueprint specifying a roadmap and policy actions to be undertaken to deepen the
integration postulates that ASEAN Community-Building strives to ‘[r]einforce
ASEAN centrality in the emerging regional economic architecture by maintaining ASEAN’s role as the centre and facilitator of economic integration
in the East Asian region’ (ASEAN Secretariat 2015, p. 2). Despite no consensus on its definition, ASEAN Centrality could be understood as the
Organization’s roles as both a process facilitator (e.g. supplying discussion
platforms) and initiator of substance (e.g. designing agreement elements)
(Fukunaga 2015). Being a process facilitator, ASEAN provides fora where
the ASEAN members and external powers discuss international and regional
issues and find ways to jointly address them. This is manifested by various
ASEAN-Plus mechanisms such ASEAN Regional Forum, ASEAN Defence
Ministers’ Meeting-Plus, and ASEAN + 3 Financial Cooperation Process.
Speaking of ASEAN as an initiator of substance, ASEAN Centrality links to
the notion of leadership. The Organization plays a role as the leader or
driver of wider regionalism (Jones, 2010; Sukma, 2010). This view highlights
the agency of the Organization in setting cooperation agendas and affecting outcomes. As Stubbs (2014, p. 524) precisely captures, in ‘East Asia,
despite the presence of two major powers in the region, Japan and China,
as well as the continuing influence of the United States, it has been the
members of ASEAN that have led the way in building East Asian regional
cooperation.’ With respect to RCEP, this idea was activated to help the
Organization perform inclusive institutional balancing and assume leadership in pushing forward Asia-Pacific trade governance.
Why did Beijing and Tokyo—the ones championing different Asia-Pacificwide trade liberalisation modalities—let the regional states have their
way? Several factors explained this phenomenon. First, both countries

1134

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

abided by the pre-existing principle of having the ASEAN Centrality
ingrained in multilateral schemes. The previous precedents reinforced their
upholding of the Centrality notion in RCEP (Interview 5). Second, the RCEP
modality makes economic sense. The transaction costs required to realise
an Asia-Pacific-wide FTA (e.g. resources needed to collect information and
conduct negotiation) was deemed to be lower if it is built upon the
existing foundations—i.e. ASEAN + 1 FTAs—than otherwise. Moreover, a
few structural contexts provided room for the Southeast Asian governments to have more agency in the RCEP development. For instance, China
and Japan locked horns in their endeavors to lead the construction of an
Asia-Pacific-wide trade pact. Both rejected the model promoted by the
other. In contrast, ASEAN was seen as a neutral player. As a result, the
Sino-Japanese rivalry and these states’ views on the Organization entailed
that Beijing and Tokyo eventually converged on the ASEAN-proffered idea
of RCEP (Interview 6). Another structural context involved the US-China
competition on the trade governance front. Because the TPP was the trade
arm of the Obama Administration’s ‘Rebalance to Asia’, China saw it as
Washington’s tool to encircle its ascendancy. Staying outside TPP, Beijing
construed that its RCEP membership (even though this modality is ASEANled) could alleviate some adverse impact of the US-led trade arrangement
on its economy. This thinking resulted that Premier Wen Jiabo declared
the state’s support of RCEP at the 7th EAS in November 2012 (Qin, Li, &
Li, 2012). Likewise, Japan embraced RCEP. Navigating the Sino-American
power dynamics, the country (which is a signatory to both TPP and RCEP)
viewed that it could pursue these two initiatives in tandem. In short, Tokyo
can simultaneously lean on RCEP to tighten its economic ties with Beijing
as well as utilise TPP to impede the Chinese clout (Govella, 2021).
Consequently, both Beijing and Tokyo finally lent their support to the
ASEAN’s idea of Asia-Pacific trade regionalism.
To summarise, the regional states executed their inclusive institutional
balancing by counter-proposing RCEP which is built upon the existing
ASEAN + 1 FTA networks as well as activating the ASEAN Centrality notion
to undergird this framework. Doing so allowed the Southeast Asian countries to be the core of Asia-Pacific-wide FTA construction and influence
the shaping of the other agreement aspects.

5.2.2. The Chair of trade negotiation Committee (TNC): appointment
and power
The incorporation of the ASEAN Centrality into RCEP enabled the Southeast
Asian stakeholders to affect the other RCEP details. One example is the
appointment of the Chair of the Trade Negotiation Committee (TNC) who
played a key role in affecting the final outcomes, verifying Hypothesis 2.
With the Centrality concept already invoked, the Southeast Asian authorities further capitalised on it by jointly nominating an ASEAN person, Mr.
Iman Pambagyo of Indonesia, as the permanent TNC Chair presiding over

The Pacific Review

1135

all RCEP talks. Although the negotiation of each chapter was co-chaired by
two parties which were an ASEAN member state and a Plus-6 nation, the
TNC Chair was always Mr. Pambagyo overseeing the whole negotiation
(Elms, 2021). The Southeast Asian officers convinced their Plus-6 counterparts
that because RCEP is an ASEAN-led scheme, it hence should have an ASEAN
person as the TNC Chair. They also argued that Mr. Pambagyo played a
pivotal role in formulating the ASEAN-led FTA during the pre-RCEP years.
Due to his excellent experience and expertise on the subject matter, he
should assume this position (Interview 5). The Plus-6 delegates finally agreed
with ASEAN. According to the non-ASEAN negotiator, the main reasons for
their endorsement were because they abided by the Centrality notion and
had high trust in Mr. Pambagyo. In other words, he was widely revered as
a trade expert who understands the ideas behind the Asia-Pacific trade
architectures. As a result, he was chosen to be the TNC Chair (Interview 8).
This position was crucial in propelling the talks. ‘Mr. Pambagyo patiently
guided the negotiations and provided strong leadership for the region
for 8 years… by ensuring that key decisions were made and bottlenecks
were resolved, particularly in the late rounds when issues became trickier
and political decisions more compelling’ (Rillo et al., 2022, 2–9). In a nutshell, the Chair has power to shape the meeting agendas and control the
tempo of talks. It also possesses authority to decide who speaks first or
even calls for an intermission to prevent disputes from escalating. At the
RCEP negotiation, Mr. Pambagyo exercised his Chair power to manage the
bargaining dynamics on various occasions. Illustratively, when one party’s
remarks triggered discussions on controversial issues, he looked around
the room to observe the other stakeholders’ non-verbal reactions and
tended to give the floor to those deemed to have moderate reactions.
This technique helped maintain the momentum in talks and decrease a
chance of conflicts and deadlock. Mr. Pambagyo sometimes called for
separate meetings with certain dissenting parties to extract their true
preferences in order to identify common ground to move forward the
negotiation (Interview 2).
This Chair’s power also enabled the regional states to safeguard their
interests and thwart China’s and Japan’s clout over the specific RCEP components. One thing that Mr. Pambagyo did was activating the ‘ASEAN Caucus’
which is an internal discussion only among the ASEAN parties prior to,
during (in a form of coffee/tea breaks), or after each round of negotiation.
The Caucus undergirds the regional states’ collective ES. It is a coalition
formation method that the ASEAN members use to obtain the contour of
the talks, identify their shared objectives, and strategise their common
approaches to be deployed at a bargaining table to achieve the goals in
specific negotiation rounds. It is sometimes used to address disagreements
and reconcile different preferences among the ASEAN members. This mechanism thus allowed the latter to haggle collectively, strengthening their
voices and curtailing the Plus-6’s clout over the talks (Interview 5). As one
source observes, ‘[a]cross the more than 29 official negotiating rounds in

1136

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

RCEP, the ASEAN member participants would gather first. Only after a day
(or more) spent in internal caucusing—for every round and every chapter—
would participants meet up as an RCEP group for discussions’ (Elms, 2021).
On some occasions, Mr. Pambagyo summoned the Southeast Asian stakeholders at a Caucus during the coffee breaks where they together settled
their differences and planned their next moves (Interview 3). A non-ASEAN
officer involved in the negotiation recalled that such coalescing method
was never utilised by the Plus-6 nations (Interview 8).
The employment of the ASEAN Caucus yielded some favourable outcomes to the Southeast Asian stakeholders. A case in point was the
Intellectual Property (IP) Chapter. Mr. Pambagyo held the Caucus to identify
the regional states’ common positions. What they aimed to obtain from
the talks were to safeguard their traditional knowledge of indigenous and
local communities, the right to activate the WTO Agreement on TradeRelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) flexibilities, and long
implementation periods. These elements stemmed from the Southeast Asian
governments’ apprehension of being exploited by non-ASEAN established
patent exporters such as Japan and South Korea and emerging IP producers
namely China. If not well-crafted, this Chapter would beget asymmetrical
relations whereby non-ASEAN powers take advantage of their IP supremacy
to wield their clout over their developing Southeast Asian neighbours. For
instance, the IP laws will dwindle a probability that the latter invent their
homegrown technologies and gain access to medicine for their population.
Instead, they will have to depend on innovations concocted by extra-regional powers to provide growth and welfare to their societies. As a result,
this would permit the latter to abuse their power over the former, undermining the former’s economic security (Interview 5).
Thanks to the ASEAN Caucus, the regional states got what they hoped
for. For example, Article 11.53 of RCEP stipulates that ‘each Party may
establish appropriate measures to protect genetic resources, traditional
knowledge, and folklore’ (RCEP 2020, p. 11–27). In other words, this FTA
protects the interests of developing or least developed nations which are
more well-endowed in these assets than IP with industrial qualities (e.g.
manufacturing designs, pharmaceutical patents). Also, Japan and South
Korea initially objected the TRIPS flexibilities (Chander & Sunder, 2018)
but finally gave in partly due to ASEAN’s insistence. As a result, RCEP
ensures access to medicine for public health reasons. Article 11.8 of the
agreement notes that ‘the Parties affirm the right to fully use the flexibilities as duly recognised in the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement
and Public Health’ (RCEP 2020, p. 11–4).
In addition, Japan, South Korea, and New Zealand pressed for more
stringent implementation timelines. However, Cambodia, Laos, and
Myanmar (CLM) found this term infeasible. All ASEAN members banded
together and fought back. They cited the Guiding Principles and Objectives
for Negotiating the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. The
document stresses that ‘[t]aking into consideration the different levels of

The Pacific Review

1137

development of the participating countries, the RCEP will include appropriate forms of flexibility including provision for special and differential
treatment, plus additional flexibility to the least-developed ASEAN Member
States’. (ASEAN, 2012). This ultimately persuaded the Plus-6 parties to
grant CLM longer transitional periods (as appeared in Annex 11 A of the
RCEP text) and agree to provide necessary technical assistance to CLM
for their implementation (as outlined in Annex 11B of the RCEP agreement) (Interview 5; Congressional Research Service, 2021).
Another incident showcasing the Chair’s power was the exclusion of
Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) from the Investment Chapter. This
provision gives foreign investors power to sue host governments in international arbitration tribunals. At a glance, it looks puzzling why RCEP has
no ISDS even though this component was already embedded in most ASEAN
and ASEAN + 1 deals. In other words, it appears in the ASEAN FTA; ASEANAustralia-New Zealand FTA (AANZFTA); ASEAN-China FTA (ACFTA); and
Agreement of Investment Under the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation Among the Governments of the Member Countries
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Republic of Korea.
Nonetheless, evidence unfolds that the elimination of ISDS was caused by
the Southeast Asian nations’ sovereignty concerns. They believed that ISDS
would enable the non-ASEAN stakeholders to protect the latter’s overseas
investment made by their quasi-state actors or non-state actors at the
expense of the regional states’ interests. Put differently, the ASEAN members
viewed that the inclusion of ISDS would invite other powers to exploit them,
undermining their policy sovereignty and economic security. (Interview 3).
The discussions about ISDS began at the early rounds of RCEP negotiation. Japan proposed this clause and successfully garnered support from
the Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) signatories inside the talks. However, some ASEAN members objected. The
disagreeing parties were embroiled in this conflict and the talks reached
stalemate (Interview 7). Mr. Pambagyo intervened by calling the ASEAN
Caucus to find out what made the negotiation stuck. This was when
Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines openly expressed sensitivities
towards the incorporation of ISDS into the agreement. Their stance was
partly borne out of the previous lawsuits against them (Interview 6). The
Southeast Asian authorities eventually arrived at a consensus that ISDS
was a no-go. Mr. Pambagyo then presented this joint position to the Plus-6
delegates. The outcomes were that all stakeholders agreed to drop ISDS
from the Investment Chapter in September 2019 so that they could concluded the negotiation. They also planned to discuss this matter after two
years of RCEP ratification (The Malaysian Reserve, 2019).
In conclusion, the Southeast Asian governments realised inclusive institutional balancing by designing rules concerning the selection of the TNC
Chair. As exemplified by the IP and ISDS stories, the Chair’s power was
exercised to protect the ASEAN members’ economic security and dampen
the prospects of the non-ASEAN nations’ influence in these areas.

1138

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

5.2.3. Special accession clause for India
Another way that the regional states used to carry out inclusive institutional balancing was roping in other powers into RCEP to provide check
on the target, confirming Hypothesis 3. In other words, the Southeast
Asian officers played a key role in devising the Special Accession Clause
for India, securing a route for the country to come back on a later date.
In November 2019, India decided to exit RCEP. Prime Minister Nerendra
Modi remarked at the 3rd RCEP Summit that the pact ‘does not address
satisfactorily India’s outstanding issues and concerns’ (The Economic Times,
2019). This move was both a surprise and disappointment to the other
RCEP participants because the negotiation was about to conclude (Interview
6). The following factors accounted for New Delhi’s last-minute withdrawal.
First, the government was worried that this trade pact would neither protect
its small and medium enterprises nor grant sufficient international labour
mobility to the Information Technology professionals which India enjoys a
comparative advantage (Raghavan, 2020). The second factor involved the
state’s rising trade deficits with the other RCEP economies. Another reason
was geopolitics, especially the intensifying altercation of India-China borders
and the hostility over the Line of Actual Control in the Kashmir region.
Seeing Beijing as its enemy, New Delhi decided to discontinue its trade
talks with China under the RCEP framework (Wang & Sharma, 2021).
After India announced its departure, some Plus-6 delegates were not
shy to exhibit their reluctance to seal the deal. For instance, Australia and
Japan voiced that they saw no benefits of RCEP without New Delhi. Both
Tokyo and Canberra wanted to enter the Indian market. They stressed the
need to recalibrate their cost-benefit analysis and hence did not want to
proceed (Interview 3). The negotiation was on the brink of collapse and
RCEP risked not seeing the light of day.
The Southeast Asian governments could not let the talks fail and dearly
wanted to have India inside RCEP. Economic logics cannot fully explain
this phenomenon. One study reveals that RCEP will be economically significant regardless of India’s involvement (Petri & Plummer, 2020). Without
RCEP, the regional states can nevertheless further liberalise trade with the
latter by upgrading the existing ASEAN-India FTA (AIFTA). Instead, strategic
reasons accounted for the ASEAN members’ desire to keep intact New
Delhi. The Special Accession Clause was ultimately aimed at diluting potential Beijing’s and Tokyo’s leverage in regional trade governance (Interview
6). As earlier mentioned, RCEP is used by the former to undertake inclusive
institutional balancing vis-à-vis extra-regional powers. It is also an ASEANled initiative, enabling the Southeast Asian countries to assume leadership
in shaping regional trade governance. These players believed that by
keeping the door open for India’s return, they could borrow the latter’s
power to hamper China’s and Japan’s dominance (Tay, 2022, p. 26). Also,
because RCEP is a living document which terms can be amended later,
the regional states believed they will have to work with New Delhi to
jointly alter some rules, further galnavising the former’s economic security.

The Pacific Review

1139

The regional states showcased their activism in the crafting of the Clause.
How did they do it? First, these countries discussed among themselves
and reached their common position. They then decided that they would
continue to push for the RCEP conclusion despite doing so risked losing
a few non-ASEAN stakeholders. Also, they came up with the idea of furnishing the fast-track pathway facilitating India’s re-entry. The Southeast
Asian authorities subsequently presented their views to the non-ASEAN
delegates. Moreover, the former tapped on their diplomatic networks by
tasking their ambassadors based in Canberra and Tokyo to convince the
Australian and Japanese governments to stay on board (Interview 3).
The regional states’ determination to wrap up the negotiation was a gamechanger. In brief, it successfully compelled Australia and Japan to return to a
bargaining table. Canberra was driven by its fear of exclusion should it leave
RCEP. It also saw both TPP and RCEP as the jigsaws of FTAAP which would
broaden and deepen economic integration (The Australian Government, 2012,
p. 208). Similarly, Japan re-engaged. It was fueled by its apprehension of
potential China’s dominance over the trade pact. In short, Tokyo trust that its
non-participation would potentially pave a way for Beijing’s supremacy in
regional trade architectures which the former could not accept. Consequently,
Australia and Japan altered their initial stance and were willing to work with
the ASEAN participants to bring back India to this FTA (Interview 8).
Concerning the writing of this Clause, the Southeast Asian authorities
took a lead in setting up the Troika responsible for concocting the components. This grouping comprised Mr. Pambagyo (TNC Chair), Dato Lim Jock
Hoi (ASEAN Secretary General), and the representative from the Japanese
government (Interview 2). The roles of Dato Lim Jock Hoi deserve to be
highlighted. He helmed the ASEAN Secretariat during the last three years
of RCEP talks. The Secretariat under his auspices ensured the ASEAN Centrality
in the negotiation and supported the TNC Chair. On the latter, the mechanism helped maintain the momentum in talks by preparing position papers
and ‘ways forwards’ documents to facilitate the discussions (Rillo et al., 2022,
p. 2–9). With respect to India’s re-admission, the Secretariat assisted the TNC
Chair in fashioning a concept paper containing the terms permitting New
Delhi to rejoin when it is ready. The TNC Chair and ASEAN Secretariat
together roped in Japan to be part of the Troika. This move was underpinned
by the thinking that Japan’s well understanding of India’s demands and
sensitivities would bolster the Troika’s ability to effectively devise the Clause.
Tokyo acquired the information regarding New Delhi’s preferences from the
series of capacity-building programmes it launched for the latter while the
RCEP negotiation was ongoing (Interview 4). The Troika drafted the Special
Clause and pitched it to the remaining RCEP members, and then to India.
The provision was finally accepted by all stakeholders.
To sum up, the Southeast Asian governments’ inclusive institutional
balancing was shown through their leadership in devising the Special
Accession Clause for India. This term facilitates New Delhi’s re-entry,
allowing the regional states to borrow the latter’s clout to check China’s
and Japan’s influence over regional trade governance.

1140

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

At this point, some observers may contend that the outcomes could
be caused by the domestic groups’ actions. In short, companies in
Southeast Asia lobbied their governments to alter the agreement details
granting the former more access to foreign markets. While some terms
reflected businesses’ desire (e.g. tariff reductions), this alternative explanation fails to effectively shed light on the RCEP components above.
For example, if the Southeast Asian authorities had solely wanted greater
market access to non-ASEAN economies, the ASEAN-led RCEP would
not have seen the light of day. Put differently, they could have more
easily and speedily achieved greater market access by upgrading bilateral
FTAs with individual non-ASEAN countries. In other words, they would
not have come up with the RCEP modality and put themselves as the
core and chair of this FTA. With regard to penetrating India’s market, if
economic logics had only driven the negotiation, we would not have
witnessed the insertion of the Special Accession Clause. It is because
gaining more access to New Delhi’s market could be more easily done
through renegotiating AIFTA. Therefore, my line of argument focusing
on ES fares better in terms of shedding light on these RCEP elements.

6. Conclusions
This paper’s analysis of the RCEP agreement has verified the argument
and hypotheses regarding small countries’ use of multilateral frameworks
to bolster their collective ES in certain governance areas. To recap, I have
argued that that the regional states worked together to design the terms
of multilateral economic agreements to boost their influence over regional
economic governance architectures.
I have divulged three pathways that small nations can leverage these
schemes to conduct their inclusive institutional balancing. First, the
Southeast Asian governments were able to craft the rules to make them
the centre of cooperation. Regarding RCEP, they activated the ASEAN
Centrality, hence turning the pact into an ASEAN-led one. Second, these
nations made rules allowing them to be the chair of talks. Riding on the
Centrality principle, they appointed an ASEAN person as the TNC Chair
which subsequently shaped the IP and ISDS details to safeguard their
interests. Finally, the Southeast Asian authorities displayed their activism
in devising the RCEP terms engaging India after its exit, resulting in the
Special Accession Clause for latter.
My analysis has also pointed the roles of structural contexts in facilitating
small countries’ collective ES. In the RCEP case, that Southeast Asian governments effectively extracted buy-ins from their non-ASEAN peers was
partly due to the fragmented power dynamics namely the Sino-Japanese
contestation. Such rivalry provided space for the ASEAN stakeholders to do
what they could in tweaking the RCEP elements in their favour.
This article has enriched research on small states’ strategies toward
their more powerful counterparts. I have shown that collective ES is a
strategy that these nations use to jointly respond to greater powers’

The Pacific Review

1141

threats to their economic security. Illustratively, when other powerful
countries’ actions are construed to threaten their economic security,
they implement collective ES. In my study, the ES is displayed in a form
of inclusive institutional balancing. On reflection, having the concept
of ES enables me to string together the notions of economic security
and institutional balancing better than without it. ES makes the causal
mechanism explaining small states’ responses under threat clearer. Also,
the analysis has applied the concept of institutional balancing mostly
scrutinised by IR scholars to the IPE realm via the case study of a multilateral economic framework, RCEP. Therefore, my paper enhances our
broad understanding of small nations’ roles in affecting the regional
economic order as well as cultivates inter-disciplinary research.
These valuable insights notwithstanding, the article possesses some limitations, necessitating future studies. First, the analysis has little taken into account
the bilateral ties which individual ASEAN parties have with each of the Plus-6
stakeholders in the RCEP negotiation as well as bilateral relations among the
latter. These dynamics happening during the RCEP talks could impact the
development of the agreement details. Illustratively, during the Philippines
President Rodrigo Duterte’s trip to India in 2018, both countries concurred to
invigorate investment facilitation collaboration. The outcomes were the new
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Philippines’ Board of
Investment and Invest India, and the extended MOU between India’s National
Association of Software and Service Companies and the Philippines’s Information
Technology and Business Processing Association. Because these MOUs could
serve as Manila’s backup options should the RCEP becomes stillborn, the
country might not be as passionate to pursue this FTA as before. As a result,
future studies should factor in the bilateral interplay among the RCEP negotiating parties to further strengthen the analysis.
Also, this study has relied on a single case which limits its generalisability. Therefore, interested scholars should test the conceptual framework
using cases of other multilateral platforms where ASEAN members interact
with their non-ASEAN counterparts, or small countries in other regions
such as South America and Middle East. Doing so will reaffirm the study’s
external validity. Moreover, future research could undertake studies comparing and contrasting different small nations’ inclusive institutional balancing in dissimilar institutional settings. Such comparative works will
shed additional light on our understanding of small states’ roles in affecting
regional economic governance.

Notes
1. The Impossible Trinity is an incompatibility of three policy alternatives. At a given point of
time, a country can simultaneously maintain only two of the following three policies: free
capital flows across borders, an independent monetary policy, and an exchange rate stability.
2. One source notes the emerging trading blocs at that time created an impetus for their pursuit. In short, the ongoing TPP negotiation and preparation to launch the CJK FTA talks
tempted the Southeast Asian authorities to forge forward RCEP (Suh, 2014).

1142

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

3. What differentiates ES from regular foreign economic policy is that the former is a response
to threats as demonstrated via the RCEP case study.
4. The ASEAN members also leaned on RCEP to perform institutional hedging against uncertainties (Kuik, 2008). It should be emphasised that this strategy constituted the regional states’
response under the condition of uncertainties where no specific threat exists. In other words,
the intensifying US-China strategic competition has caused supply chain disruptions and uncertainties in the world economy. The regional states saw the uncertainties as undermining
their economic security (Interview 2). Put differently, the uncertainties lessen their ability to
plan ahead, develop and implement policies to secure growth and welfare to their societies.
Nevertheless, neither Washington nor Beijing was seen as a threat deliberately trying to inflict
harm on Southeast Asian economies through their bilateral spat. Due to the absence of threats,
the ASEAN governments chose to undertake institutional hedging (instead of institutional
balancing) to alter some RCEP terms. One outcome was that the 40 percent rule of origin
(ROO), which is considered low as compared to other FTAs. For instance, the US-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA) requires 75 percent of regional contents. Yet, a careful look transpires that
the ROO rule was intentionally designed by the ASEAN authorities. With this low threshold,
businesses can source inputs from non-RCEP economies (e.g. US, European countries) up to
60 percent in terms of value-added of the final products and sell the latter duty-free within
the RCEP bloc. This term makes the Southeast Asian governments able to further diversify their
supply chains and foster trade and investment ties with external powers which are inside RCEP
(e.g. China) and outside it (e.g. US). This hedging strategy ultimately enables the regional states
to achieve their economic security amidst the rising uncertainties (Interview 5, 6, 7).

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

References
Acharya, A., & Tan, S. S. (2005). Betwixt balance and community: America, ASEAN,
and the security of Southeast Asia. International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 6(1),
37–59. doi:10.1093/irap/lci125
Almezaini, K. S., & Rickli, J. M. (Eds.). (2016). The small gulf states: Foreign and security policies before and after the Arab Spring. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
ASEAN. (2012). Guiding Principles and Objectives for Negotiating the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership. The 21st ASEAN Summit, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia, November 20.
Bailes, A. J., Thayer, B. A., & Thorhallsson, B. (2016). Alliance theory and alliance
‘Shelter’: The complexities of small state alliance behaviour. Third World Thematics:
A TWQ Journal, 1(1), 9–26. doi:10.1080/23802014.2016.1189806
Beach, D., & Pedersen, R. B. (2013). Process tracing methods – Foundations and
guidelines. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Bennett, A. (2010). Process tracing and counterfactual analysis [Powerpoint presentation]. Conference on Process Tracing, Institute for Qualitative and Multi-Method
Research, Syracuse University, June 14–25.
Berthelon, M., & Freund, C. (2008). On the conservation of distance in international trade.
Journal of International Economics, 75(2), 310–320. doi:10.1016/j.jinteco.2007.12.005
Björkdahl, A. (2008). Norm advocacy: A small state strategy to influence the EU.
Journal of European Public Policy, 15(1), 135–154. doi:10.1080/13501760701702272
Blavoukos, S., & Bourantonis, D. (2011). Chairs as policy entrepreneurs in multilateral negotiations. Review of International Studies, 37(2), 653–672. doi:10.1017/
S0260210510000525

The Pacific Review

1143

Braveboy-Wagner, J. (2010). Opportunities and limitations of the exercise of foreign
policy power by a very small state: the case of Trinidad and Tobago. Cambridge
Review of International Affairs, 23(3), 407–427. doi:10.1080/09557571.2010.484049.
Browning, C. S. (2006). Small, smart and salient? Rethinking identity in the small
states literature. Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 19(4), 669–684.
doi:10.1080/09557570601003536
Bueger, C., & Wivel, A. (2018). How do small island states maximize influence?
Creole diplomacy and the smart state foreign policy of the Seychelles. Journal
of the Indian Ocean Region, 14(2), 170–188. doi:10.1080/19480881.2018.1471122
Castle, M. A. (2022). How do global trade rules evolve? Strategic sequencing in
international economic law. Review of International Political Economy. doi:10.108
0/09692290.2022.2099949
Chander, A., & Sunder, M. (2018). The Battle to Define Asia’s intellectual property
law: TPP to RCEP. UC Irvine Law Review, 8(3), 331–362.
Chasek, P. S. (2005). Margins of power: Coalition building and coalition maintenance
of the South Pacific Island states and the alliance of small Island states. Review
of European Community and International Environmental Law, 14(2), 125–137.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9388.2005.00433.x
Cohen, B. J. (2018). Currency statecraft: Monetary rivalry and geopolitical ambition.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Congressional Research Service. (2021). “Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
(RCEP)”, 5 August 2021, p.2. Retrieved from https://www.everycrsreport.com/
files/2021-08-05_IF11891_af1937448b1c4d0fc60a7107dcdc3fb25260bb23.pdf.
Crump, L. (2006). Global trade policy development in a two-track system. Journal
of International Economic Law, 9(2), 487–510. doi:10.1093/jiel/jgl005
Crump, L. (2011). Negotiation process and negotiation context. International
Negotiation, 16(2), 197–227. doi:10.1163/138234011X573011
Daunton, M. (2010). From Bretton Woods to Havana: Multilateral deadlocks in
historical perspective. In Deadlocks in Multilateral Negotiations: Causes and
Solutions, 47–78. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Deitelhoff, N. (2009). The discursive process of legalization: Charting islands of
persuasion in the ICC case. International Organization, 63(1), 33–65. doi:10.1017/
S002081830909002X
Dodds, F., Donoghue, A. D., & Roesch, J. L. (2016). Negotiating the sustainable development goals: A transformational agenda for an insecure world. Abingdon,
Oxon: Routledge.
Drezner, D. (2019). Economic statecraft in the age of trump. The Washington
Quarterly, 42(3), 7–24. doi:10.1080/0163660X.2019.1663072
Elms, D. (2021). Getting RCEP across the line. World Trade Review, 20(3), 373–380.
doi:10.1017/S1474745620000592
Elms, D., & Lim, C. L. (2012). (). The Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement (TPP)
negotiations: Overview and prospects. RSIS Working Paper No. 232, S. Rajaratnam
School of International Studies, Singapore, February 21.
Feyrer, J. (2009). Distance, trade, and income-the 1967 to 1975 closing of the Suez
canal as a natural experiment (No. w15557). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Foot, R., & Goh, E. (2019). The international relations of East Asia: A new research
prospectus. International Studies Review, 21(3), 398–423. doi:10.1093/isr/viy015
Fukunaga, Y. (2014). ASEAN leaderhsip in the regional comprehensive economic
partnership. Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies, 2(1), 103–115. doi:10.1002/app5.59

1144

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

Gibson, N. (2008). Goff Welcomes US PTA Negotiations. National Business ReviewNew Zealand September 23.
Goh, E. (2005). Meeting the China challenge: The US in Southeast Asian regional
security strategies. Policy Studies Monograph No. 16. Washington D.C.: East-West
Center.
Govella, K. (2021). The adaptation of Japanese economic statecraft: Trade, aid, and
technology. World Trade Review, 20(2), 186–202. doi:10.1017/S1474745620000543
Gvalia, G., Siroky, D., Lebanidze, B., & Iashvili, Z. (2013). Thinking outside the bloc:
Explaining the foreign policies of small states. Security Studies, 22(1), 98–131.
doi:10.1080/09636412.2013.757463
Hampson, F. O., & Reid, H. (2003). Coalition diversity and normative legitimacy in
human security negotiations. International Negotiation, 8(1), 7–42.
doi:10.1163/138234003769590659
Haokip, T. (2011). India’s look east policy: Its evolution and approach. South Asian
Survey, 18(2), 239–257. doi:10.1177/0971523113513368
He, K. (2008). Institutional balancing and international relations theory: Economic
interdependence and balance of power strategies in Southeast Asia. European
Journal of International Relations, 14(3), 489–518.
He, K. (2015). Contested regional orders and institutional balancing in the Asia
Pacific. International Politics, 52(2), 208–222. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.46
Hoadley, S. (2008). Thailand’s and Malaysia’s Cross-regional FTA Initiatives. In Katada,
S. & Solis, M. Cross-regional trade agreements: Understanding permeated regionalism in East Asia (pp. 95–121). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Holmes, J., Schnurr, S., & Marra, M. (2007). Leadership and communication:
Discursive evidence of a workplace culture change. Discourse & Communication,
1(4), 433–451. doi:10.1177/1750481307082207
Hopewell, K. (2015). Different paths to power: The rise of Brazil, India and China
at the World Trade Organization. Review of International Political Economy, 22(2),
311–338. doi:10.1080/09692290.2014.927387
Jones, L. (2010). Still in the “drivers’ seat”, but for how long? ASEAN’s capacity for
leadership in East-Asian international relations. Journal of Current Southeast Asian
Affairs, 29(3), 95–113. doi:10.1177/186810341002900305
Kawai, M., & Wignaraja, G. (2008). EAFTA or CEPEA: Which way forward? Asean
Economic Bulletin, 25(2), 113–139. doi:10.1355/AE25-2A
Keohane, R. O. (1988). International institutions: Two approaches. International
Studies Quarterly, 32(4), 379–396. doi:10.2307/2600589
Krasner, S. (1983). International Regimes. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kuik, C. C. (2008). The essence of hedging: Malaysia and Singapore’s response to
a rising China. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 30(2), 159–185. http://www.jstor.
org/stable/41220503
Laatikainen, K. V., & Smith, K. E. (2017). The multilateral politics of UN diplomacy:
Introduction. The Hague Journal of Diplomacy, 12(2-3), 95–112. doi:10.1163/187
1191X-12341366
Lee, D. (2009). Bringing an elephant into the room: Small African State diplomacy
in the WTO. In The Diplomacies of Small States (pp. 195–206). London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Lee, S. (2012). The emergence of an economic-security nexus and the diversity of
FTA linkage strategies in East Asia. Korean Journal of Policy Studies, 27(1), 109–129.
Lee, S., & Moon, C. I. (2009). South Korea’s regional economic cooperation policy:
The evolution of an adaptive strategy. In V. K. Aggarwal, M. G. Koo, S. Lee, &

The Pacific Review

1145

C. I. Moon(Eds.), Northeast Asia: Ripe for integration? (pp. 37–61). Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer.
Lim, D. J., Ferguson, V. A., & Bishop, R. (2020). Chinese outbound tourism as an
instrument of economic statecraft. Journal of Contemporary China, 29(126), 916–
933. doi:10.1080/10670564.2020.1744390
Ministry of External Affairs of India. (2003). Speech by External Affairs Minister
Yashwant Sinha. Harvard University, September 29.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. (2012). Joint Declaration on the Enhancement
of Trilateral Comprehensive Cooperative Partnership. The Fifth Trilateral Summit
Meeting among The People’s Republic of China, the Republic of Korea and
Japan, Beijing, China, May 13.
Monheim, K. (2016). The ‘power of process:’ How negotiation management influences multilateral cooperation. International Negotiation, 21(3), 345–380.
doi:10.1163/15718069-12341341
Mortimer, D. (2008). Winning in World Markets: Review of Export Policies and
Programs. Canberra: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, September 1.
Retrieved from https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/files/mortimer_report.pdf.
Nesadurai, H. E. (2005). Conceptualising economic security in an era of globalisation: What does the East Asian experience reveal?: CSGR Working Paper No.
157/05 February. Centre for the Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation
(CSGR), University of Warwick, Coventry, The United Kingdom. Retrieved from
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/1963/1/WRAP_Nesadurai_wp15705.pdf.
Nicolas, F. (2012). Korea and economic integration in East Asia: The way forward.
Korea’s Economy, 28, 87–93.
Odell, J. S. (2015). How should the WTO launch and negotiate a future round?
World Trade Review, 14(1), 117–133. doi:10.1017/S147474561400038X
Okano-Heijmans, M. (2014). Trade diplomacy in EU-Asia relations. Clingendael Report,
September.
Osorio, C. G. (2016). (Beyond the structural asymmetry of the UNSC: A bargaining
power-analysis of Resolutions 2220 and 2216). (Master’s thesis). Department of
Political Science, University of Oslo, Norway December.
Panke, D. (2012a). Being small in a big union: Punching above their weights? How
small states prevailed in the vodka and the pesticides cases. Cambridge Review
of International Affairs, 25(3), 329–344. doi:10.1080/09557571.2012.710579
Panke, D. (2012b). Small states in multilateral negotiations. What have we learned?
Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 25(3), 387–398. doi:10.1080/09557571
.2012.710589
Parker, D. A., & Sofio, D. G. (2017). US economic statecraft, homeland security, and the
trans‐pacific partnership. Foundations of Homeland Security: Law and Policy, 437–448.
Pauly, L. W. (2006). Monetary statecraft in follower states. In D. M. Andrews (Ed.),
International Monetary Power (pp. 184–207). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Petri, P. A., & Plummer, M. G. (2020). East Asia decouples from the United States:
Trade War, COVID-19, and East Asia’s new trade blocs. COVID-19, and East Asia’s
New Trade Blocs (June 11, 2020).
Pitakdumrongkit, K. (2015a). Co-chairing international negotiations: The case of
the Chiang Mai initiative multilateralization. The Pacific Review, 28(4), 577–605.
doi:10.1080/09512748.2015.1012540
Pitakdumrongkit, K. (2015b). Coordinating the South China Sea Issue: Thailand’s
roles in the code of conduct development. International Relations of the AsiaPacific, 15(3), 403–431. doi:10.1093/irap/lcv006

1146

K. PITAKDUMRONGKIT

Pitakdumrongkit, K. (2022). What causes changes in international governance
details?: An economic security perspective. Review of International Political
Economy, 29(2), 399–424. doi:10.1080/09692290.2020.1819371
Politico. (2017). “Malta’s EU presidency: How it went.” June 30. Retrieved from
https://www.politico.eu/article/maltas-eu-presidency-how-did-it-go/#.
Qin, J., Li, X., & Li, J. (2012). Beijing supports Asian free-trade area. China Daily
November 20.
Raghavan, P. (2020). Explained: The economic implications of India opting out of
RCEP. The Indian Express. November 26. Retrieved from https://indianexpress.
com/article/explained/india-out-of-rcep-china-economy-trade-angle-7053877/.
Ravenhill, J. (2010). The ‘new East Asian regionalism’: A political domino effect.
R e v i e w o f I n te r n a t i o n a l Po l i t i ca l Eco n o my , 1 7 ( 2 ) , 1 7 8 – 2 0 8 .
doi:10.1080/09692290903070887
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (RCEP (2020)) 15 November 2020.
Rillo, A., Robeniol, A., & Buban, A. (2022). The Story of RCEP: History, Negotiations,
Structure, and Future Directions. In Kimura, F., Thangavelu, S., & Narjoko, D.
(Eds.), Regional comprehensive economic partnership (RCEP): Implications, challenges, and future growth of East Asia and ASEAN (pp. 2–1–2-28). Jakarta, Indonesia:
Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA), March.
Schelling, T. (1960). The strategy of conflict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Solís, M., Stallings, B., & Katada, S. (Eds.). (2009). Competitive regionalism: FTA diffusion in the Pacific Rim. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stubbs, R. (2014). ASEAN’s leadership in East Asian region-building: Strength in
weakness. The Pacific Review, 27(4), 523–541. doi:10.1080/09512748.2014.924229
Suh, J. K. (2014). Korean bridge: Balancing Asian economic regionalism between
the United States and China. In G. Rozman (Ed.), Joint US-Korea academic studies (vol. 25, pp. 188–199). Washington D.C.: Korea Economic Institute of America.
Sukma, R. (2010). The accidental driver: ASEAN in the ASEAN regional forum. In
Haacke, J. & Morada, N. M. (Eds.), Cooperative security in the Asia-Pacific: The
ASEAN regional forum (pp. 111–123). Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Sutton, P. (2011). The concept of small states in the international political economy.
The Round Table, 100(413), 141–153. doi:10.1080/00358533.2011.565625
Tallberg, J. (2010). The power of the chair: Formal leadership in international cooperation. International Studies Quarterly, 54(1), 241–265. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2478.2009.00585.x
Tan, I., Hong, K., Chiang, C. Y., Wu, D., Pan, J., & Weng, K. K. (2020). “Understanding
the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (RCEP): What
does the RCEP mean to businesses?” Baker Mckenzie, 2 December. Retrieved
from https://www.bakermckenzie.com/-/media/files/insight/publications/2020/12/
bakermckenzie_understandingrcep_dec2020.pdf?la=en
Tay, S. (2022). Managing Chin’s regional economic integration. East Asia Forum
Quarterly, Vol 14, No 1, p. 25–27. January-March 2022.
Terada, T. (2013). The US struggles in APEC’s trade politics: Coalition-building and
regional integration in the Asia-Pacific. International Negotiation, 18(1), 49–66.
doi:10.1163/15718069-12341245
The ASEAN Secretariat. (2015). ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint 2025. Jakarta,
Indonesia: The ASEAN Secretariat.
The ASEAN Secretariat. (2020). ASEAN Statistical Yearbook 2020. Jakarta, Indonesia:
The ASEAN Secretariat, December.
The ASEAN Secretariat. (2008). The ASEAN Charter. Jakarta, Indonesia: The ASEAN
Secretariat, January.

The Pacific Review

1147

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). (2011). ASEAN Framework for
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. The 19th ASEAN Summit, Bali,
Indonesia, November 17.
The Australian Government. (2012). Australia in the Asian Century White Paper,
October. Retrieved from https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resourcefiles/2012-10/apo-nid31647.pdf.
The Economic Times. (2019). India decides to opt out of RCEP, says key concerns
not addressed. November 5.
The Malaysian Reserve. (2019). RCEP talks to proceed without ISDS. September 13.
Thorhallsson, B. (2012). Small states in the UN security council: Means of influence?
The Hague Journal of Diplomacy, 7(2), 135–160. doi:10.1163/187119112X628454
Thurbon, E., & Weiss, L. (2021). Economic statecraft at the frontier: Korea’s drive
for intelligent robotics. Review of International Political Economy, 28(1), 103–127.
doi:10.1080/09692290.2019.1655084
Tillikainen, T. (2018). Europe and Finland: Defining the political identity of Finland in
Western Europe. London: Routledge.
Wang, C., & Sharma, V. (2021). India’s RCEP dilemma with China: Beyond the legal
texts. Pacific Focus, 36(1), 40–62. doi:10.1111/pafo.12180
Wohlforth, W. C., De Carvalho, B., Leira, H., & Neumann, I. B. (2018). Moral authority and status in international relations: Good states and the social dimension
of status seeking. Review of International Studies, 44(3), 526–546. doi:10.1017/
S0260210517000560
Zartman, I. W., & Rubin, J. Z. (eds.) (2000). Power and Negotiation. Ann Arbor, MI:
The University of Michigan Press.

Cited Interviews
Interview 1: Interview with a former Australian trade negotiator, 21 September 2021.
Interview 2: Interview with an Indonesian trade negotiator, 18 October 2022.
Interview 3: Interview with an ASEAN officer, 3 November 2021.
Interview 4: Interview with a former ASEAN trade negotiator, 24 April 2022.
Interview 5: Interview with Laotian officers, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
21 September 2021.
Interview 6: Interview with Malaysian officers, Ministry of Trade and Industry, 23
September 2021.
Interview 7: Interview with a Filipino trade negotiator, 17 September 2021.
Interview 8: Interview with a New Zealander trade negotiator, 14 October 2021.

