The Paciﬁc Review

ISSN: 0951-2748 (Print) 1470-1332 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpre20

Shades of grey: riskiﬁcation and hedging in the
Indo-Paciﬁc
Cheng-Chwee Kuik
To cite this article: Cheng-Chwee Kuik (2023) Shades of grey: riskiﬁcation and hedging in the
Indo-Paciﬁc, The Paciﬁc Review, 36:6, 1181-1214, DOI: 10.1080/09512748.2022.2110608
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2022.2110608

Published online: 09 Sep 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 4512

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 26 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpre20

THE PACIFIC REVIEW
2023, VOL. 36, NO. 6, 1181–1214
https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2022.2110608

Shades of grey: riskification and hedging
in the Indo-Pacific
Cheng-Chwee Kuik
Institute of Malaysian and International Studies (IKMAS), National University of
Malaysia (UKM), Bangi, Malaysia and Foreign Policy Institute, Johns Hopkins SAIS
ABSTRACT

This essay unpacks the hedging behavior of small and secondary states by
focusing on Southeast Asian responses to the intense US-China rivalry and
the emergence of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad) in the IndoPacific region. It contends that the weaker states’ perceptions of external realities are not black and white, but shades of grey, as uncertainty breeds ambiguity and ambivalence. The states often do not view a major power (and its
initiatives) as either a clear-cut threat or a straightforward solution. Instead,
they perceive a spectrum of risks and challenges, each with constantly changing manifestations and magnitude, all of which require complex combinations
of mutually-reinforcing and counteracting measures. All ASEAN states have
mixed attitudes towards the competing powers, viewing both the Quad’s
Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) strategies and China’s Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI) as bringing not only opportunities but also risks and dangers.
These ambivalent perceptions entail a process of ‘riskification’, where states
identify and prioritize certain risks while downplaying others, in ways that
serve elite interests at home. Hence, while nearly all the ASEAN states have
stressed in varying degrees the risks of entrapment, abandonment, polarization and marginalization, many have downplayed the dangers of big-power
aggressiveness and interference, some more so than others. The varying riskification patterns thus lead to varying hedging acts, prompting subtly different
responses to the emerging realities.

KEYWORDS Riskification; weaker-state hedging; Southeast Asia; US–China rivalry; Indo-Pacific

Introduction
The notion of ‘Indo-Pacific’, which entered the international politics lexicon
about a decade ago, has evolved from a strategic construct to geopolitical
reality. Coined and promoted by the member states of the Quadrilateral
CONTACT Cheng-Chwee Kuik
cckuik@gmail.com
Centre for Asian Studies, Institute of
Malaysian and International Studies, National University of Malaysia (UKM), Bangi 43600, Malaysia
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic
content of the article.
ß 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

1182

C. C. KUIK

Security Dialogue (Quad), a minilateral alignment consisting of Australia,
India, Japan and the United States, the Indo-Pacific narrative and its institutional expression have gained momentum in the recent years, especially
after the Quad’s revival in 2017. By 2018, each of the Quad member states,
one after another, had announced their own Free and Open Indo-Pacific
(FOIP) strategies (Envall & Wilkins, 2022; Medcalf, 2020; Rajagopalan, 2020).
Since 2019, non-Quad countries, France first, followed by Germany, the
Netherlands, and then the European Union (EU) as a group, have released
their respective Indo-Pacific documents, emphasizing the importance of
preserving the ‘rules-based’ international order. Subsequently, more powers
within and beyond Asia have tilted toward the Indo-Pacific. In September
2021, London joined Canberra and Washington to form the AustraliaUnited Kingdom-United States (AUKUS) pact. Since late February 2022, the
Russia–Ukraine war has sapped the US attention and resources but there
are signs the Indo-Pacific tilt will remain a long-term strategic direction for
the United States, other Quad members, and their key partners in Europe,
Asia, and elsewhere. Canada, New Zealand and South Korea look set to
map out their own strategies for the Indo-Pacific. During the US President
Joe Biden’s May 2022 trips to Seoul and Tokyo to boost his administration’s
Indo-Pacific strategy, Biden stressed, apparently with China in mind,
that stronger ties and solidarity among ‘likeminded countries’ are required,
amid ‘competition between democracies and autocracies’ (The White
House, 2022).
As the Quad members and their ‘likeminded’ partners endeavor to
strengthen cooperation between and among themselves, they have also
sought to court the member states of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) both bilaterally and regionally, leveraging the expanding
ties to increase their presence in the Indo-Pacific. These courtships are
driven by strategic, diplomatic and economic reasons. Strategically, many
Southeast Asian states share concerns about China’s security actions, especially those over the South China Sea. Diplomatically, ASEAN and ASEANled institutions are viewed as the drivers of Asian multilateralism and
regionalism. Economically, Southeast Asia, a region with large populations,
rich resources, and fast-growing middle classes, provides an increasingly
important market and investment opportunities. The ASEAN Outlook on
the Indo-Pacific (AOIP), announced in June 2019, showed some convergence between ASEAN’s principles and FOIP strategies, despite differing
emphases on norms and approaches (Acharya, 2019; Anwar, 2020). This
convergence has added impetus for potentially wider partnerships across
the region.
Central to the Indo-Pacific powers’ courtships of Southeast Asia is a discourse that depicts, either explicitly or implicitly, China as the ‘principal

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1183

threat’ to ASEAN states and other regional countries. This discourse, voiced
and amplified by mainstream media and expert analysis, regards the South
China Sea disputes and other sovereignty issues (i.e., the Taiwan Strait and
the Korean Peninsula) as the ‘principal security problems’ in Asia. The discourse also describes the US-centered alliances and partnerships as the
‘principal solution’ for tackling these problems. In September 2020, then
the US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo urged Southeast Asian countries to
‘stand up’ to China, which ‘bully ASEAN coastal states in the South China
Sea’, reminding all states not to ‘let the Chinese Communist Party walk over
[them] and [their] people’, while stressing that the region ‘should be confident in the United States and know it can bank on [US] support’ (Nguyen,
2020). In December 2021, Biden’s Secretary of State Antony Blinken blasted
China’s ‘aggressive actions’ in Asia while declaring plans to ‘more closely
integrate’ the US allies and partners in Asia in order to defend the rulesbased order (Martin, 2021).
These perspectives appear logical, especially considering the ASEAN
states’ inability to handle these massive challenges on their own. They also
seem inevitable, particularly when US leaders, allies, and opinion shapers
began framing the great power competitions as a global struggle between
the ‘liberal’ versus ‘autocratic’ order (Bump, 2022). In March 2021, Biden
described Chinese leader Xi Jinping as someone who shares with Russian
President Vladimir Putin a belief that ‘autocracy is the wave of the future’.
Biden added that ‘[t]his is a battle between the utility of democracies in the
21st century and autocracies’, and ‘[w]e’ve got to prove democracy works’
(Sanger, 2021). The ‘democracy versus autocracy’ discourse is deepening,
following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022. Many US allies
share similar views. On 9 March 2022, Australia’s intelligence chief said that
Beijing’s ‘convergence’ with Moscow will pose new threats to liberal
democracies, potentially leading to ‘[a] situation where other countries in
the region, across South-East Asia, across the Pacific, including Australia,
have to defer to Beijing’s choices’ (Dziedzic, 2022). On 12 March 2022, during a visit to Malaysia, former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said
Russian aggression posed a ‘serious threat’ to the international order. In a
veiled reference to China’s aggressive behavior, Abe also commented that
‘[u]nilateral attempts to change the status quo by force or economic coercion pose a serious threat in Asia’ and urged countries in the region to
‘raise a voice of opposition in unison’ (The Japan Times, 2022).
Such viewpoints, however, are only partially and unevenly shared by
Southeast Asian states. For the ASEAN states, while China is indeed a source
of growing security concerns, it is also an increasingly indispensable partner
which supports economic growth, supplies pandemic assistance, and bolsters post-COVID regional resilience. In the eyes of Southeast Asian states,

1184

C. C. KUIK

China is both a problem and a solution. The ASEAN states have ambivalent
perceptions of the United States as well. That is, while Washington is
viewed as critical and indispensable by some states, it is neither a clear-cut
nor certain solution. The ASEAN states are as anxious about the uncertainties in the US’s long-term Asia commitment and Washington’s black-andwhite values-based policies as they are about Beijing’s long-term intentions
and increasing maritime assertiveness.
This paper argues that the ASEAN states’ perceptions of risks and solutions in the Indo-Pacific era are shades of grey, not a stark black and white.
Southeast Asian states neither view China-related issues as their only and
most pressing challenge nor the US-led alignment as a straightforward,
let alone a primary solution. As weaker states with diverse political systems
which have experienced centuries-long Western domination and decadeslong Cold War politics, Southeast Asian states view the ongoing IndoPacific competitions more through a power lens than an ideological prism.
The heightening rivalries between China and the United States (and its
allies) are not considered ideological contestation, but the latest round in a
perennial cycle of big power rivalry. The paper further argues that while the
structural uncertainties surrounding the US–China rivalry have brought
about a range of risks (e.g., entrapment, polarization and marginalization), it
is the domestic factors that underpin the riskification process (prioritizing
some risks but downplaying others), leading to varying forms of hedging behavior.
This paper proceeds as follows. Part 2 develops a ‘riskification’ framework, reviewing the relevant literature in International Relations (IR) and
developing analytical parameters to establish the links between riskification
and the weaker states’ alignment choices. Part 3 unpacks the structural and
domestic roots of Southeast Asian riskification from Asia-Pacific to IndoPacific. Part 4 illuminates how the Southeast Asian states’ perceptions of
risks have led them to hedge by responding to Quad and related IndoPacific realities cautiously. Part 5 concludes by summing up the theoretical
and policy implications of the weaker states’ shades-of-grey outlook, before
offering suggestions for future research.

Riskification and hedging behavior: a framework
Risk—exposure to dangers, potential harms, or probable losses—is central
to the human experience (Beck, 1992; Bernstein, 1996; Greenspan, 2013;
Heng, 2006; Knight, 1921; Taleb, 2018). There are three major kinds of risks
in international relations: security, economic and political. While some of
these risks (e.g., military aggression, political interference, and certain types
of nontraditional security challenges) originate from the intentional acts of

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1185

state or non-state actors, others are products of such impersonal forces as
global economic downturns, domestic political decay and systemic changes
in the distribution of power. Regardless of their origins, these risks are especially harmful to smaller and weaker states because their internal limitations
invite external exploitation and they lack the resources to absorb structural
shocks and mitigate risks by themselves.
Identifying risks and actions to mitigate them are central to ‘hedging’
behavior across such spheres of human activities as agriculture, finance, linguistics and politics (Bertrand et al., 2015; Fraser, 2010; Hyland, 1998;
Working, 1953). Since the 2000s, IR scholars have identified risks and riskmitigation as drivers of state alignment choices, especially hedging behavior. David Lake, for instance, describes hedging as ‘a form of insurance’
against the risks and costs of opportunism (Lake, 1996, p. 15). Kuik (2008)
conceives of hedging as behavior under high-stakes, high-uncertainties
conditions, where sovereign actors pursue multiple contingency options to
offset the numerous risks exposed by their return-maximizing acts, cultivate
fallback positions and reduce loss if things go awry. This conception is
among the first in IR literature to highlight that ‘risk’, with its manifestations
in the security, economic and political domains, is key to understanding
hedging as human behavior. It also highlights that while big powers often
play a crucial role—solicited or otherwise—in a small state’s risk management (Kuik, 2008, p. 163), such role is ‘far from unidirectional’—it is ambivalent as the big powers can be both harmful and helpful to smaller states
(see also Kuik, 2016b, 2020, 2021b).
Building on Snyder (1984) and other major works on alliance politics,
Ciorciari (2010) identifies several major types of ‘risks of alignment’, namely,
diminished autonomy, dependency, abandonment, entrapment, and alienating domestic groups. Ciorciari and Haacke (2019, p. 369) note that
‘hedging strategies seek to address risk in the form of potential securityrelated threats’. Kuik (2016a, 2020, 2021b) observes that states hedge
against not a single actor but a range of risks. To mitigate multiple risks
across domains and across time, hedgers typically pursue a bundle of
‘opposite’, ‘contradictory’ measures to counteract and ‘offset the effects of
one another, with the goal of avoiding the danger of betting on the wrong
horse’ and other hazards at the systemic level (Kuik et al., 2012, p. 318;
Kuik, 2016b). Lim and Cooper (2015) point out that states hedge by
‘sending ambiguous signals’. Ciorciari concurs, adding that hedging not
only involves ‘preserving strategic ambiguity’, but also ‘forging limited
security alignments’ and ‘cultivating modest self-protection in case potential threats materialize’ (Ciorciari, 2019, p. 523). Other authors have covered
the various forms of risks and risk-mitigation strategies in state alignment
behavior (Chan, 2020; Goh, 2008; Jackson, 2014; Khong, 2004; Koga, 2018;

1186

C. C. KUIK

Keating & Ruzicka, 2014; Korolev, 2016; Tan, 2020; Tunsjø, 2010; Wilkins,
2021). Jones and Jenne (2022) usefully describe hedging as a counsel of
prudence in the conduct of statecraft that fits strategic ends to limited
means [emphasis added].
This study adopts a broad sense of the term ‘alignment’. That is,
‘alignment’ means coming together, working with each other, linking oneself to larger collective efforts of coordinating and pursuing shared aims. It
involves coordinated actions for continuous harmonization of wider ends
across domains. Alignments are broader than alliances which entail a
mutual defense commitment, a bond with a single great-power patron, and
often a targeted threat. Alignments, however, allow room for simultaneous
and selective cooperation with multiple partners and even with both competing powers (Kuik & Evans, 2022, p. 27). A state may choose to remain in
a pre-existing alliance with Power A while diversifying its partnerships by
pursuing multi-directional alignments with multiple powers.
Hedging, accordingly, is defined in this study as insurance-maximizing
alignment behavior with three attributes, i.e., active impartiality, inclusive
diversification and prudent contradictions, all aimed at offsetting risks
and ensuring a fallback position under conditions of uncertainty.
Typically, a hedger signals that it is not taking sides with any competing
power, while it diversifies partnerships with all powers and pursues deliberately contradictory measures to cultivate maneuvering space and keep
all options open.
Recent scholarly works have sought to explain how and why risk-mitigation drives and limits hedging behavior at the inter-state level. Haacke
(2019) systematically argues that hedging is ‘a risk management strategy’,
particularly for security risks. This assertion is further elaborated by Haacke
and Ciorciari (2022). Building on Clapton’s (2011) work on ‘riskification’ (i.e.,
‘risk identification, assessment and management’) and Corry’s (2012)
‘riskification versus securitization’ model, Haacke and Ciorciari (2022, p. 24)
highlight ‘the importance of politics in riskification and state capacity to
address risks’, a process that underscores the ‘constructed nature of risks’
[italics added], where governments and [the] relevant bureaucracies play
key roles in ‘constructing actual or potential risks’. Kuik (2008, pp. 161–162)
elaborated that
the representation of risks—which risks will be identified and prioritized as
foreign policy ‘problems’—is neither given nor fixed, but is constantly
shaped by the way in which elites seek to justify their domination by acting
in accordance with the very foundations of their authority at a given time
[italics in the original].

Thus, Haacke and Ciorciari (2022, p. 24) argue that ‘analysts cannot take
for granted that risks simply exist “out there” or that states will be similarly

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1187

proficient in addressing them’; rather, ‘hedging necessarily results from a
process of identifying and weighing risks and choosing what means and
pathways are available for managing them’.
In the recent years, more scholarly works have focused on ‘riskification
and securitization’, which explore the relations between risk and such related
issues as ‘threat’ and ‘security’. Some are framed within the basic tenets of
the Copenhagen School in IR. Karen Lund Petersen (2012), for instance,
examines the intersections between risk and security studies from what she
terms the three ‘disciplines of risks’, namely economics, anthropology, and
sociology. To differentiate risks from security, Jessica Kirk notes that while
security is understood as ‘imminent’ and ‘on the immediate horizon in need
of (present) response’, risks are ‘future-oriented’, stretching the timeline of
danger by drawing the possible future into the present, ‘orienting the latter
around preparing for the danger lurking into the former’ (2020, p. 3).
Accordingly, risks are about ‘perpetual vulnerability’ and the elimination of
dangers is viewed as largely ‘impossible’. Kirk’s conception of risks along the
time horizon converges with Kuik’s (2008, 2016a, 2016b) wider-than-security
characterization of risks along the domain horizon. Together, these conceptualizations highlight the cross-temporal, cross-sectoral, multifaceted dimensions of risks as state vulnerabilities under uncertainty. As succinctly summed
up by Kirk (2020, p. 3), risks are ‘unpredictable, uncontrollable, and yet
internal to (modern) society’ in the Ulrich Beck (1992) sense of ‘a bottomless
barrel of demands, unsatisfied, infinite, self-producible’.
There have been similar attempts to distinguish ‘risk’ from ‘threat’. While
the two concepts overlap in terms of exposure to possible harm, they
diverge in the certainty and immediacy of the possibilities. That is, while risk
refers to potential harm, threat refers to clear and present danger.
According to Olaf Corry (2012, pp. 238–249), while threat is conceptually
linked to the ‘direct causality of harm’, risk is linked to plausible
‘constitutive’ or ‘conditional causes’ of the future danger, depersonalized
potentiality, and the absence of a specific threatening actor. This enriches
Wallander and Keohane (1999)’s conception:
Where a state’s leaders regard it as facing a positive probability that another
state will either launch an attack or seek to threaten military force for
political reasons, it faces a threat. Threats pertain when there are actors that
have the capabilities to harm the security of others and that are perceived
by their potential targets as having intentions to do so. When no such
threat exists, either because states do not have the intention or the
capability to harm the security of others, states may nevertheless face a
security risk [emphasis in the original].

Of course, it is not just security that is at stake. Risk may and often does
affect a state’s capacity to pursue prosperity (economic wealth and material
gains) and autonomy (sovereignty and policy maneuverability) as well.

1188

C. C. KUIK

‘Riskification’, accordingly, is used in this study to mean a process in which
a sovereign state identifies, prioritizes, or de-prioritize possible harmful processes or events that may endanger its security, prosperity and autonomy. This
necessarily involves efforts to avoid, mitigate and offset a state’s exposure
to dangers, especially those regarded as highly undesired by state elites.
Some dangers are perceived to be more urgent and/or severe than others,
depending on external and internal circumstances.
Based on the above insights, particularly Haacke and Ciorciari’s observations about the politically driven construction of risks, we develop a riskification framework to unpack the underlying dynamics of hedging as recurrent
alignment behavior in international relations, as distinguished from the more
widely discussed strategies of ‘balancing’ and ‘bandwagoning’ (Waltz, 1979;
Walt, 1985; Schweller, 1994). Our framework is different from the existing literature in three aspects. Firstly, we adopt a wider conceptualization of ‘risk’
and ‘riskification’ as states seek to address not only security-related dangers,
but also non-military and non-security risks. This broadened conception is
necessary because in reality, states are mindful of the political and economic
risks as much as—and sometimes more than—security risks, especially when
they are not directly threatened.
Secondly, analytically, our framework posits that risks and interests
are two sides of the same policy coin. Risk is potential harm to prioritized
interests. Riskification, accordingly, is mainly about managing and mitigating risks, but also optimizing interests or returns, the contents and
approaches of which are defined by ruling elites. A state’s alignment
choice, hence, is a function of its ruling elite’s calculations of politicallydefined returns-maximization and risk-mitigation. Balancing strategy prevails when a state completely aligns with a powerful actor to push back
another power viewed as a clear-cut threat to its national security and/
or elite’s interests. Bandwagoning prevails when a state identifies a big
power as a reliable patron which promises its elite with interests without
unacceptable risks and drawbacks. Hedging prevails when a state sees
neither a clear-cut threat nor a clear-cut patron, but multiple risks and
challenges capable of undermining its elite’s prioritized interests, each
with stakes high enough to necessitate the cultivation of insurance-maximizing measures under uncertainty.
Thirdly, theoretically, we adopt a two-level framework to unpack the
relations between risks, riskification and state alignment choices. The framework postulates that the riskification process is rooted in both structuraland domestic-level factors. While risks are chiefly a product of structural
conditions (particularly systemic uncertainties), riskification is more a result
of domestic calculations (mainly the elite’s politically defined interests).

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1189

Structurally, different forms of uncertainty present different forms of
risks. As uneven growth in the major actors’ relative capabilities changes
power structure and power relations, the unpredictable intentions of each
actor change commitments among present and future patrons, partners
and adversaries. Together, these system-wide uncertainties generate a wide
array of top-down risks for smaller states, including entrapment and abandonment, becoming subservient, alienating a strong power prematurely, or
facing a direct threat without credible allied support (Christensen & Snyder,
1990; Fearon, 1997; Morrow, 1993, 2000; Snyder, 1984). Each risk complicates the tasks of coping with challenges on the economic, nontraditional
security, and internal fronts.
Two structural factors are key: the magnitude of threat and the reliability
of allied support. When threat is profound and patron support reliable, the
riskification process and policy choice will be more straightforward (direct
threat necessitates direct balancing; the availability of a clear-cut patron
leads to clear-cut bandwagoning) and less susceptible to domestic influence. When threat is profound but support is not dependable (or conversely, credible support is met with diffused, indirect dangers), riskification
will be more subjected to domestic factors (e.g., in the absence of a credible
patron, a weaker state may choose to downplay certain external risks to
serve its elite’s internal interests). Finally, when an ambiguous threat coincides with uncertain support, riskfication will be most susceptible to such
domestic factors as elite politics and legitimation, leading the state to prioritize or deprioritize some stakes over the others.
To summarize, our framework posits that riskification is not just about
the identification and management of risks; it is also about the ranking (prioritization and deprioritization) of elite-defined interests and risks based on
changing circumstances at the structural and domestic levels. Riskification
is a process in which a rational actor—in this case, a sovereign state, and
more specifically, its ruling elite—constantly evaluates risks arising from the
structural changes, before exploring options to mitigate the risks, while
maximizing the interests required to consolidate its elite’s authority and
standing at home.

Roots of riskification: from Asia-Pacific to Indo-Pacific
The Southeast Asian states’ perceptions of dangers and patrons have been
evolving in response to changes in the external environment. During the
early decades of the Cold War period, the noncommunist states of
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand—which
founded ASEAN in August 1967 and later joined by Brunei in 1984—perceived the communist powers (the Soviet Union and China and, to some

1190

C. C. KUIK

extent, Vietnam after its invasion of Cambodia in December 1978) as the
principal threats and viewed the US-led Western powers as their principal
patrons. Their perceptions were, by and large, black and white: the sources
of threat were direct and unambiguous along ideological lines, while the
patrons’ commitments were perceived to be relatively concrete and credible. Such straightforward perceptions, however, were gradually replaced
by an increasingly ambiguous and ambivalent outlook, following Britain’s
withdrawal from Southeast Asia, the US military setbacks in the Vietnam
War, and the US–China rapprochement in the 1970s.
Southeast Asian perceptual shifts have continued after the end of the
Cold War circa 1990. The collapse of the Soviet Union ended the decadeslong ideologically-based global struggles between the communist bloc and
the US-led free world (which, in turn, contributed to the resolution of the
Indochinese conflict), but the eclipse of bipolarity also meant the end of an
era of strategic clarity. Consequently, throughout the post-Cold War decades, the ASEAN states have become more uncertain not only about the
principal sources of threats, but also the principal sources of patron support. On one hand, the numerous traditional and nontraditional security
challenges are not clearly hierarchical in their severity. On the other, the
weaker states have become more unsure of patron reliability and the prospect of big-power relations, in particular US commitment, China’s intentions, US–China competition, and the ASEAN’s relevancy in the new era
(Acharya, 2014; Ba, 2009a; Goh, 2008; Khong, 2004; Leifer, 1996).
In other words, Southeast Asia’s post-Cold War outlook of threat and
support has become more diffused, uncertain, and complex. The roots are
structural: the emerging uncertainties are the products of system-wide, topdown dynamics stemming from uneven growth of relative capabilities,
unpredictable big-power action-reaction, as well as unforeseeable circumstances. While the occurrence of these dynamics is above and beyond any
single state’s control, their ramifications and risks affect all states, especially
the weaker ones.
These structural conditions—diffused threat perceptions and uncertain
principal support—which underpin Southeast Asia’s post-Cold War riskification, motivate and constrain the ASEAN states’ external policy choices, both
individually and collectively. To cope with these uncertainties, diplomacy
and regionalism were developed as key tools. Individually, each Southeast
Asian state has developed active bilateral diplomatic and developmental
ties with countries far and near. As a group, the old ASEAN member states
have taken several inclusive, regionalist actions by: (a) enlarging its membership to include Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar and Cambodia; (b) expanding
ASEAN dialogue processes by inviting South Korea, India, China and Russia
as dialogue partners (besides the original Western partners); and (c)

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1191

establishing such ASEAN-led mechanisms as the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF, in 1994), the ASEAN Plus Three (APT, in 1997), the East Asia Summit
(EAS, in 2005), and the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus,
in 2010). These multilateral arrangements, together with bilateral diplomatic
and economic tools, have enabled ASEAN states to work with partners in
and out of Asia to respond to region-wide challenges and crises, which, in
due course, have institutionalized ASEAN’s centrality in Asian affairs (Ba,
2009b; Goh, 2008; Kuik, 2022). Beyond diplomacy, the original ASEAN members have also enhanced their respective military partnerships with their
longstanding partners and allies, primarily the United States but also other
Western powers (Capie, 2020; Parameswaran, 2022; Tan, 2020). Since the
2010s, as China’s regional clout grows, more and more ASEAN states have
moved to establish strategic partnerships and defense ties with China as
well (Storey, 2011, 2020).
These inclusive and increasingly multi-sector, multilayered partnerships—
as opposed to exclusive, military-dominant, collective-defense alliances as
the key tool of statecraft—reflect the ASEAN states’ post-Cold War riskification and policy responses. While alliances and de facto alignments have
enabled the weaker Southeast Asian states to fend off direct military threats
(e.g., communist insurgencies across the ASEAN region and Vietnam’s expansionist actions in Indochina) during the Cold War, military tools are only partial solutions for ASEAN states to cope with the wide range of post-Cold War
challenges. While military tools are essential for addressing sovereignty and
territorial disputes, they are inadequate when tackling such non-military dangers as cyclical economic downturn, external interference, as well as problems associated with diversities within and across national boundaries. These
challenges aside, Southeast Asian states also have to contend with the risks
associated with the myriad and fluid forms of nontraditional security issues,
intra-ASEAN disputes, and above all, the more pressing political and governance problems at home (Alagappa, 1995; Emmerson, 2008; Mely CaballeroAnthony & Gong, 2020; Kuik, 2021b, 2021c).
The perceptions of such myriad, mixed, and diffused dangers and challenges are described as ‘grey’ because the manifestations and magnitude
of these risks (and the corresponding risk-mitigation measures) are far from
black and white, without a clear hierarchy of severity, and often without direct, clear-cut sources of problems, let alone straightforward solutions. They
are ‘shades’ in that a state’s discernment of these myriad realities is a spectrum (as opposed to dichotomy), of problems and corresponding policy
responses, each with constantly changing forms but inconstant effects,
without clearly drawn lines of severity and solutions.
Thus, shades-of-grey riskification requires Southeast Asian states to
develop multi-domain, multi-level tools throughout the post-Cold War

1192

C. C. KUIK

decades. To cope with different types of challenges, different tools have
been developed with multiple partners and through multiple platforms
(e.g., bilateral alignments, minilateral cooperation, and regional institutions).
Because a one-size-fits-all approach is unavailable and because all problems, partners, and platforms exhibit constantly changing saliency and reliability, a combination of multilayered partnerships and arrangements
(albeit fragmented and overlapped) is deemed necessary to cope with challenges in a mutually complementary manner.
The emergence of the Indo-Pacific narratives and networks has deepened such diffused outlook. While the US–China rivalry remains the central
theme of Asian geopolitics, more actors are entering the fray to push back
China’s growing power and assertiveness. This is evidenced by the revival
of Quad and the growing activism of an increasing number of second-tier
powers in and out of Asia across the military and non-military chessboards
(Kuik, 2021d). By the 2020s, it was clear that the balance-of-power efforts
around Asia were being pursued not only via military means, but also
through economic, connectivity-building, technology, pandemic assistance,
and other cooperative activities. As more powers are involved and as more
tools are used across the twin chessboards, the increasingly intensified
power competition is rapidly making Southeast Asia the center of multidomain courtships. These, in turn, have presented greater opportunities but
also greater risks to Southeast Asia.
The ASEAN states see a long and growing list of external and internal
risks in the Indo-Pacific. Some risks are region-wide; others are specific to
certain countries. While not all the perceived risks originated from extraregional powers, several are associated with the actions of and interactions
among the big powers across the region. Thus far, the ASEAN states’
responses to the emerging Indo-Pacific realities highlight that the weaker
states are particularly concerned about four types of structural risks: entrapment, abandonment, regional polarization and marginalization of ASEAN as
a regional grouping. These concerns are not new, but each has been
heightened by the increasingly intense action-reaction maneuvers among
the competing powers.

Structural imperative
Relative position matters. How a state sees the world depends on its relative place in the system. As non-big powers, Southeast Asian states identify
and evaluate ‘risks’ (probable harms, potential losses, distant dangers) and
‘threats’ (direct, clear-and-present dangers) primarily via the prism of their
own survival (existential stakes). This is distinct from systemic primacy
(power stakes) as viewed by the United States and the rules-based order

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1193

(normative stakes) emphasized by the Quad members and their Indo-Pacific
partners. While these stakes converge in a preference for the status quo,
different relative positions mean different perceptions of risks.
Southeast Asian states, having been subjected to colonial and Cold War
power domination, view themselves as more the ‘rule-takers’ than ‘rulemakers’. Rules are almost always made and enforced by the powers of the
day. The weaker states are always concerned about who enforce which rules
and supply what other public goods, but they care even more about how
and to what extent the supply–demand dynamics affect their own state survival and elite interests.
These dynamics, the results of uneven growth of relative capabilities
and aspirations across the big powers in the international system, are
structural issues. The dynamics are determined by the relative capacity of
respective powers in supplying regional public goods across the developmental, diplomatic, and defense domains. The changing relative abilities,
alongside an individual power’s intentions, ultimately, determine who are
the principal providers of needed goods and the principal sources of
threats in the system.
There are many indicators of these changing realities, as well as the
resulting responses in Asia and the wider Indo-Pacific. China is rising economically, while becoming more assertive and aggressive strategically. The
United States is still leading militarily and technologically, but is showing
symptoms of relative decline in terms of economic output and diplomatic
engagement. It has also become a more unpredictable global player and
regional partner, especially during the Trump years. Many second-tier
powers have reacted to these structural trends by keeping the US-centered
order as Plan A for as long as possible, while developing multiple Plans B
(e.g., the Quad, other minilateral arrangements, additional layers of bilateralism) to mitigate the growing risks of uncertainties. Smaller and secondary
states, in Southeast Asia and elsewhere, have responded by cultivating
more layers of cooperation while developing contingency measures to mitigate and offset risks (elaborated below).
An important sign of the evolving power structure in Southeast Asia is
the changing of the guard for the principal provider of regional prosperity
and principal partner for regional architecture-building. In terms of economic relations, Southeast Asia-China trade has grown faster than
Southeast Asia–US trade. By the early 2010s, Southeast Asia’s trade with
China was double its trade with the United States (see Table 1).
Beyond trade, the big powers have shown uneven capacity and clout
in other key sectors: investment, infrastructure–building partnerships, and
region-wide institution-building in Southeast and East Asia. While the
United States is still among the top investors in most East Asian countries,

1194

C. C. KUIK

Table 1. Southeast Asia’s total trade with the united States and China, 1992–2019.
Year

Southeast Asia-U.S. (USD)

Southeast Asia-China (USD)

1992
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019

61,706,804a
123,665,243a
130,764,663
139,954,511
152,856,281
173,260,338
176,233,813b
182,859,407b
149,296,200
182,399,338c
198,756,735b
198,281,035
205,876,144
220,280,503
232,032,474
237,906,263
252,866,393
276,565,082
299,761,221

9,081,241a
54,781,227a
78,255,658
105,868,495
130,371,622
160,854,479
203,235,919
231,329,220
213,034,220
292,880,786
363,168,412
400,205,676
443,646,372
480,346,580
471,870,946
452,572,866
515,577,334
589,883,904
642,123,403

Source: https://wits.worldbank.org/
Data exclude Timor Leste.
b
Data exclude Myanmar.
c
Data exclude Myanmar and Timor Laste.
a

China is catching up fast, in part because of its BRI ventures. Meanwhile,
parts of Asian economic integration and regional architecture have
progressed without U.S. participation (e.g., the APT cooperation and the
15-member Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, RCEP). All
these developments are ongoing as a growing number of BRI-related connectivity projects are extending China’s infrastructure and developmental
footprints across Southeast Asia (Harding & Tran, 2019; Kuik, 2021a;
McCarthy, 2022).
These structural trends present both promises and risks to Southeast
Asian states (Choong, 2019; Kuik, 2021b, 2021c; Seah et al., 2022). While
China’s growing developmental and diplomatic profiles have generally
benefited most ASEAN states, its militarization activities in the South China
Sea and other aggressive actions have raised serious concerns among the
coastal states with territorial and maritime interests. Security stakes aside,
some ASEAN states are also mindful of the dangers of becoming dependent
on or even subservient to China, in the face of Beijing’s influence operations and in some cases, the use of economic coercion across the region.
These concerns are, by and large, shared by Quad and other extra-regional
powers courting Southeast Asian states to form a strong Indo-Pacific coalition to counter-check China (Le Thu, 2020; Medcalf, 2020).
Nevertheless, the ASEAN states view Indo-Pacific power-balancing not as
a straightforward solution but a spectrum of potential gains and risks.
While welcoming the increasing availability of external forces to constrain

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1195

China and additional alternatives to diversify their developmental ties, the
Southeast Asian states also perceive—in varying degrees—a range of risks,
challenges and dangers, as elaborated below:
 Entrapment
In the recent years, the US–China rivalry has become more open, more direct, and more confrontational. As rivalries intensify and power relations
become more uncertain, the risk of entrapment increases for all Southeast
Asian states. As much as the ASEAN states would like to benefit strategically
and economically from big-power competition, they also recognize the danger
of being entrapped into big-power conflicts. After all, big-power intentions and
action-reactions are top-down processes beyond any state’s control. While the
balance-of-power logic compels small and secondary states to leverage credible countervailing forces to constrain an increasingly powerful China, they also
realize that partnering exclusively or even too closely with the United States
and other Quad members—especially in the defense and security domains—
may give the impression that the ASEAN states are siding with those powers
against China, which risks antagonizing Beijing and polarizing regional affairs.
Excessive push-back activities also risk escalating tensions between the United
States and China, as well as China and other powers. These developments may
eventually turn ‘constraining’ China into ‘containing’ China. Growing US–China
rivalry may then escalate into a hot conflict, entrapping Southeast Asia into
Cold War-style cycles of instability, tensions, and even armed confrontation
(Anwar, 2020; Hoang, 2021; Noor, 2021; Tan, 2020).
 Abandonment
Although the United States is still viewed as an indispensable power in the
ASEAN region, some regional states feel increasingly anxious and unsure of
the reliability of the US’s security commitment. This anxiety is attributable in
part to the US’s fluctuating attention to the ASEAN region, and in part to several ASEAN states’ experiences with their patrons (e.g., Malaysia’s experiences
of the British withdrawal of forces from its bases east of Suez in the late 1960s
and Thailand’s experiences of the US’s retreat from mainland Southeast Asia
after its defeat in the Vietnam War in 1975). Most importantly, anxiety spiked
because of unpredictable US policies during the Trump Administration
(2016–2020). While many regional states are pleased with the Biden administration’s pledge that ‘America is back’, most are also concerned about the
possible revival of some form of Trumpism following the next presidential
election. Concerns about the US’s long-term commitments are further complicated by a pattern in the US’s Asia policy: Washington would pay more

1196

C. C. KUIK

attention to its Northeast Asian allies and Quad partners than to Southeast
Asia (Liow, 2017; Murphy, 2021; Stromseth, 2021).
 Regional polarization
As the US-China rivalry broadens, there is growing fear of Cold War 2.0
and strategic bifurcation among regional countries. Since Trump launched
the trade war against China and pushed for ‘decoupling’ between the
world’s two largest economies, the US’s China policy has become increasingly zero-sum in its orientation. Southeast Asian states are also increasingly
uneasy about the growing rhetoric of ideological ‘divide’. These concerns
and fears have aggravated after the Russia–Ukraine war began in February
2022. As noted, unlike mainstream Western discourse which portrays the
war and ensuing developments as a ‘democracy versus autocracy’ conflict,
Southeast Asian states view the war more as an extension of big-power politics. In addition, while many in the West have advocated alliances as the
principal and straightforward solution for smaller states in both Europe and
Asia, most in Southeast Asia have continued to be allergic to a military solution. They view alliance and alignment targeted at a specific power as a
self-fulfilling prophecy, potentially resulting in polarization and turning a
security risk into an immediate threat.
 Group marginalization
As the Quad gains more momentum and more Asian and European
second-tier powers rally behind the Indo-Pacific narratives, Southeast Asian
states perceive the growing danger that these non-ASEAN initiatives risk
undermining ASEAN centrality in regional affairs (Choong, 2019; Stromseth,
2021; Hoang & Cook, 2021; Laksmana, 2020). Many in Southeast Asia,
including those who value the regional role of the United States and other
Quad members, have expressed such fears. Singaporean foreign minister
Vivian Balakrishnan, for example, stated in 2018 that the Quad’s FOIP ‘does
not adequately address if ASEAN could continue to be central to the
region’s architecture, and whether multilateralism and the rule of law would
remain the order of the day’ (Yong, 2018). A year later, after the AOIP was
launched by ASEAN, the foreign minister commented that ‘[t]he Outlook
will not stop strategic forces from pulling individual ASEAN Member States
in different directions. ASEAN unity—the pre-requisite for ASEAN
Centrality—will be tested’ (Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore, 2019).

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1197

Domestic roots: Drivers playing up, or down, external risks
While ASEAN states are all mindful of the abovementioned risks and other
dangers (e.g., big-power aggressiveness) because of their systemic positions,
they have opted to play up or play down the risks differently because of
different domestic reasons. Riskification, as noted, is a process of prioritization, reprioritization, and de-prioritization of certain risks over others. The
extent and ways a state plays up some risks while playing down others are
primarily functions of its elite’s domestic priorities, as necessitated by their
sources of legitimacy at home.
These riskification processes are demonstrated most clearly in the varied
regional responses to the South China Sea. To begin, there have been persistent differences across the claimant states’ responses: Vietnam and the
Philippines have, by and large, adopted a more direct, antagonistic
approach to push back China’s growing maritime assertiveness. By contrast,
the other two ASEAN claimants, Brunei and Malaysia, have opted for a
softer stance, avoiding directly confronting Beijing and avoiding openly
drawing in the United States and other powers into their respective South
China Sea policy (even though they have long maintained robust defense
linkages with those extra-regional powers). In addition, while Vietnamese
and Philippine leaders have openly and repeatedly described China as a
‘threat’, their counterparts in Bandar Seri Begawan, Putrajaya, and other
ASEAN capitals have avoided using such terms and instead use such less
confrontational terms as ‘challenge’ and ‘concern’.
The ASEAN states’ different responses, of course, are attributable to the
different degrees of China’s assertiveness (i.e., Beijing’s actions pose more
direct and greater security challenges to Vietnam and the Philippines than
to Brunei and Malaysia). However, the China factor alone cannot adequately
explain other counter-intuitive patterns, which include: (a) why, despite
China’s continuing maritime assertiveness (and the US’s continuing security
commitment), the Philippines under Rodrigo Duterte (2016–2022) chose to
downplay the maritime risks from Beijing by setting aside the Permanent
Court of Arbitration (PCA)’s 2016 ruling on the South China Sea (but upplay the political challenges from Washington when the Barack Obama
administration criticized Duterte’s ‘war on drugs’ policy by threatening to
end the Philippine–US alliance); (b) why, in recent years, non-claimants
Indonesia and Singapore have exhibited stronger stances over the South
China Sea than claimants Brunei and Malaysia (e.g., Jakarta’s high-profile
military exercises around Natuna and Singapore’s high-profile support for
the 2016 PCA ruling); and (c) why, despite their strong positions on the
South China Sea, Vietnam, the Philippines, Indonesia and Singapore—-like
all the other ASEAN states—have been pragmatic in forging robust

1198

C. C. KUIK

partnerships with China on a widening scope of diplomatic, economic and
security cooperation.
These puzzling patterns indicate that riskification is broader than securitization. Non-security risks are prioritized over security concerns when a
grave military threat is absent. Most important, the fact that similar security
risks posed by big-power aggressiveness (e.g., China’s maritime assertiveness) have been responded to differently by different leaders and different
countries—despite their insistence on a similar pragmatic posture toward
the competing major powers—highlight the domestic roots of the riskification processes.
Specifically, the varying patterns of riskification are the results of varying
pathways of the elite’s domestic legitimation. All ruling elites seek to justify
and enhance their political authority to govern at home (on legitimation,
see Alagappa, 1995; Beetham, 1991; Weber, 1947, 1978) by pursuing multiple pathways of legitimation vis-a-vis targeted domestic constituencies. In
Southeast Asia, development- and stability-based performance legitimation
has long been the primary pathways for the elite’s inner justification. Most
governing elites derive their political power—and their right to rule—primarily from their performance in maximizing economic growth, internal
order, and external stability. High performance, high authority and legitimacy; low performance, low authority and legitimacy. These sources of legitimacy necessitate that the state pursues productive external partnerships to
draw in as much concrete benefits as possible, in ways which enable the
elites to better perform their political and governance tasks at home.
Indeed, it is development-based performance legitimation that explains
why many Southeast Asian states have embraced China’s BRI-related economic statecraft, albeit in varying degrees and forms (see the articles in the
Special Issues of Asian Perspective, Vol. 45, No. 2 and No. 4). It also explains
why many states perceive the US’s Indo-Pacific strategy as an imbalanced
strategy: over-investing in military and maritime security (the first chessboard of Asian geopolitics), while under-investing in the economic and
development agenda (the second chessboard).
Thus, the imperative of performance legitimation explains why all ASEAN
states have pragmatically diversified their development and strategic ties
with as many partners and in as many domains as possible. Equally important, performance legitimation also explains why some ASEAN states have
downplayed the danger of big-power aggressiveness, casting China’s maritime assertiveness as a longer-term security concern rather than a pressing
threat. This group of ASEAN states tends to prioritize immediate, concrete
gains that are politically significant here and now, over potential external
dangers in the unknown future. They acknowledge the needs to develop
contingency measures (by pursuing multiple partnerships on an inclusive

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1199

and impartial manner) and to cultivate fallback positions, but these acts are
aimed primarily at hedging against a broad range of risks rather than pushing back against a direct and immediate danger. Indeed, some of the
ASEAN states choose to hedge lightly because they view over-reacting to
China’s growing assertiveness as politically undesirable and strategically
counter-productive (turning a potential concern into an instant threat).
Thus, they avoid openly over-playing the power-balancing card, instead
emphasize deference and reassurance over defiance and deterrence.
Such a light-hedging approach is in contrast to the more defiant (albeit
still selective and not across-the-board) posture by Vietnam, the Philippines
(save for Duterte years), and to some extent, Indonesia and Singapore,
which have opted to hedge more heavily than the other ASEAN states (on
‘light’ versus ‘heavy’ hedging, see Kuik & Rozman, 2015; Kuik, 2020). Heavyhedgers emphasize defiance over deference; they also invest more heavily
in risk-contingency measures than light-hedgers. The ruling elites in Hanoi,
Manila and Jakarta cannot afford to downplay the security risks from
China’s aggressiveness because the salience of nationalist identity-based
legitimation compels them to project a stronger and firmer posture visa-vis Beijing, especially over the South China Sea. Given the populace’s
anti-China sentiment, engaging in soft and compromising acts will only
erode the elite’s legitimacy. For heavy-hedgers, while acquiring economic
benefits and ensuring external stability are vital, these material gains must
not be perceived as sacrificing the countries’ sovereignty and territorial stakes.
While anti-China nationalism is a key driver motivating the elite’s higher
riskification in Vietnam, the Philippines and Indonesia, this factor is largely
non-existent in Singapore, a city-state with ethnic Chinese making up the
vast majority of its 5.6 million multicultural populations. Singapore’s riskification of China-related issues is rooted more in its elite’s concerns about
the island-state’s internal and external vulnerabilities. Internally, the elite is
fearful that China’s influence operation will erode the socio-political foundations of Singapore’s multi-ethnic social fabric and identity. Externally, the
elite is apprehensive of the growing tensions surrounding China in Asian
waters will disrupt regional stability, shattering the existential conditions of
Singapore’s open and heavily trade-dependent economy. Higher and wider
stakes call for heavier hedging efforts.
Thus, for Singapore and other heavy-hedgers, the elite’s domestic priority of striking a balance between performance legitimation and identity
legitimation leads to a highly prudent riskification process. The elite’s
greater attention to security risks—even the longer-term ones—lead these
states to emphasize contingencies, especially military ones, more. To guard
against power adventurism externally and to boost political authority

1200

C. C. KUIK

internally, they invest more heavily (than light hedgers) in deterrence and
defiance vis-a-vis China, albeit in indirect and selective ways. However, to
reduce and offset the possibility of strategic backfiring and economic costs,
they have also pursued the seemingly contradictory act of forging close and
comprehensive partnerships with China, the very source of their perceived
security risks. Hence, the heavy-hedgers, like the light-hedgers, insist on
being inclusive and impartial when dealing with competing powers at a
time of growing uncertainty.

Southeast asian hedging: reducing and offsetting risks
The above differences in the riskification patterns (chiefly a result of domestic factors) notwithstanding, there are commonalities across the alignment
postures (a function of structural conditions) of individual states. All three
attributes of hedging are discernible in Southeast Asian alignment practices: (a) an insistence on active impartiality toward the competing powers;
(b) an inclusive diversification approach in partnering with all powers; and
(c) an adoption of prudent contradictions to cultivate fallback positions.
Such hedging acts—an insurance-maximizing behavior—are aimed primarily at mitigating and offsetting risks under conditions of uncertainty. This is
different from realist-style security-maximizing ‘balancing’, where a state
completely aligns and sides with one power against another (as opposed to
being impartial), forming military alliances and other exclusive mechanisms
to counter-check a specific threat. It is also different from profit-maximizing
‘bandwagoning’, where a state sides with a predominant power
for benefits.
Completely aligning with one single power against another exposes
smaller states to the risks of entrapment, abandonment, polarization and
marginalization. To reduce and mitigate such systemic risks, the ASEAN
states—as a group and individually—have hedged by actively pursuing
impartial and inclusive partnerships with both competing powers. They have
also practiced prudent contradictions, i.e., using the opposing effects of measures to counteract and offset each other, thereby reducing exposure to
undesired eventualities. Hedging, fundamentally, is less about passively
avoiding risks, but more about actively reducing and offsetting risks, not least
to preserve strategic autonomy and maintain political maneuverability.
ASEAN states have sought to offset risks by pursuing a number of mutually-counteracting practices: (a) displaying both ‘selective deference’ and
‘selective defiance’ toward all powers (Kuik, 2020); (b) keeping their distance
from the Quad at the group level but forging close partnership with individual Quad members at the bilateral level; and (c) ensuring roughly parallel
progress or corresponding accommodation with both competing powers

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1201

(e.g., an advancement in the Southeast Asia-China cooperation tends to
take place alongside progress in the Southeast Asia–US ties).
Examples abound. In the face of emerging Indo-Pacific realities, virtually
all ASEAN states—even Thailand and the Philippines, the two U.S. treaty
allies in Southeast Asia—have repeatedly stressed that they are ‘neutral’ or
‘non-aligned’ (not taking sides vis-a-vis the competing powers, and not
necessarily non-alliance). Almost all ASEAN states—including Cambodia and
Laos, two of China’s closest partners in Southeast Asia—have endeavored
to diversify their strategic and/or developmental links with all available
powers, some with more layers of partnerships than others. Vietnam and
each of the founding member states of ASEAN have also pursued seemingly contradictory measures: upgrading strategic ties with their Western
and regional partners, while simultaneously developing comprehensive
cooperation with China, the very source of their security concerns.
The Southeast Asian states’ prudent contradiction is also evidenced in
their layered approach to the Quad. As noted, while the ASEAN states have
kept distance from the Quad at the group level (including staying away
from the idea of Quad-Plus), they have engaged individual Quad members
bilaterally and selectively to hedge against risks at different levels. That is,
on the one hand, all the states have, alongside their engagement with
China, collaborated with individual Quad members primarily on concrete,
readily achievable goals crucial to their respective elite’s governance functions, most notably pandemic assistance, developmental opportunities (in
connectivity-building, supply chains, digital economy, etc.), and less-sensitive areas of defense cooperation (capacity-building, asset transfer, and in
some cases, policy exchanges and joint exercises). On the other hand, however, almost all ASEAN states have avoided areas that might lead to strategic bifurcation and other dangers with domestic repercussions. Similar
ambivalent and selective approaches can also be observed in the Southeast
Asia’s engagement with China’s BRI and other initiatives.
By pursuing such seemingly contradictory actions, ASEAN states underscore their impartiality and inclusivity while creating space for buffering,
middling maneuverability and continuous cooperation for all regional states
and their partners. The bottom line is to avoid burning bridges and to avoid
putting all eggs in any single power’s basket. The net effects are continuously expanding multilayered partnerships. The greater the layers of
cooperation created on an inclusive basis, the greater the space for crossissue bargaining, mutual accommodation and institutionalized coexistence
among the partnering countries.
Indonesia offers an illuminating example of how a non-big power seeks
to hedge systemic risks by pursuing ‘selective defiance’ and ‘selective

1202

C. C. KUIK

deference’, side-by-side with active impartiality and inclusive diversification
vis-a-vis the competing powers.
Indonesia’s China policy has demonstrated a propensity to openly—and
selectively—defy Beijing’s will especially at sea, whist simultaneously demonstrating a quiet deference on politically-sensitive issues (e.g., allegations
of human right abuses against Uighur Muslims in Xinjiang). Under Joko
Widodo (Jokowi), Indonesia has shown a strong defiance over the South
China Sea issue. Although not a claimant country, Indonesia views China’s
extensive ‘nine-dash line’ as an encroachment into the Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ) of its resource-rich Natuna Islands. Jakarta’s open defiance was
vividly displayed when it renamed the area that falls under Indonesia’s
claimed EEZ the ‘North Natuna Sea’. This move followed the footsteps of
Vietnam and the Philippines, which renamed the disputed waters as ‘East
Sea’ and ‘West Philippine Sea’, respectively. Indonesia’s defiance has also
been exhibited by its ‘sink-the-boat’ policy as well as a series of massive
military exercises off the Natuna Islands from 2016 to 2020, which Jokowi
attended to draw attention to his administration’s resolve to defend
Indonesia’s sovereignty and maritime interests.
Such public defiance (displeasing China) has been displayed side-by-side
with signs of quiet accommodation (pleasing China). While ‘displeasing
China’ signals to domestic constituencies the elite’s determination to
defend Indonesia’s national interests, ‘pleasing China’ indicates to external
audiences Indonesia’s pragmatic approach to pursuing stable, cordial and
mutually productive foreign relations. These contradictory measures serve
as mutually-counteracting ‘antidotes’, sending intended signals to targeted
audiences at different levels, while offsetting each other’s effects. By avoiding total confrontation and total compromise, Indonesia maximizes its policy independence and prioritized interests, while minimizing the risks of
being viewed as siding with one power against another.
Despite—and exactly because of—its defiant stance over the Natuna,
Jakarta has shown some degree of deference to Beijing on several issues, but
without appearing submissive. This selective and limited deference is discernible in Jakarta’s low-key stance on the Uighur Muslims in China’s Xinjiang
Province. This stance is puzzling to some, as Indonesia is the largest Muslim
country in the world and it is experiencing a resurgence of political Islam
domestically. Jakarta’s selective deference to Beijing is also observable in its
low-profile response to the July 2016 Arbitral Tribunal’s ruling in favor of the
Philippines, a fellow ASEAN member. Indonesia, the de facto leader of
ASEAN, not only refrained from pressuring China, it also steered clear of supporting Hanoi’s insistence on including stronger language critical of Beijing
in the joint communique at the 2017 ASEAN meetings (Laksmana, 2016).

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1203

There is also evidence of Jakarta’s active impartiality and inclusive diversification vis-a-vis the competing powers. Under Jokowi, Indonesia has
strengthened its long-standing ties with the United States, expanding
cooperation on democratic development and good governance, while
exploring partnerships on such emerging areas as connectivity-building,
digital technology, climate change, and green energy (Bland, 2021;
Laksmana, 2021). Indonesia has also further broadened bilateral defense
engagement, for example, the special operations joint combined trainings
in June 2021, groundbreaking for the partially US-funded Batam Naval Base
in the Riao Islands the same month, participating in the largest-ever combined military exercises, Garuda Shield, in August 2021, and participating in
the bilateral naval exercise, CARAT, in November 2021 (Chatmas, 2021; Pen
Mako Korpaskhas, 2021; Reuters, 2021; Suoneto & Harsono, 2022). Beyond
the United States, Indonesia has also diversified its strategic ties with
numerous second-tier powers, for instance, holding 2þ2 security talks with
Australia, Japan, Germany, Vietnam; signing a defense cooperation agreement with France in June 2021, which covers defense technology transfer,
joint production of armaments, military education and training, peacekeeping cooperation, counter-terrorism, etc. (Nirmala, 2021; Suhenda, 2021; The
Jakarta Post, 2022).
Indonesia’s increasingly active alignment postures, however, are not realist-style ‘balancing’ because Jakarta has also actively enhanced its multidomain partnership with China. If Indonesia was ‘balancing’—a military
countervailing act to contain a shared threat—it would have completely
bandwagoned with the United States and ‘likeminded’ Indo-Pacific partners,
forming an exclusive coalition to push back against China. It would not
have taken the contradictory measure of simultaneously enhancing its
cooperative ties with China. Indeed, even as the Jokowi government was
conducting high-profile military exercises near Indonesia’s Natuna Islands,
as well as developing strategic alignments with more defense partners as
noted, Jakarta also made it a point to pursue these ties alongside seemingly
opposite acts: developing an institutionalized and comprehensive cooperative mechanism with China (which were elevated to a High-level Dialogue
Cooperation Mechanism in 2021); conducting joint naval exercises; partnering in vaccine cooperation, and accepting China’s offer to assist in salvaging
the sunken Indonesian submarine KRI Nanggala in the strategic Lombok
Strait (Grossman, 2021). Indonesia has also selectively embraced Beijing’s
BRI bilaterally and supported China’s other initiatives (e.g., Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank).
As observed by Dino Patti Djalal, former Indonesian ambassador to the
United States, among Jakarta’s many partnerships, ‘Indonesia’s partnership
with China is perhaps the most substantial’, adding that although there is

1204

C. C. KUIK

wariness of ‘the risk of becoming too politically and strategically close to
China’, Indonesia’s political establishment believes that ‘China represents
“the future” in that Indonesia’s economic fortunes will be inevitably and
increasingly tied to China’. This ambivalence has led to ‘a paradoxical tendency to be close but to also maintain some distance’ (Djalal, 2020). To
underscore its non-alignment and bebas aktif (free and active) foreign policy, Indonesia has simultaneously enhanced its partnerships with China, the
United States and other powers. Some of these partnerships are gradually
evolving into de facto alignments, as evidenced by such attributes as: converging strategic outlook, high-level dialogue or consultative mechanism,
and policy coordination. Non-alignment is pursued via multi-alignments
(Kuik & Evans, 2022).
Indonesia is not the only Southeast Asian state seeking to hedge the systemic risks by pursuing multilayered alignments, using them as mutuallyreinforcing and mutually-counteracting measures. Several other ASEAN
members have also had long-standing close defense and security partnerships with multiple extra-regional powers. Some have recently developed
similar arrangements with neighboring countries and regional powers.
These partnerships and arrangements serve as mutually-complementary
layers in each country’s alignment postures. Malaysia and Singapore, for
instance, have aligned, in varying degrees, with the United States on
defense and security, while continuing to take part in the Five Powers
Defence Arrangements (FPDA), the consultative mechanism involving the
United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. Thailand, the U.S. treaty ally,
forged a de facto alignment with China during the Indochina conflict in the
1970s and 1980s, and has revitalized this alignment since the 2000s. Other
relatively new alignments which have emerged and expanded recently in
the region include the Vietnam–US strategic partnership, Vietnam’s 2þ2
mechanisms with Indonesia and the Philippines, the Philippine–Japanese
defense partnership (De Castro, 2021; Kuik, 2020; Pongsudhirak, 2020;
Tan, 2020).
Southeast Asian states have also pursued varying mutually counteracting
measures to offset the effects of the existing alignments. Such mechanisms
may involve military and/or non-military means, depending on bilateral
dynamics, available options and prevailing needs. For instance, Hanoi has
relied on the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV)’s party-to-party ties
with the Communist Party of China (CPC) to counteract the effects of its
increasingly close defense and security partnership with Washington.
Singapore has used its continuously expanding economic and functional partnerships with China to offset the sensitivity of its robust strategic alignment
with the United States. Other original ASEAN members, including Indonesia
and Malaysia, have leveraged their bourgeoning military cooperation,

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1205

alongside bilateral diplomacy and BRI-related connectivity partnership with
China to balance their respective defense ties with the West. The reverse
(using the Western alignments to offset China’s influence) is also true.
In an age of ultra-uncertainty, the paradox of small-state alignment
choices is that regional states increasingly find it necessary to pursue nonalignment (impartiality) via multilayered-alignments. This paradoxical pragmatism is needed to hedge both systemic and country-specific risks amid a
fluid and unpredictable power structure. While an impartial, inclusive positioning serves to mitigate such systemic dangers as entrapment and abandonment, different layers of partnerships with different powers are
developed to minimize country-level risks when they must and maximize
elite-prioritized returns when they could.
As noted, which risks to minimize and which opportunities to maximize
are matters determined by the elite’s domestic priorities, as defined by their
sources of legitimacy. The elite’s varying legitimation needs lead to varying
riskification patterns, which in turn lead to varying hedging approaches.
The elites in countries such as Vietnam, Singapore, Indonesia and occasionally the Philippines need to strike a balance between identity-based legitimation (i.e., conforming to nationalist sentiments, or in Singapore’s case,
preserving its multicultural social fabric) and performance-based legitimation (ensuring growth and stability). This requires them to emphasize, or
even magnify, security risks and other country-specific contingencies as
much as, and even more than, developmental benefits. Such prudent riskification leads them to pay greater attention to military-based approaches,
chiefly through investing in greater layers of armaments and alignment
efforts (but without joining any anti-Beijing alliance). It also leads these
elites to display greater public defiance than selective deference vis-a-vis
China. These countries, in short, hedge more heavily than other
regional countries.
By comparison, other ASEAN states, like Brunei, Malaysia and Thailand,
have hedged more lightly. Riskification-wise, they have persistently downplayed the security risks associated with the rise of China, while emphasizing concrete developmental and functional gains. Responses-wise,
they have preferred the use of diplomatic means over confrontational
approaches in managing inter-state disputes, while displaying greater open
deference than selective defiance. Such sanguine riskification and its corresponding light-hedging tendencies, as noted, are in large part attributable
to their elite’s different legitimation logic.

1206

C. C. KUIK

Conclusion
This essay developed a two-level riskification framework to unpack the
dynamics of hedging behavior in an era of ultra-uncertainty. Based on the
ASEAN states’ responses to the intensifying US–China rivalry and other
emerging realities in the Indo-Pacific era, I argue that the smaller states’
perceptions of risks and the possible solutions are not black-and-white, but
shades of grey. Instead of viewing China as ‘the principal threat’ and viewing the US-led alignment as ‘the principal solution’, Southeast Asian states
perceive a much messier world: a wide array of risks and dangers, each
with constantly changing manifestations and magnitude, and all of which
require intricate, mixed measures. These result in various forms of hedging
acts, all characterized by three defining attributes: (a) active impartiality (not
taking sides vis-a-vis the competing powers); (b) inclusive diversification
(developing strategic and developmental ties with all powers); and (c) prudent contradictions (cautiously adopting seemingly opposite, mutually-counteracting options) aimed at offsetting multiple risks, thereby preserving a
fallback position amid enduring uncertainty.
The essay’s three findings are as follows. First, the shades-of-grey perceptions reflect a riskification process, where states identify, prioritize and
deprioritize elite-defined stakes and risks based on the changing external
and internal circumstances. Second, riskification is rooted in both structural
and domestic factors. Under the current structural conditions, when lessthan-clear threats coincide with less-than-certain support, riskification is
most susceptible to domestic factors, most notably elite legitimation.
Because of an elite’s domestic need to balance different pathways of justification (e.g., the various forms of identity-based and performance-based
legitimation), each state tends to identify and magnify some risks while
understating others, in ways that best preserve elite authority and interests
at home. Hence, while virtually all ASEAN states take seriously the risks of
entrapment, abandonment, polarization and marginalization, some states
have played up (or down) the dangers of big-power aggressiveness, interference and dependency. The two-level riskification dynamics thus explain
why some states hedge more heavily than other countries, emphasizing
public defiance over quiet deference, stressing strategic autonomy over
material gain, and paying more attention to military contingency. Third,
because risk perceptions and the attendant riskification processes are constantly subject to whims of reality, hedging is never static, but dynamic and
adaptive, constantly evolving to meet the changing needs at different levels.
These findings have theoretical implications for state alignment research.
The risk-based analysis—and the riskification framework more specifically—
challenge the security-based and threat-based paradigms, two dominant

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1207

schools of thought in the alignment literature. Thinking in terms of ‘risk’ is
analytically more revealing than ‘security’ and ‘threat’ because risk is a
more basic and fundamental factor of state external perceptions—and policy choices—than ‘security’ and ‘threat’, which are narrower and more specific in spatial and temporal terms. ‘Security’ refers to dangers that may
affect a state’s existential conditions (e.g., military aggression or non-military threats that result in loss of territory and lives), but it does not encompass such harms, typically viewed as non-security, e.g., political interference,
erosion of socio-political fabric, erosion of national pride, developmental
stagnation, financial crisis, and economic dependency. In the similar vein,
while ‘threat’ refers to potential harms that are more profound in magnitude and more immediate in the time horizon, it does not encompass possible dangers that are neither imminent nor pressing in nature. The notion of
‘risks’, by comparison, is more broad-based, allowing for more accurate
identification and systematic comparison across cases and time. Making
these differentiations is analytically significant because it avoids gross generalization and conceptual over-stretching. Lumping every conceivable danger as ‘security’ or ‘threat’ would not be helpful in unpacking the variations
in state perceptions, let alone explain the states’ policy choices. The types
and ranges of risks a state perceives and prioritizes (or deprioritize) shape
the state’s external outlook and alignment choices.
There are policy implications as well. Shades-of-grey perceptions require
a spectrum of policy options (involving multiple partners), rather than an
either-or dichotomous choice, i.e., aligning with one side against another.
The ongoing dominant policy discourse of depicting inter-state relations
and alignment choices as ‘democracies versus autocracies’, ‘likeminded versus non-likeminded nations’, and ‘clear-cut threat versus clear-cut support’
is superficial and unrealistic at best and counter-productive at worst. As
New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern argued at her July 2022 foreign
policy speech in Sydney,’it is overly simplistic to see geopolitics as a contest
between democracies and authoritarian regimes such as China, given that
‘the world is bloody messy’ (Knott, 2022). Cautioning against viewing issues
in ‘a black and white way‘, Ardern stressed that with tensions rising in the
Indo-Pacific, diplomacy ‘won’t succeed’ if ‘those parties we seek to engage
with are increasingly isolated and the region we inhabit becomes increasingly divided and polarised’, adding that governments ‘must not allow the
risk of a self-fulfilling prophecy to become an inevitable outcome for our
region’. Ardern’s prudent outlook is clearly shared by her counterparts in
Southeast Asia, as discussed above. Indeed, if the notion of ‘likeminded’ in
the Indo-Pacific discourse means ideologically adhering to liberal democratic principles, strategically getting on the US’s and Quad’s Indo-Pacific
bandwagon to counter-balance China, and decoupling economically from

1208

C. C. KUIK

China, there will be no takers from Southeast Asia. These attributes converge only partially with the ASEAN states’ external outlooks. Morever, they
expose the ASEAN states to greater external risks and complicate their
elites’ domestic tasks.
Future research should focus on several interrelated issues. Conceptually,
more rigorous parameters are required to better operationalize hedging as
alignment behavior distinguishable not only from balancing and bandwagoning, but also other alignment choices (e.g., passive neutrality, one-sided
diversification). Theoretically, more research should be done to further
examine the causal links between the pathways of legitimation, patterns of
riskification and forms of hedging behavior. This is a vital step to better
explain when states hedge, why states hedge differently, and how elite’s different domestic needs to balance the policy tradeoffs lead the state to pursue different types of hedging. In terms of policy-related research, more
systematic comparative analysis are required to better elucidate how the
increasing global uncertainty is pushing smaller states in different regions
to pursue non-alignment via varying forms of multi-alignment the ways
they do.

Acknowledgements
I thank Alice D. Ba, Paul Evans, Fong Chin Wei, Lai-Ha Chan, Pak K. Lee, John
Ciorciari, Jurgen Haacke, David Han, Yee Kuang Heng, Ann Marie Murphy,
Belaetham Kalimuthu, Bunn Negara, Mahmud Ali, Ilango Karuppannan, Mohamed
Jawhar Hassan, Zakaria Haji Ahmad, and the two anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments and input during the various stages of writing this paper. I
also thank Zikri Rosli and Fikry A. Rahman for their superb research assistance. The
usual caveats apply.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Funding
This project is supported by UKM Research Grant No. GP-2020-K007581.

Notes on contributor
Cheng-Chwee Kuik is Professor in International Relations and Head of the Centre
for Asian Studies, Institute of Malaysian and International Studies (IKMAS), National
University of Malaysia (UKM). He is concurrently a Non-resident Fellow at the
Foreign Policy Institute, Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Kuik’s research focuses on
smaller states’ alignment behavior, ASEAN-based multilateralism, and Asian security. He served as Head of the Writing Team for the Government of Malaysia’s

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1209

inaugural Defence White Paper (2020). Cheng-Chwee is guest editor of the Special
Issue on “Southeast Asian Responses to China’s Belt and Road Initiative” (Asian
Perspective, Spring and Fall 2021), co-author (with David M. Lampton and Selina
Ho) of Rivers of Iron: Railroads and Chinese Power in Southeast Asia (2020), and coeditor (with Alice Ba and Sueo Sudo) of Institutionalizing East Asia (2016). His current projects include: hedging in international relations, elite legitimation and foreign policy choices, and the geopolitics of infrastructure connectivity cooperation.

ORCID
Cheng-Chwee Kuik

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6318-085X

References
Acharya, A. (2014). Constructing a security community in Southeast Asia. Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781315796673
Acharya, A. (2019). Why ASEAN’s Indo-Pacific outlook matters. East Asia Forum. https://
www.eastasiaforum.org/2019/08/11/why-aseans-indo-pacific-outlook-matters.
Alagappa, M. (1995). (Ed.), Political legitimacy in Southeast Asia: The quest for moral
authority. Stanford University Press.
Anwar, D. F. (2020). Indonesia and the ASEAN outlook on the Indo-Pacific.
International Affairs, 96(1), 111–129. doi:10.1093/ia/iiz223
Ba, A. (2009a). Systemic neglect? A reconsideration of US-Southeast Asia policy.
Contemporary Southeast Asia, 31(3), 369–398. doi:10.1355/cs31-3a
Ba, A. D. (2009b). [Re]negotiating East and Southeast Asia: Region, regionalism, and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Stanford University Press.
Beck, U. (1992). Risk society: Towards a new modernity. SAGE Publications.
Beetham, D. (1991). The legitimation of power. Red Globe Press London.
Bernstein, P. L. (1996). Against the gods: The remarkable story of risk. John Wiley & Sons.
Bertrand, J. L., Brusset, X., & Fortin, M. (2015). Assessing and hedging the cost of
unseasonal weather: Case of the apparel sector. European Journal of Operational
Research, 244(1), 261–276. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2015.01.012
Bland, B. (2021, December 12). If the U.S. is serious about China competition, it
needs Indonesia. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/12/opinion/indonesia-us-jokowi-biden.html.
Bump, P. (2022, March 18). The newly important American political axis: Democracy
vs. autocracy. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/
2022/03/18/newly-important-american-political-axis-democracy-vs-autocracy/.
Caballero-Anthony, M., & Gong, L. (2020). Non-traditional security issues in ASEAN:
Agendas for action. ISEAS.
Capie, D. (2020). The power of partnerships: US defence ties with Indonesia,
Singapore and Vietnam. International Politics, 57(2), 242–258. doi:10.1057/s41311019-00205-8
Chan, L. H. (2020). Strategic hedging: A “third way” for Australian foreign policy in
the Indo-Pacific. Asia Policy, 27(3), 87–112. doi:10.1353/asp.2020.0045
Chatmas, L. (2021, November 1). US, Indonesia commence bilateral exercise CARAT
Indonesia. US Navy Office of Information. https://www.navy.mil/Press-Office/NewsStories/Article/2828209/us-indonesia-commence-bilateral-exercise-carat-indonesia/.

1210

C. C. KUIK

Choong, W. (2019). The return of the Indo-Pacific strategy: An assessment. Australian
Journal of International Affairs, 73(5), 415–430. doi:10.1080/10357718.2019.1639134
Christensen, T. J., & Snyder, J. (1990). Chain gangs and passed bucks: Predicting alliance patterns in multipolarity. International Organization, 44(2), 137–168. doi:10.
1017/S0020818300035232
Ciorciari, J. D. (2019). The variable effectiveness of hedging strategies. International
Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 19(3), 523–555. doi:10.1093/irap/lcz007
Ciorciari, J. D. (2010). The limits of alignment: Southeast Asia and the great powers
since 1975. Georgetown University Press.
Ciorciari, J. D., & Haacke, J. (2019). Hedging in international relations: An introduction. International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 19(3), 367–374. doi:10.1093/irap/
lcz017
Clapton, W. (2011). Risk in international relations. International Relations, 25(3),
280–295. doi:10.1177/0047117811415480
Corry, O. (2012). Securitisation and “riskification”: Second-order security and the politics of climate change. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 40(2), 235–258.
doi:10.1177/0305829811419444
De Castro, R. C. (2021). The Philippines’ hedging between the United States and
China: Can the Biden Administration tip the balance? Asia Policy, 28(4), 115–123.
Djalal, D. P. (2020, January 28). New dynamics emerge in Indonesia-China relations.
The Jakarta Post. https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2020/01/28/new-dynamics-emerge-indonesia-china-relations.html.
Dziedzic, S. (2022). March 9). Top intelligence chief warns China’s “troubling” strategic convergence with Russia poses threat to democracies. ABC News. https://
www.abc.net.au/news/2022-03-09/australian-top-intelligence-chief-warns-chinaautocracy-russia/100896170.
Emmerson, D. K. (Ed.). (2008). Hard choices: Security, democracy, and regionalism in
Southeast Asia. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Envall, H. D. P., & Wilkins, T. S. (2022). Japan and the new Indo-Pacific order: The rise
of an entrepreneurial power. The Pacific Review, 1–32. doi:10.1080/09512748.2022.
2033820
Fearon, J. D. (1997). Signaling foreign policy interests. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
41(1), 68–90. doi:10.1177/0022002797041001004
Fraser, B. (2010). Hedging in political discourse: The Bush 2007 press conferences. In
U. Okulska & P. Cap (Eds.), Perspectives in Politics and Discourse (pp. 201–214).
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Goh, E. (2008). Great powers and hierarchical order in Southeast Asis: Analyzing
regional security strategies. International Security, 32(3), 113–157. https://doi.org/
10.1162/isec.2008.32.3.113
Greenspan, A. (2013). The map and the territory: Risk, human nature, and the future of
forecasting. Penguin Press.
Grossman, D. (2021). Indonesia is quietly warming up to China. Foreign Policy.
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/06/07/indonesia-china-jokowi-natuna-sea-militarybri-cooperation-biden-united-states/.
Haacke, J. (2019). The concept of hedging and its application to Southeast Asia: A
critique and a proposal for a modified conceptual and methodological framework.
International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 19(3), 375–417. doi:10.1093/irap/lcz010
Haacke, J., & Ciorciari, J. D. (2022). Hedging as risk management: Insights from works
on alignment, riskification, and strategy No. 124, IPC Working Paper Series.

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1211

Harding, B., & Tran, K. M. (2019). US–Southeast Asia trade relations in an age of disruption. In CSIS Briefs. https://www.csis.org/analysis/us-southeast-asia-trade-relations-age-disruption.
Heng, Y. K. (2006). War as risk management. Routledge.
Hoang, T. H. (2021). ASEAN navigates between Indo-Pacific polemics and potentials.
Perspective, 49, 1–10. https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/
ISEAS_Perspective_2021_49.pdf.
Hoang, T. H. & Cook, M. (2021). Is the East Asia Summit suffering erosion?
Perspective, 61, 1–8.
Hyland, K. (1998). Hedging in scientific research articles. John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Jackson, V. (2014). Power, trust, and network complexity: Three logics of hedging in
Asian security. International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 14(3), 331–356. doi:10.
1093/irap/lcu005
Jones, D. M., & Jenne, N. (2022). Hedging and grand strategy in Southeast Asian foreign policy. International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 22(2), 205–231. doi:10.1093/
irap/lcab003
Keating, V. C., & Ruzicka, J. (2014). Trusting relationships in international politics: No
need to hedge. Review of International Studies, 40(4), 753–770. doi:10.1017/
S0260210514000059
Khong, Y. F. (2004). Coping with strategic uncertainty: The role of institutions and
soft balancing in Southeast Asia’s post-cold war strategy. In J. J. Suh, P. J.
Katzenstein, & A. Carlson (Eds.), Rethinking Security in East Asia: Identity, Power,
and Efficiency (pp. 172–208). Stanford University Press.
Kirk, J. (2020). From threat to risk? Exceptionalism and logics of health security.
International Studies Quarterly, 64(2), 266–276. doi:10.1093/isq/sqaa021
Knight, F. H. (1921). Risk, uncertainty, and profit. Houghton Mifflin.
Knott, M. (2022, July 7). ‘The world is bloody messy’: Ardern softens stance on China.
The Sydney Morning Herald. https://www.smh.com.au/national/the-world-isbloody-messy-ardern-softens-stance-on-china-20220707-p5azv1.html?campaign_
id=7&emc=edit_mbae_20220708&instance_id=66025&nl=morning-briefing%3Aasia-pacific-edition&regi_id=63067313&segment_id=97870&te=1&user_id=f9388
fed83044165b17310274cea3789.
Koga, K. (2018). The concept of “hedging” revisited: The case of Japan’s foreign policy strategy in East Asia’s power shift. International Studies Review, 20(4), 633–660.
doi:10.1093/isr/vix059
Korolev, A. (2016). Systemic balancing and regional hedging: China–Russia relations.
The Chinese Journal of International Politics, 9(4), 375–397. doi:10.1093/cjip/
pow013
Kuik, C. C. (2008). The essence of hedging: Malaysia and Singapore’s response to a
rising China. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 30(2), 159–185. doi:10.1355/cs30-2a
Kuik, C. C. (2016a). Malaysia between the United States and China: What do weaker
states hedge against? Asian Politics & Policy, 8(1), 155–177. doi:10.1111/aspp.
12240
Kuik, C. C. (2016b). How do weaker states hedge? Unpacking ASEAN states’ alignment behavior towards China. Journal of Contemporary China, 25(100), 500–514.
doi:10.1080/10670564.2015.1132714
Kuik, C. C. (2020). Hedging in post-pandemic Asia: What, how, and why? The Asan
Forum. https://theasanforum.org/hedging-in-post-pandemic-asia-what-how-andwhy/

1212

C. C. KUIK

Kuik, C. C. (2021a). Irresistible inducement? Assessing China’s Belt and Road Initiative
in Southeast Asia. Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/sites/default/
files/pdf/kuik_irresistible-inducement-assessing-bri-in-southeast-asia_june-2021.pdf
Kuik, C. C. (2021b). Getting hedging right: A small-state perspective. China
International Strategy Review, 3(2), 300–315. doi:10.1007/s42533-021-00089-5
Kuik, C. C. (2021c). Asymmetry and authority: Theorizing Southeast Asian responses
to China’s Belt and Road Initiative. Asian Perspective, 45(2), 255–276. doi:10.1353/
apr.2021.0000
Kuik, C. C. (2021d). The twin chessboards of US-China rivalry: Impact on the geostrategic supply and demand in post-pandemic Asia. Asian Perspective, 45(1),
157–176. doi:10.1353/apr.0.0010
Kuik, C. C. (2022). Southeast Asian states and ASEAN: A center of courtships and
cooperation. In D. Shambaugh (Ed.), International Relations of Asia (3rd ed.) (pp.
189–227). Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Kuik, C. C., Idris, N. A., & Md Nor, A. R. (2012). The China factor in the U.S.
“reengagement” with Southeast Asia: Drivers and limits of converged hedging.
Asian Politics & Policy, 4(3), 315–344. doi:10.1111/j.1943-0787.2012.01361.x
Kuik, C. C., & Rozman, G. (2015). Light or heavy hedging: Positioning between China
and the United States. Joint U.S.-Korea Academic Studies, 25, 2–9.
Kuik, C. C., & Evans, P. (2022). ASEAN and Ukraine: Non-alignment via multi-alignment? TI Observer, 21, 23–29.
Lake, D. A. (1996). Anarchy, hierarchy, and the variety of international relations.
International Organization, 50(1), 1–33. doi:10.1017/S002081830000165X
Laksmana, E. A. (2016). The domestic politics of Indonesia’s approach to the Tribunal
ruling and the South China sea. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 38(3), 382–388.
Laksmana, E. A. (2020). Whose centrality? ASEAN and the Quad in the Indo-Pacific.
Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs, 3(5), 106–177. https://media.defense.gov/2021/Mar/
12/2002599864/-1/-1/0/6-LAKSMANA.PDF/TOC.pdf.
Laksmana, E. A. (2021). A fragile fulcrum: Indonesia-US military relations in the age
of great-power competition. Asia Policy, 28(4), 106–114. doi:10.1353/asp.2021.
0057
Le Thu, H. (2020). Southeast Asia and Indo-Pacific concepts: From resistance to reticence to reaction. Security Challenges, 16(3), 53–57.
Leifer, M. (1996). The ASEAN Regional Forum. The Adelphi Paper, 36(302).
Lim, D. J., & Cooper, Z. (2015). Reassessing hedging: The logic of alignment in east
Asia. Security Studies, 24(4), 696–727. doi:10.1080/09636412.2015.1103130
Liow, J. C. (2017). Ambivalent engagement: The United States and regional security in
Southeast Asia after the Cold War. Brookings Institution Press.
Mako Korpaskhas, P. (2021, June 4). Latma Teak Spear Iron 2021, Korpaskhas TNI AU
dan US SOCPAC latihan menembak. TNI Angkatan Udara. https://tni-au.mil.id/
latma-teak-spear-iron-2021-korpaskhas-tni-au/.
Martin, P. (2021, December 14). Blinken blasts China, seeks to rally US allies in Asia.
Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-12-13/blinken-seeksto-bolster-southeast-asia-ties-to-counter-china.
McCarthy, J. (2022, January 20). With US focused on defense, China’s trade and infrastructure sweep Southeast Asia. The NPR Daily. https://www.npr.org/2022/01/20/
1073764647/us-china-southeast-asia-trade-defense.
Medcalf, R. (2020). Indo-Pacific empire: China, America and the contest for the world’s
pivotal region. Manchester University Press.

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

1213

Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore (2019, August 5). Minister for foreign affairs Dr
Vivian Balakrishnan’s written reply to parliamentary question. https://www.mfa.gov.
sg/Newsroom/Press-Statements-Transcripts-and-Photos/2019/08/05-Aug_MinWritten-PQ-Reply.
Morrow, J. D. (1993). Arms versus allies: Trade-offs in the search for security.
International Organization, 47(2), 207–233. doi:10.1017/S0020818300027922
Morrow, J. D. (2000). Alliances: Why write them down? Annual Review of Political
Science, 3(1), 63–83. doi:10.1146/annurev.polisci.3.1.63
Murphy, A. M. (2021). America is back? Opportunities and obstacles to restoring U.S.
credibility in Southeast Asia. Asia Policy, 28(4), 66–76. doi:10.1353/asp.2021.0060
Nguyen, P. (2020, September 10). Pompeo tells Southeast Asia to stand up to China, shun
its firms. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-asean-summit-idUSKBN2611XI.
Nirmala, R. (2021, November 2). US to boost strategic partnership with Indonesia
amid China rivalry. BenarNews. https://www.benarnews.org/english/news/indonesian/us-indonesia-boost-relations-france-11022021152228.html.
Noor, E. (2021, November 26). Malaysia on the horns of an AUKUS dilemma. Asia
Times. https://asiatimes.com/2021/11/malaysia-on-the-horns-of-an-aukus-dilemma/.
Parameswaran, P. (2022). Elusive balances: Shaping US-Southeast Asia strategy.
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-981-16-6612-4
Petersen, K. L. (2012). Risk analysis:A field within security studies? European Journal
of International Relations, 18(4), 693–717. doi:10.1177/1354066111409770
Pongsudhirak, T. (2020). Thailand’s strategic drift: Domestic determinants amidst
superpower competition. Australian Strategic Policy Institute. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/resrep25080.
Rajagopalan, R. (2020). Evasive balancing: India’s unviable Indo-Pacific strategy.
International Affairs, 96(1), 75–93. doi:10.1093/ia/iiz224
Reuters (2021, August 5). Indonesia hails “new era” for US ties, hosts biggest joint military drills. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/indonesia-hails-new-era-usties-hosts-biggest-joint-military-drills-2021-08-05/.
Sanger, D. E. (2021, March 26). Biden defines his underlying challenge with China:
‘Prove democracy works.’ The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/
26/us/politics/biden-china-democracy.html.
Schweller, R. L. (1994). Bandwagoning for profit: Bringing the revisionist state back
in. International Security, 19(1), 72–107. doi:10.2307/2539149
Seah, S., Lin, J., Suvannaphakdy, S., Martinus, M., Thao, P. T. P., Seth, F. N., & Ha, H. T.
(2022). The state of Southeast Asia: 2022 survey report. https://www.iseas.edu.sg/
wp-content/uploads/2022/02/The-State-of-SEA-2022_FA_Digital_FINAL.pdf.
Snyder, G. H. (1984). The security dilemma in alliance politics. World Politics, 36(4),
461–495. doi:10.2307/2010183
Storey, I. (2011). Southeast Asia and the rise of China. Routledge.
Storey, I. (2020). China–Southeast Asia relations in the era of Xi Jinping. In A. S. Ding
& J. P. Panda (Eds.), Chinese Politics and Foreign Policy under Xi Jinping (pp.
235–254). Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781003041481
Stromseth, J. (2021). ASEAN and the Quad: Strategic impasse or avenue for cooperation? Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2021/09/23/
asean-and-the-quad-strategic-impasse-or-avenue-for-cooperation/.
Suhenda, D. (2021, November 25). Indonesia, France extend strategic partnership,
discuss Indo-Pacific. The Jakarta Post. https://www.thejakartapost.com/world/
2021/11/24/indonesia-france-extend-strategic-partnership-discuss-indo-pacific.html.

1214

C. C. KUIK

Suoneto, N., & Harsono, H. (2022, February 16). A new era of US-Indonesia relations? The
Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2022/02/a-new-era-of-u-s-indonesia-relations/.
Taleb, N. N. (2018). Skin in the game: Hidden asymmetries in daily life. Random House.
Tan, S. S. (2020). Consigned to hedge: South-east Asia and America’s “free and open
Indo-Pacific” strategy. International Affairs, 96(1), 131–148. doi:10.1093/ia/iiz227
The Jakarta Post (2022, February 10). Indonesia signs deal with France to buy 6 Rafale
warplanes. https://www.thejakartapost.com/indonesia/2022/02/10/indonesia-signsdeal-with-france-to-buy-6-rafale-warplanes-.html.
The Japan Times (2022, March 12). In veiled criticism of China, Abe urges unity against
attempts to alter status quo. https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2022/03/12/
national/politics-diplomacy/abe-malaysia-ukraine-china/.
The White House (2022, May 21). Remarks by President Biden and President Yoon Suk
Yeol of the Republic of Korea in Joint Press Conference. https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/05/21/remarks-by-president-biden-andpresident-yoon-suk-yeol-of-the-republic-of-korea-in-joint-press-conference/.
Tunsjø, Ø. (2010). Hedging against oil dependency: New perspectives on China’s
energy security policy. International Relations, 24(1), 25–45. doi:10.1177/
0047117809340543
Wallander, C. A., & Keohane, R. O. (1999). Risk, threat and security institutions. In
R. O. Keohane (Ed.), Power and Governance in a Partially Globalized World (pp.
88–115). Routledge.
Walt, S. M. (1985). Alliance formation and the balance of world power. International
Security, 9(4), 3–43. doi:10.2307/2538540
Waltz, K. (1979). Theory of the international politics. Waveland Press, Inc.
Weber, M. (1947). The theory of social and economic organization. Oxford University
Press.
Weber, M. (1978). Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology. University
of California Press.
Wilkins, T. (2021). Middle power hedging in the era of security/economic disconnect:
Australia, Japan, and the ‘Special Strategic Partnership’. International Relations of
the Asia-Pacific, 1–35. doi:10.1093/irap/lcab023
Working, H. (1953). Futures trading and hedging. The American Economic Review,
43(3), 313–343.
Yong, C. (2018, May 14). Singapore not joining US, Japan-led free and open IndoPacific for now: Vivian Balakrishnan. The Straits Times. https://www.straitstimes.
com/singapore/singapore-not-joining-us-japan-led-free-and-open-indo-pacific-fornow-vivian-balakrishnan.

