Common Waters: Japan, South Korea, and Maritime Security
Assistance in Southeast Asia
Ryan Ashley, Jada Fraser
Asia Policy, Volume 18, Number 2, April 2023, pp. 101-126 (Article)

Published by National Bureau of Asian Research
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1353/asp.2023.0021

For additional information about this article
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/893910

[146.110.152.37] Project MUSE (2025-09-03 15:50 GMT)

asia policy, volume 18, number 2 ( april 2023 ) , 101–26
•

http://asiapolicy.org

•

Common Waters:
Japan, South Korea, and Maritime
Security Assistance in Southeast Asia
Ryan Ashley and Jada Fraser

[146.110.152.37] Project MUSE (2025-09-03 15:50 GMT)

ryan ashley is an active duty U.S. Air Force officer and a PhD student at

the University of Texas at Austin’s Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs
(United States). He is a Graduate Fellow at the Clements Center for National
Security and a Lecturer with the Air Force Special Operations School, where he
teaches courses on Japanese politics, culture, and security. His work has been
published by Nikkei Asia, Pacific Affairs, and War on the Rocks. He can be
reached at <rashley@utexas.edu>.

jada fraseris an MA student in Asian Studies in the Edmund A. Walsh

School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University and Editor-in-Chief of the
Georgetown Journal of Asian Affairs (United States). She is a member of the
Young Leaders Program and a U.S.-Japan Next Generation Fellow with Pacific
Forum. She has worked as a policy research fellow at the Edwin O. Reischauer
Center for East Asian Studies at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced
International Studies and as a research assistant for the Japan chair at the
Center for Strategic and International Studies. Her work has been published by
Nikkei Asia, the Lowy Institute, and the Australian Strategic Policy Institute.
She can be reached at <jcf136@georgetown.edu>.

keywords:japan-korea cooperation; southeast asia; south china sea;
mekong river; quad plus

© The National Bureau of Asian Research
One Union Square, Suite 1012, 600 University Street, Seattle, Washington 98101 USA

asia policy

executive summary
This article proposes that Southeast Asia is an ideal space for cooperation
between Japan and South Korea, given that both countries share strategic
priorities in the region.

main argument
Although Japan and South Korea’s bilateral ties are typically defined by
long-standing issues over historical issues and territorial disputes, each
country shares a wide set of geopolitical interests, leading to an “Asian
paradox” of mismatched priorities. This paradox is clearly visible in Southeast
Asia. While Tokyo’s strategic ties with the subregion, often via the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), are deeper and predate Seoul’s, South
Korea is increasingly expanding its own relations with the region alongside
its growing security outreach across the Asia-Pacific. As a result, Japan’s
and South Korea’s interests and activities are meeting in strategic spaces in
Southeast Asia, such as the South China Sea and the Mekong River basin.
Despite sharing common goals in these spaces, so far Seoul and Tokyo have
not collaborated in their efforts. While many hurdles still limit direct security
cooperation between Japan and South Korea, even indirect cooperation
in shared strategic spaces in Southeast Asia could provide both countries
an opportunity to build trust and provide security benefits to countries in
Southeast Asia.

policy implications
• The U.S. can incentivize Japan–South Korea cooperation in Southeast Asia
through the Quad Plus framework.
• Expanding the General Security of Military Information Agreement
between Japan and South Korea could be a method of increasing their
cooperation in Southeast Asia.
• To achieve greater cooperation toward these aims, the U.S. should support
strategic latitude for Japan and South Korea in Southeast Asia.

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

I

n November 2021 the newest flagship of the Philippine Navy’s
state-of-the-art frigate class, the BRP Jose Rizal, conducted exercises with
the JS Kaga, the unofficial aircraft carrier of the Japan Maritime Self-Defense
Force.1 This military engagement, hailed in both Manila and Tokyo as a
further step toward growing the countries’ burgeoning strategic relationship,
belied the crucial role played by another Asian maritime power—the Republic
of Korea (ROK, or South Korea). In the bidding process, Hyundai Heavy
Industries, a South Korean conglomerate, was chosen over competitors from
Germany, India, and Spain to build the Jose Rizal for the Philippine Navy.
The ship is also armed with anti-ship missiles and torpedoes designed for the
ROK Navy.2 While the exercises of the Kaga and the Jose Rizal contributed to
strengthening Japanese-Philippine maritime ties, these exercises would not
have been possible without the expertise and industry of South Korea.
This example is but one of many highlighting the importance of growing
maritime security relations between Japan, South Korea, and Southeast Asia,
comprising the member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). For Southeast Asia, a region with increasingly contested strategic
maritime spaces, Japan and South Korea are welcome security partners that
provide access to technology, industry, capacity building, and training, as
well as a degree of strategic assurance. For Japan, Southeast Asian maritime
security is a long-standing strategic priority, and expanding Japan’s reach
in the region is an ongoing imperative. For South Korea, Southeast Asia is
a region of growing importance, especially as it continues to perceive itself
as dependent on the trade and energy flows through Southeast Asia’s global
commons, and Seoul desires to expand and deepen its diplomatic heft in
the region.
This article argues that a triangular maritime security relationship
between Japan, South Korea, and Southeast Asia provides opportunities for
all three parties—and especially for cooperation between Seoul and Tokyo.
Despite their fraught relationship, Japan and South Korea share several
strategic priorities in Southeast Asia. Crucially, these shared interests are also
prioritized by Southeast Asian leaders, lending credence to the potential for
a triangular relationship that is increasingly beneficial for all. Nevertheless,
the weakest link in this triangle is the relationship between Seoul and Tokyo.

1 Jairo Bolleda, “PH Navy Holds Passing Exercises with Japanese Vessels,” Rappler, November 15, 2021
u

https://www.rappler.com/nation/photos-philippine-navy-holds-passing-exercises-japanese-vessels.

2 “Philippine Navy’s First Jose-Rizal Class Frigate Leaves South Korea,” Janes Defence, May 18, 2020

https://www.janes.com/defence-news/news-detail/2020/05/18/be6cf6ea-2d6d-4350-a37d6bed47605667.
u

[ 103 ]

asia policy

Strengthening maritime cooperation in Southeast Asia between Japan and
South Korea would thus benefit all parties, as well as implicitly serve the
strategic aims of the United States.
This article is organized into four sections:
u

u

u

u

pp. 104–7 provide a brief background on the Japan-ROK relationship
and summarize what the authors identify as the main narratives
surrounding Seoul-Tokyo reconciliation to distinguish the article’s
recommendations for facilitating cooperation from previous stalled
attempts.
pp. 107–13 lay out a methodology for understanding the triangular
relationship described above.
pp. 113–24 provide two case studies of potential maritime cooperation
between Japan and South Korea in Southeast Asia: the South China Sea
and the Mekong River basin.
pp. 124–26 summarize the argument made in the article and provide
recommendations for U.S. policymakers on how to best support the
consolidation of a mutually beneficial security triangle in the heart of
this priority region for security.

the japan-rok relationship
As many analysts of Northeast Asia emphatically argue, Japan and
South Korea’s strategic alignment is expansive, underscored by the countries’
democratic values and their shared perceptions of their regional security
environment (regarding North Korea and, increasingly, China). Yet their
dearth of cooperation belies their common interests.3 The two countries’
inability to effectively and sustainably work together, often referred to as the
“Gordian knot” of U.S. strategy in Asia,4 remains one of the United States’
greatest challenges in forging a coherent network of like-minded allies and
partners in the Asia-Pacific. This “Asian paradox” represents a serious threat
to stability in East Asia in the face of an ever more assertive China and a
3 Michael J. Green and Nicholas Szechenyi, Power and Order in Asia: A Survey of Regional

Expectations (Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies [CSIS],
July 2014) u http://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/
publication/140605_Green_PowerandOrder_WEB.pdf; and Jada Fraser, “The Cornerstone
and the Linchpin: Reconstituting U.S.-ROK-Japan Trilateral Security Cooperation,” Pacific
Forum, Issues & Insights, no. 22, November 2022, 1–12 u https://pacforum.org/publication/
the-cornerstone-and-the-linchpin-reconstituting-u-s-rok-japan-trilateral-security-cooperation.

4 Daniel Sneider, “Cutting the Gordian Knot in South Korea–Japan Relations,” East Asia Forum,

April 4, 2022 u https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2022/04/04/cutting-the-gordian-knot-insouth-korea-japan-relations; and Mintaro Oba and Ji-Young Lee, “Pragmatic Stability, Latent
Tensions,” Comparative Connections 22, no. 1 (2020): 119–26 u https://cc.pacforum.org/2020/05/
pragmatic-stability-latent-tensions.

[ 104 ]

[146.110.152.37] Project MUSE (2025-09-03 15:50 GMT)

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

nuclear North Korea. Coined in 2013 by former South Korean president Park
Guen-hye in her address to a joint session of the U.S. Congress, the term
“Asian paradox” highlights the disconnect between South Korea and Japan’s
“growing economic interdependence on the one hand, and backward political,
security cooperation on the other.”5 As the United States faces a widening gulf
between its resources and goals, improving cooperation with and among its
most important allies in Northeast Asia is now more critical than ever.
Numerous historical grievances frustrate meaningful Japan-ROK
cooperation, such as the use of forced labor and “comfort women” (a term
referring to Korean and other women forced into sexual slavery by the Imperial
Japanese Army).6 Previous attempts at reconciliation between Japan and
South Korea include efforts at “grand bargain” compromises, “threat focused”
strategies, and various levels of U.S.-involved mediation paths. Notably, there
are also observers who argue that the relationship has no hope for improvement
and therefore that focusing on mending it is a waste of time and resources.
Brad Glosserman and Scott Snyder provide an example of a “grand
bargain” compromise in their book The Japan–South Korea Identity Clash.
An agreement to improve relations, they argue, would rest on a series
of government statements and actions in which the United States would
recognize its role in both the origination and perpetuation of many of the
historical flashpoints in the Japan-ROK bilateral relationship; Japan would
acknowledge government responsibility for the crimes perpetrated against
South Koreans, pay reparations to individual “comfort women” and forced
laborers, and relinquish its claims to the disputed Dokdo/Takeshima islands;
and South Korea would accept the Japanese offer as definitive and would
pledge to commence a forward-looking relationship with Japan.7
“Threat focused” strategies, including those proposed by realist scholars
such as Michael Green and Victor Cha, keep the bilateral relationship focused
on shared security threats like North Korea. In his “quasialliance theory,” Cha
argues that Japan and South Korea are more likely to cooperate during times

5 Katrin Katz, “Korea-Japan Relations, 50 Years In: Demystifying the Paradox of Cyclical Tensions

and Rapprochement,” CSIS, August 13, 2015, 1 u https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/
legacy_files/files/publication/150813_Korea_Japan_Relations_50_Years.pdf; and Jada Fraser,
“Textbook Diplomacy: Nationalism and Historical Narrative Reconstruction in the Japan–South
Korea Relationship” (BA thesis, College of Liberal Arts, University of Texas at Austin, April 2020)
u https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/irg/honors/theses.php.

6 Jada Fraser, “Abe Shinzo and the Japan–South Korea Relationship: Near- and Long-Term Legacies,”

Pacific Forum, July 11, 2022 u https://pacforum.org/publication/pacnet-35-abe-shinzo-and-thejapan-south-korea-relationship-near-and-long-term-legacies.

7 Brad Glosserman and Scott A. Snyder, The Japan–South Korea Identity Clash: East Asian Security

and the United States (New York: Columbia University Press, 2015), 172–73.

[ 105 ]

asia policy

when they are uncertain about the U.S. commitment to the region.8 Green
has argued that even while compromises between Japan and South Korea on
historical issues remain remote, cooperation in areas of mutual interest can
productively strengthen the relationship. Green, among others, has previously
proposed a multipronged approach that involves addressing separate
issues through different channels to lower the costs of an all-or-nothing
solution—such as the grand bargain compromise—and create space and time
for incremental progress.9
“Pro-U.S. mediation” strategies, like one described by Mark Manyin,
consider Washington to have a necessary role in pushing for improvement in
Japan-ROK relations.10 Conversely, the “nonintervention” school of thought
sees U.S. intervention in the conflict as ineffectual and believes that Japan-ROK
relations will see sustainable improvement only when driven exclusively by
South Korea and Japan.11 Finally, there are those that fall into the “no hope”
camp and argue that working to bridge the divide between the two countries
is not worth the time and resources. This point of view is often promulgated
by the far left in South Korea and far right in Japan, and it can also be seen in
Samuel Huntington’s article “Clash of Civilizations?”12
As argued by one of the present authors elsewhere, it is important
to think creatively about ways to facilitate coordination that reflects the
respective strategies of both countries.13 While acknowledging the existing
8 Victor D. Cha, Alignment Despite Antagonism: The United States-Korea-Japan Security Triangle

(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000).

9 Michael J. Green, “The Japan-Korea Impasse and the Security of Northeast Asia,” Nippon,

November 5, 2019 u https://www.nippon.com/en/in-depth/a06403/the-japan-korea-impasse-andthe-security-of-northeast-asia.html.

10 Mark E. Manyin, “Managing Japan-South Korea Tensions,” Council on Foreign Relations,

Discussion Paper, December 2015 u https://www.cfr.org/sites/default/files/pdf/2015/12/
Discussion_Paper_Korea_Japan_Manyin.pdf.

11 Daniel Sneider and Cheol Hee Park, “Resolved: The United States Can Fix the Japan-South

Korea Problem,” CSIS, Debating Japan, no. 4, July 9, 2021 u https://www.csis.org/analysis/
resolved-united-states-can-fix-japan-south-korea-problem.

12 Samuel P. Huntington, “The Clash of Civilizations?” Foreign Affairs, 1993, 22–49 u https://

doi.org/10.2307/20045621; Cheol Hee Park, “South Korean Views of Japan: A Polarizing Split
in Coverage,” Korean Economic Institute, June 24, 2020 u http://keia.org/sites/default/files/
publications/kei_jointus-korea_2020_2.4.pdf; and Colleen Sharkey, “Japanese Far-Right Hate
Group Helped Popularize Anti-Korean Sentiment,” University of Notre Dame, Keough School of
Global Affairs, August, 25, 2021 u https://keough.nd.edu/japanese-far-right-hate-group-helpedpopularize-anti-korean-sentiment. For more on how left-wing Korean nationalism and right-wing
Japanese nationalism exacerbate tensions in the bilateral relationship, see Gi-wook Shin, “The
Perils of Populist Nationalism,” Stanford University, Walter H. Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research
Center, Commentary, September 2019 u https://fsi-live.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/
shin_perils_of_populist_nationalism.pdf.

13 Fraser, “The Cornerstone and the Linchpin”; and Nicholas Szechenyi, Hannah Fodale,

and Jada Fraser, “The Case for U.S.-Japan-ROK Cooperation on Democracy Support
in the Indo-Pacific Region,” CSIS, November 3, 2021 u https://www.csis.org/analysis/
case-us-japan-rok-cooperation-democracy-support-indo-pacific-region.

[ 106 ]

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

literature on Japan-ROK cooperation, this article proposes a different avenue
for such collaboration by the two countries—one that highlights the potential
for mutual security and commercial non-zero-sum gains—thereby deepening
security relationships in Southeast Asia. Japan and South Korea share
geopolitical goals, economic interests, and defense capabilities that would
make expanding maritime security assistance in Southeast Asia a unique,
mutually beneficial point of convergence. Such cooperation would fill the
demand for maritime security cooperation in Southeast Asia more efficiently
by streamlining duplicative efforts and reducing redundancies. As Japan
and South Korea are both increasing defense spending while facing human
resource and fiscal constraints, collaboration on maritime security efforts in
Southeast Asia would enable both countries to save resources and allocate
them elsewhere. Moreover, this article’s recommendation for Japan and South
Korea to partner with Southeast Asian countries is in line with empirical
evidence that Japan-ROK cooperation tends to be more easily pursued
when other countries are included.14 Although this article does not argue
that successful instances of Japan-ROK maritime security cooperation in
Southeast Asia would sequentially and necessarily lead to great improvements
in their diplomatic relationship, it makes the case that less politically sensitive
areas of security cooperation would build trust and normalize some aspects of
the security relationship, benefiting Southeast Asia as well.

methodology
This article postulates that relations between Japan, South Korea, and
Southeast Asia constitute three legs of a supply-and-demand security triangle.
Japan and South Korea, the suppliers of the security relationship, sit at the
bottom of the triangle, feeding Southeast Asian demand on the top. The
strongest, most established relationship within the triangle is that between
Japan and Southeast Asia. At the bottom of the triangle, Japan and South Korea
share links of investment and trade but few security ties. This is currently the
weakest leg of the triangular relationship. Figure 1 illustrates this triangle.

14 Naoko Aoki, “Takeaways from a Time of Increased Friction: South Korea-Japan Security

Cooperation from 2015 to Present,” Korea Economic Institute, September 23, 2021 u https://
keia.org/publication/takeaways-from-a-time-of-increased-friction-south-korea-japan-securitycooperation-from-2015-to-present; and Sarah Teo, “South Korea’s Defence Diplomacy in East
Asia,” S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Policy Brief, December 1, 2013 u http://www.
jstor.org/stable/resrep05835.

[ 107 ]

asia policy

FIGURE 1
Japan–South Korea–Southeast Asia Triangle
•
•
•
•
•

Ships
Aircraft
Technology
Training
Professional military
education
• Exercises
• Official development
assistance
• Free and Open IndoPacific programs

Japan

Southeast Asia
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

ASEAN access
Strategic trust
Regional influcence
Markets

• General Security of Military
Information Agreement (GSOMIA)
• U.S. alliances

Ships
Aircraft
Training
Official development
assistance
• New Southern Policy
programs

South Korea

As noted above, the triangle is far from equally balanced. Japan and
Southeast Asia share deep and dynamic relationships on both security and
economic matters based on decades of trust-building and mutually beneficial
arrangements, with Japan supplying the security needs of Southeast Asia. South
Korea and Southeast Asia, on the other hand, share comparatively modest but
growing security ties. While South Korea does not have the same stature as
Japan in Asia, the former is an increasingly welcome security partner across
ASEAN and provides crucial resources that Japan lacks, such as purpose-built
warships. Once more, though South Korea’s economic and security relations
with Southeast Asian states are less developed than those with Japan, South
Korea enjoys growing trust and access in the region, bolstered by its reliable
supply of security assistance.15
While each leg of this security triangle is crucial, this article focuses
on the relationship between Japan and South Korea, as this relationship is
arguably the weakest link among all three parties. Japan and South Korea,
outside of their alliance relationships with the United States, are both net

15 For further context on the growing relationship between South Korea and Southeast Asia, see,

for example, Kathryn Botto, “South Korea Beyond Northeast Asia: How Seoul Is Deepening
Ties with India and ASEAN,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, October 19, 2021 u
https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/10/19/south-korea-beyond-northeast-asia-how-seoul-isdeepening-ties-with-india-and-asean-pub-85572.

[ 108 ]

[146.110.152.37] Project MUSE (2025-09-03 15:50 GMT)

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

suppliers of security assistance and have little need for each other’s military
hardware or training opportunities. Therefore, despite the fact that Japan and
South Korea are closely aligned in geopolitical terms, they fail to cooperate
effectively on defense matters.16 This is because leaders in both countries are
often inclined to see the other as a liability, sharing an overall alignment on
regional goals but ignoring the other as either a potential source of supply or
demand for security partnerships.
This lack of motivation to cooperate stands in stark contrast with
Southeast Asian nations’ eagerness to partner with both Japan and South
Korea on defense-related initiatives. Conventional analyses of the region,
and ASEAN as a whole, frequently stress Southeast Asia’s desire to “not be
forced to choose” in the developing great-power competition between the
United States and China.17 Southeast Asia’s modern sense of regionalism
is rooted in its history of colonization and imperialism, followed by the
bloody ideological conflicts of the Cold War. Yet, despite a desire to remain
nonaligned from any one great power, the countries of Southeast Asia face
myriad security challenges, namely from the territorial ambitions of China.
As such, Southeast Asia faces two seemingly contradictory needs: increasing
military assistance from outside powers, while avoiding alignment on either
side of the U.S.-China rivalry.
Here, South Korea and Japan prove ideal partners. Each is a modernized and
sophisticated military power that desires greater security ties with the region and
holds similarly skeptical views of China’s goals in the region. Both countries are
also robust maritime powers, able to provide training, support, and resources for
Southeast Asia’s greatest security need: navies and coast guards.18 Importantly,
thus far, ASEAN states’ building of closer relations with Japan and South Korea
has not antagonized China enough to spark a diplomatic backlash from Beijing.19
16 Michael J. Green and Cheol Hee Park, “Assessing the Direction of South Korea–Japan Relations in a

New Era,” CSIS, Commentary, October 6, 2020 u https://www.csis.org/analysis/assessing-directionsouth-korea-japan-relations-new-era; and Green and Szechenyi, Power and Order in Asia.

17 Multiple versions of this commonly used phrase exist across media relevant to Southeast Asia.

For examples, see Jonathan Stromseth, “Don’t Make Us Choose: Southeast Asia in the Throes of
U.S.-China Rivalry,” Brookings Institution, October 2019 u https://www.brookings.edu/research/
dont-make-us-choose-southeast-asia-in-the-throes-of-us-china-rivalry.

18 While South Korea is not typically included in the category of “maritime powers” through force of

its navy alone, this article will consider South Korea an influential maritime power thanks to the
combined capabilities of its navy, shipbuilding sector, and maritime weapons sales capacity.

19 Koki Shigenoi, ed., “Japan’s Role for Southeast Asia Amidst the Great Power Competition and

Its Implications for the EU-Japan Partnership,” Konrad Adenauer Stiftung, April 2022 u https://
www.kas.de/documents/267709/18041095/Japan%27s+role+in+South+East+Asia+amidst+the+g
reat+power+competition+%28English%29.pdf/160eef85-d166-9d09-3388-f6a30afdbe10?version
=1.0&t=1651136707700; and Lee Jaehyon, “New Emphasis Needed: South Korea’s New Southern
Policy and ASEAN,” ISEAS Perspective, no. 110 (2020) u https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wp-content/
uploads/2020/09/ISEAS_Perspective_2020_110.pdf.

[ 109 ]

asia policy

Japan and South Korea, too, have their own motivations for deepening
security ties with Southeast Asia. Despite Seoul and Tokyo’s current
estrangement, each holds a large stake in maintaining the U.S.-backed security
order in the Indo-Pacific region. This order is buttressed by the free movement
of trade and goods across strategic chokepoints such as the Malacca Strait and
South China Sea, both of which are in Southeast Asia. Japan and South Korea
also depend on these waterways to import the vast majority of their energy
and to transport their exports to Africa, Europe, and South Asia.20
The geopolitical importance of Southeast Asia to modern Japan has been
well understood by leaders in Tokyo for more than a century. In the decades
following the Meiji Restoration in 1868, political doctrines of “southward
expansion” (nanshin-ron) stressed the importance of the region as a natural
sphere of economic and political influence for Japanese imperial control.21
A highly militarized version of the doctrine became official national policy
in 1935 and motivated Imperial Japan’s invasion of the region in the early
years of World War II.22 Despite its defeat and occupation, Japan continued to
prioritize the region in the postwar period, albeit now as a zone of economic
reconstruction rather than military conquest. Throughout the Cold War, Japan
rebuilt trust with countries across the region through economic outreach and
“heart-to-heart” diplomacy.23 The foreign policy doctrines of Prime Ministers
Shigeru Yoshida and Takeo Fukuda, for example, both placed Southeast Asia
as a priority in Tokyo’s grand strategy.
Today, surveys suggest that Japan is the most trusted country among
political and economic leaders in Southeast Asia, enabling Tokyo to freely
and easily engage with the region on economic and security affairs.24 Indeed,
Southeast Asia is central to Japan’s “Free and Open Indo-Pacific” strategy,
which stresses the importance of free trade, defense cooperation, and
regional integration.25 Japan is also the region’s largest sovereign investor,
largest source of foreign aid, and consistently in the top-three trade partners
20 “Asia Region Is Most Dependent on Middle East Crude Oil, LNG Supplies,” Reuters,

January 8, 2020 u https://www.reuters.com/article/asia-mideast-oil-factbox/
factbox-asia-region-is-most-dependent-on-middle-east-crude-oil-lng-supplies-idINKBN1Z71VW.

21 Hajime Shimizu, Southeast Asia in Modern Japanese Thought: The Development and Transformation

of “Nanshin Ron” (Canberra: Australian National University, 1980).

22 Ibid.
23 Toru Yano, “The ‘Fukuda Doctrine’ and Its Implications for Southeast Asia: A Japanese Perspective,”

Southeast Asian Affairs (1978): 60–64 u http://www.jstor.org/stable/27908336.

24 Sharon Seah et al., “The State of Southeast Asia: 2022 Survey Report,” ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute,

February 2022 u https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/The-State-of-SEA-2022_
FA_Digital_FINAL.pdf.

25 Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), “Foreign Policy: Free and Open Indo-Pacific,” May 16, 2022 u

https://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/page25e_000278.html.

[ 110 ]

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

of each Southeast Asian country.26 Put simply, Japan remains an economic
powerhouse in Southeast Asia with a great deal of strategic access and influence
as a result. The Kishida administration’s ambitious new National Security
Strategy, released in December 2022, commits Japan to even greater security
and economic outreach to Southeast Asia, signaling its high prioritization of
a continued presence in the region.27
Since the decades following the division of the peninsula at the end of the
Korean War, South Korea, too, has long recognized the strategic importance
of Southeast Asia. During the postwar consolidation of the South Korean
government, engagement with Southeast Asia mainly hinged on the diplomatic
battle with North Korea to secure international recognition and legitimacy.28
Since the early 1970s, South Korea has, to varying degrees, sought to develop
relations with countries in Southeast Asia based on “economic diplomacy
and diplomatic pragmatism.”29 From the late 1990s through the early years
of the 2000s, South Korea’s self-recognition as an important middle power
accelerated its outreach as a “bridge” between Southeast and Northeast Asia
and as a “model of economic success and democratic development [that]
developing Southeast Asian countries [could] adopt.”30 During the same
time, hallyu, or the “Korean wave” of pop culture, proved a hit in Southeast
Asia.31 In addition to increasing the value of ASEAN-ROK trade—Korean
cultural exports to ASEAN countries increased from $800 million in 2015 to
$1.3 billion in 2017—hallyu enhances South Korea’s soft power and is utilized
in support of the country’s foreign policy goals.32

26 “A Glimpse into Japan’s Understated Financial Heft in South-East Asia,” Economist, August 14,

2021 u https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2021/08/14/a-glimpse-into-japansunderstated-financial-heft-in-south-east-asia.

27 Cabinet of Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan (Tokyo, December 2022) u https://www.cas.

go.jp/jp/siryou/221216anzenhoshou/nss-e.pdf.

28 David I. Steinberg, “South Korea in Southeast Asia: Enhancing Returns and Reassurances,”

Southeast Asian Affairs (1995): 74–88 u http://www.jstor.org/stable/27912120.

29 Brian Bridges, “From ASPAC to EAS: South Korea and Southeast Asia,” Asian Affairs 41, no. 2

(2014): 33–55 u http://www.jstor.org/stable/44074542.

30 Hallyu describes the rise in popularity of Korean popular culture content including television

dramas, movies, pop songs and their associated celebrities. Sarah Teo, Bhubhindar Singh, and See
Seng Tan, “Southeast Asian Perspectives on South Korea’s Middle Power Engagement Initiatives,”
Asian Survey 56, no. 3 (2016): 555–80 u https://www.jstor.org/stable/26364373.

31 Shim Doobo, “Korean Wave in Southeast Asia,” Kyoto Review of Southeast Asia 11 (2011) u https://

kyotoreview.org/issue-11/korean-wave-in-southeast-asia/#:~:text=Since%20the%20late%20
1990s%2C%20an,of%20Korean%20popular%20culture%20in.

32 Primastuti Handayani, “Korean Wave in ASEAN Keeps Going Strong,” Jakarta Post, April 25, 2019

https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2019/04/25/korean-wave-in-asean-keeps-going-strong.
html; and Dal Yong Jin, “The Korean Wave,” Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, May 26,
2020 u https://gjia.georgetown.edu/2020/05/26/the-korean-wave.
u

[ 111 ]

asia policy

Former president Moon Jae-in’s signature foreign policy, the New
Southern Policy (NSP), was to some extent a reformulation of South Korea’s
strategy of the past several decades. The NSP sought to elevate South Korea’s
relations with Southeast and South Asia to the same level as relations with
China, Japan, and the United States. Importantly, the NSP was motivated
by the need to diversify economic and security relations amid U.S.-China
strategic competition—as being in the middle of this competition is an
uncomfortable position that South Korea and Southeast Asia both intimately
understand. South Korea also has strong economic interests in the region.
Since 2017, the ten member countries of ASEAN have ranked as South Korea’s
second-largest trading partner (after China), with trade volume more than
tripling from $61.8 billion in 2006 to $189.5 billion in 2021.33 In addition,
between 2012 and 2021, South Korean foreign direct investment in Southeast
Asia more than doubled, underscoring the government’s recognition of the
region’s growing strategic significance (Figure 2).34
The “peace pillar” of the NSP focused on deepening security relations with
Southeast Asia, though this pillar often faced criticism as the least substantial
element of the policy, as it avoided potentially sensitive areas of traditional
security cooperation.35 South Korea’s military ties with the region remain
comparatively less developed than its economic and soft-power linkages.
However, the ASEAN-ROK Defense Ministerial Dialogue, recently launched
in November 2021, heavily emphasizes maritime security cooperation in its
action plan.36 Most notably, the Yoon Suk-yeol administration’s “Strategy
for a Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific Region” places a renewed
emphasis on deepening both economic and defense relations with Southeast
Asia.37 Seemingly, then, Japan’s and South Korea’s strategic aims in Southeast
Asia (and even those of the United States) are not in conflict with one
another. Rather, they share enough alignment to suggest that the region is a
33 Association of Southeast Asian Nations Member States (ASEAN), “The Nineteenth AEM-ROK

Consultation,” Joint Media Statement, September 16, 2022 u https://asean.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/09/ADOPTED-AEM-ROK-19-Media-Statement.pdf; and “S. Korea, ASEAN
to Upgrade Their FTA,” Korea Herald, July 27, 2021 u https://www.koreaherald.com/view.
php?ud=20210727000496.

34 “Statistics of Foreign Direct Investment,” Korea Eximbank u https://stats.koreaexim.go.kr/en/

enMain.do.

35 Kathryn Botto, “South Korea Beyond Northeast Asia: How Seoul Is Deepening Ties with

India and ASEAN,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, October 19, 2021 u https://
carnegieendowment.org/2021/10/19/south-korea-beyond-northeast-asia-how-seoul-isdeepening-ties-with-india-and-asean-pub-85572.

36 “S. Korea, ASEAN Launch New Defense Ministerial Dialogue,” Yonhap News Agency, November

10, 2021 u https://en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20211110009400325.

37 Ministry of Foreign Affairs (ROK), Strategy for a Free, Peaceful, and Prosperous Indo-Pacific Region

(Seoul, December 2022) u https://www.mofa.go.kr/eng/brd/m_5676/view.do?seq=322133.

[ 112 ]

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

FIGURE 2
South Korean FDI in Southeast Asia

Source: “Statistics of Foreign Direct Investment,” Korea Eximbank u https://stats.koreaexim.go.kr/en/
enMain.do.

[146.110.152.37] Project MUSE (2025-09-03 15:50 GMT)

logical point of collaboration between two like-minded countries. The Yoon
administration’s outreach campaign to Tokyo to work together on increasing
pragmatic cooperation holds promising potential for strengthening the
Japan-ROK leg of the security triangle with Southeast Asia.38

case studies
South China Sea
Japan, South Korea, and many Southeast Asian countries share similar
interests and concerns regarding security in the South China Sea. All three
parties are heavily reliant on South China Sea trade routes for their economic
and food security. The assertive and provocative actions of China’s People’s

38 Lee Haye-ah, “Yoon, Japan’s Kishida Agreed to Seek Quick Settlement of Forced Labor

Issue: Official,” Yonhap News Agency, November 16, 2022 u https://en.yna.co.kr/view/
AEN20221116008500315; and Terrence Matsuo, “Uncertain Prospects for Yoon’s Japan
Initiative,” Korea Economic Institute, August 2, 2022 u https://keia.org/the-peninsula/
uncertain-prospects-for-yoons-japan-initiative.

[ 113 ]

asia policy

Liberation Army (PLA) Navy in the South China Sea, motivated by the
country’s disputed claims within its so-called nine-dash line, directly threaten
the integrity of these sea lanes and hold all parties’ access at risk. Japan and
South Korea can cooperate to bolster maritime security efforts with Southeast
Asian countries to secure open access and safeguard rule of law in the South
China Sea along two main lines of effort: coordinating maritime capacitybuilding activities to reduce redundancies and coordinating technology
transfers to improve maritime domain awareness capabilities.
The South China Sea can be considered a global flashpoint due to the
vast amounts of international trade transiting its sea lanes. Approximately
one-third of global maritime trade passes through the area, a proportion
that increases for the large economies of Northeast Asia.39 Japan’s and South
Korea’s most important shipping routes transit the South China Sea: in 2016,
42% of Japan’s trade and approximately 50% of South Korea’s trade transited
the South China Sea.40
An extremely important subset of trade for Japan and South Korea is
energy. Sea lanes in the South China Sea carry approximately 85%–90% of
Japan’s and South Korea’s oil imports and 33% of Japan’s and South Korea’s
liquefied natural gas (LNG) imports.41 Both states are increasingly reliant on
Australia, the largest LNG exporter in the world as of 2021, for supplies, and
most Australian LNG exports pass through the South China Sea.42 Japan and
several Southeast Asian countries also share resource extraction interests in
the South China Sea, as the area is estimated to hold modest but significant
LNG deposits. Many of the disputes between Southeast Asian claimant
states and China center on rights to drilling and resource exploration, and
China’s assertive posture prevents Japan from exploring partnering options
for energy extraction.43

39 Uptin Saiidi, “Here’s Why the South China Sea Is Highly Contested,” CNBC, February 7, 2018 u

https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/07/heres-why-the-south-china-sea-is-highly-contested.html.

40 “How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea?” CSIS, China Power, updated January 25, 2021

https://chinapower.csis.org/much-trade-transits-south-china-sea; author’s own calculations
based on “How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea?”; and “South Korean Foreign
Trade in Figures,” Santander Trade Portal, May 2022 u https://santandertrade.com/en/portal/
analyse-markets/south-korea/foreign-trade-in-figures.
u

41 Mikkal E. Herberg, “The Role of Energy in Disputes over the South China Sea,” National Bureau of

Asian Research, June 28, 2016 u https://www.nbr.org/publication/the-role-of-energy-in-disputesover-the-south-china-sea.

42 Josh Lewis, “Australia Remains World’s Top LNG Exporter but It Could Lose Its Crown

This Year,” Upstream, January 19, 2022 u https://www.upstreamonline.com/lng/
australia-remains-worlds-top-lng-exporter-but-it-could-lose-its-crown-this-year/2-1-1147625.

43 Semiha Karaoglu, “The South China Sea Dispute and Its Challenges to Japan’s Economic Interests,”

Asia Power Watch, August 31, 2020 u https://asiapowerwatch.com/the-south-china-sea-disputeand-its-challenges-to-japans-economic-interests.

[ 114 ]

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

Perhaps the most underappreciated factor driving state interests in
the South China Sea is fishing. The impact of dwindling fish stocks for
food security will only continue to impel intervention by regional states,
considering each country’s level of food dependence. The South China Sea
is home to about half of the world’s fishing vessels and produces around 12%
of the global fish catch.44 Seafood accounts for between a third and a half of
the protein intake in many Southeast Asian countries, as well as in Japan and
South Korea, increasing anxiety across the region that these worrying trends
in fishing could lead to a human security crisis. Data reveals that South China
Sea fishing stocks have declined by 75%–95% since the 1950s, and catch rates
have decreased by 66%–75% in the past two decades.45 Unprecedented levels
of illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing further complicate
fishing viability in the sea. Tellingly, when looking at the ten worst-performing
countries in IUU fish exports and imports, only two countries—Germany
and India—are not fishing in the South China Sea.46
Given these shared interests and concerns regarding the South China
Sea, Japan and South Korea are unsurprisingly each unilaterally involved in
providing maritime security assistance to Southeast Asian countries. Both
countries share strategic interests in seeing more capable Southeast Asian
claimant states contribute to safeguarding open sea lanes in the South China
Sea. By assisting with capacity-building and training activities with Southeast
Asian coast guards and navies, Japan and South Korea enhance these
countries’ ability to resist PLA Navy pressure. But more could be done, with
greater efficacy, if these efforts were coordinated between Japan, South Korea,
and each Southeast Asian partner country.
Japan has provided maritime assistance to Southeast Asia since the
1960s, when the Japan Self-Defense Forces began re-engaging in the global
security community.47 Significant concerns over China’s military power
projection capabilities and the PLA Navy’s assertive posture over territorial

44 Asyura Salleh, “The South China Sea: Preventing the Tyranny of the Commons,” Diplomat,

January 4, 2020 u https://thediplomat.com/2020/01/the-south-china-sea-preventing-the-tyrannyof-the-commons/#:~:text=Fishery%20stocks%20in%20the%20South%20China%20Sea%20are%20
necessary%20to,of%20the%20world’s%20fishing%20vessels.

45 Gregory B. Poling, “Illuminating the South China Sea’s Dark Fishing Fleets,” CSIS, January 9, 2019
u

https://ocean.csis.org/spotlights/illuminating-the-south-china-seas-dark-fishing-fleets.

46 Kevin Varley et al., “Fight Over Fish Fans a New Stage of Conflict in South China Sea,” Bloomberg,

September 2, 2020 u https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2020-dangerous-conditions-in-depletedsouth-china-sea.

47 Hanh Ngyuen, “Maritime Capacity-Building Cooperation between Japan and Vietnam: A Confluence

of Strategic Interests,” ISEAS Perspective, no. 128 (2021) u https://www.iseas.edu.sg/articlescommentaries/iseas-perspective/2021-148-maritime-capacity-building-cooperation-between-japanand-vietnam-a-confluence-of-strategic-interests-by-hanh-nguyen.

[ 115 ]

asia policy

and maritime disputes in the South China Sea catalyzed exponential growth
in Japan’s assistance to the other South China Sea claimant states. The Japan
Maritime Self-Defense Force only began conducting meaningful bilateral
capacity-building exercises with Southeast Asian navies in the past decade,
but cooperation has quickly and steadily grown.
In particular, Japanese and Philippine maritime forces enjoy especially
strong military-to-military ties and began cooperating in bilateral naval
exercises in 2012. The Philippines and Japan share a number of “firsts” for
Japan in the region. For example, the Philippines hosted the first deployment of
Japanese armored vehicles to Southeast Asia after World War II, and it was the
first country to acquire Japanese defense equipment of any kind. It was also the
first site for deployment of Japan’s Amphibious Rapid Deployment Brigade.48
Most recently, in the first-ever “2+2” summit, a meeting of the two countries’
foreign and defense ministers, Japan and the Philippines agreed to pursue a
reciprocal access agreement. The joint statement from the meeting agreed on
the need to facilitate combined exercises in the face of China’s increasingly
assertive pursuit of sovereignty claims in regional waters and “strongly opposed
actions that may increase tensions” in the South China Sea.49
While South Korea has a shorter history of maritime security cooperation
with Southeast Asian states, this cooperation has accelerated in the past decade
amid growing concerns about aggressive PLA Navy actions in the South China
Sea. As highlighted above, ROK-Philippines defense ties are steadily growing.
Beyond the delivery of the Philippine Navy’s first two guided-missile frigates,
BRP Jose Rizal and BRP Antonio Luna by Hyundai Heavy Industries, the
South Korean government also donated a Pohang-class corvette that is now
considered one of the most capable and heavily armed ships of the Philippine
fleet. In a recent development, one of the Jose Rizal–class frigates was equipped
with South Korean–made SSM-700K C-Star anti-ship cruise missiles, the first
time any Philippine Navy ship has been thus equipped.50 The ROK Navy and
the Philippine Navy regularly hold bilateral talks, conduct officer exchanges,
and run education, training, and other capability-development programs.51
48 John Bradford, “Southeast Asia: A New Strategic Nexus for Japan’s Maritime Strategy,”

Center for International Maritime Security, September 21, 2020 u https://cimsec.org/
southeast-asia-a-new-strategic-nexus-for-japans-maritime-strategy.

49 “Joint Statement of the Inaugural Japan-Philippines Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (‘2+2’),”

Department of Foreign Affairs (Philippines), April 9, 2022 u https://dfa.gov.ph/dfa-news/statementsand-advisoriesupdate/30364-joint-statement-of-the-inaugural-japan-philippines-foreign-anddefense-ministerial-meeting-2-2.

50 Collin Koh, Twitter, June 3, 2022 u https://twitter.com/CollinSLKoh/status/1532632799366131713.
51 Priam Nepomuceno, “PH, S. Korea to Deepen Maritime Security Ties,” Philippine News Agency,

March 25, 2021 u https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1134805.

[ 116 ]

[146.110.152.37] Project MUSE (2025-09-03 15:50 GMT)

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

In another first, the South Korean and Philippine defense ministers agreed
to include the ROK Marine Corps in a combined exercise in the Philippines
in October 2022.52 During the bilateral meeting, they also discussed progress
in talks over a South Korean firm building patrol frigates for the Philippine
Navy and “stressed that interoperability with Korean vessels will contribute
to advancing the Philippine Navy’s combat power,” alluding to intentions to
continue and expand combined exercises in the future.53
Vietnam is also a high priority for both Japan and South Korea in defense
matters. In 2011, Japan and Vietnam signed a memorandum of understanding
(MOU) on capacity-building initiatives in defense, which covered areas
such as personnel training, search and rescue, humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, counterterrorism, military medicine, information technology
training, and peacekeeping.54 Since then, the two countries have issued joint
statements on deepening security cooperation by building capacity in maritime
law-enforcement activities and through developing coast guard information
exchanges, military exchanges, and joint peacekeeping operations.55 Most
recently, in September 2021 the two countries signed a defense and technology
equipment transfer agreement that will facilitate Vietnam’s access to improved
capabilities and increase interoperability between both countries’ coast guards
and navies.56 In 2018, the South Korean and Vietnamese defense ministers
signed a joint statement on defense cooperation, which was followed up a
few months later by an MOU on “logistics support for peacekeeping forces,
natural disasters, and humanitarian relief.”57 Admittedly, however, there has not
been much bilateral progress in these areas in the years since the document
was signed. While South Korea tends to prioritize Vietnam in terms of official
development assistance, and the two countries share sociocultural ties, defense
and security cooperation remains comparatively underdeveloped.
Looking at the Philippines and Vietnam as example countries is
helpful for understanding areas of overlap and opportunity in coordinating
52 Martin Sadongdong, “3760 Troops from PH, U.S., Japan, South Korea Test Cohesion in Marine

Training,” Manila Bulletin, October 3, 2022 u https://mb.com.ph/2022/10/03/3760-troops-fromph-us-japan-south-korea-test-cohesion-in-marine-training.

53 “Marine Corps to Join Exercise in Philippines for First Time,” KBS World, June 3, 2022 u

http://world.kbs.co.kr/service/news_view.htm?lang=e&Seq_Code=170096.

54 Carl Thayer, “Vietnam’s Extensive Strategic Partnership with Japan,” Diplomat, October 14, 2014 u

https://thediplomat.com/2014/10/vietnams-extensive-strategic-partnership-with-japan.

55 Ngyuen, “Maritime Capacity-Building Cooperation between Japan and Vietnam.”
56 Mari Yamiguchi, “Japan, Vietnam Sign Defense Transfer Deal amid China Worries,” Associated Press,

September 12, 2021 u https://apnews.com/article/technology-china-japan-tokyo-kamala-harris-9bf9
9b9422489050fcb0dde811741714.

57 Prashanth Parameswaran, “What’s in the New Vietnam–South Korea Defense Pact?” Diplomat, June 7,

2018 u https://thediplomat.com/2018/06/whats-in-the-new-vietnam-south-korea-defense-pact.

[ 117 ]

asia policy

Japan-ROK maritime security cooperation in Southeast Asia. Japan and South
Korea both hold combined exercises, conduct training programs, and have
robust defense cooperation relationships with the Philippines. Coordinating
exercises and training programs would maximize the effectiveness of these
efforts by eliminating redundancies and focusing on specific goals, such as
enhancing maritime surveillance capabilities and maritime law-enforcement
abilities to respond to IUU fishing. With Vietnam, despite some recent steps
to upgrade the security aspect of the ROK-Vietnam relationship, sufficient
defense cooperation as well as training and capacity-building programs are
still lacking. Under the Yoon Suk-yeol administration there is fertile ground
to improve cooperation with Vietnam in these areas, and the heavy emphasis
on maritime security cooperation in the new action plan of the ROK-ASEAN
Defense Ministerial Dialogue underscores such an opportunity. As Japan is
already pursuing these forms of maritime security cooperation with Vietnam,
efforts should be made to coordinate trilaterally with South Korea.
Defense technology transfers from South Korea and Japan to partner
countries in Southeast Asia could also be better coordinated to accomplish
these same goals: reduce redundancies, improve maritime domain awareness
competencies, and enhance coast guard capabilities. For example, South Korea
excels in maritime radar technology and is set to begin mass production of
the new, indigenously developed Maritime Surveillance Radar-II.58 Seoul
should make efforts to pursue defense technology transfer agreements with
Southeast Asian countries for this maritime surveillance radar technology.
Japan’s P-1 maritime surveillance aircraft similarly would be an ideal focus
of future defense technology transfer agreements in the region. The P-1
employs a state-of-the-art Toshiba HPS-106 active electronically scanned
array radar, which uses four antennas to provide 360-degree coverage and
infrared/light detection systems for surface detection. It was also the first
operational aircraft in the world to make use of a fly-by-optics control system.59
Through the coordination of maritime surveillance technology transfers to
Southeast Asian states, coastal radar systems from South Korea and aircraft
radar systems from Japan can complement the interests of all states involved.
The Quad Plus or ad hoc Quad activities make the most sense as a
venue to coordinate these efforts. The group’s membership already contains
58 Ik-hwan Kim, “LIG Nex1 Signs Maritime Surveillance Radar-II Defense Contract,” Korea

Economic Daily, December 23, 2022 u https://www.kedglobal.com/aerospace-defense/
newsView/ked202212230019.

59 “Bangladesh Navy Could Acquire Kawasaki P-1 Maritime Patrol Aircraft,” Navy Recognition,

January 7, 2022 u https://navyrecognition.com/index.php/naval-news/naval-news-archive/2022/
january/11223-bangladesh-navy-could-acquire-kawasaki-p-1-maritime-patrol-aircraft.html.

[ 118 ]

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

two of Southeast Asia’s largest security partners—the United States and
Australia—as well as Japan. Moreover, in 2022 the Quad announced a new
initiative, the Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness
(IPPMDA), which seeks to share satellite data on illicit activity in the Indian
and Pacific Oceans with countries across the region.60 By enhancing the
capacity of Southeast Asian countries to be more than passive receivers of
this data and instead actively contribute to maritime surveillance, the efforts
of the new IPPMDA initiative can be amplified. Beyond boosting Southeast
Asian countries’ maritime security capabilities, this coordination is in the
national self-interest of both Japan and South Korea. The best-case scenario
for the region is a virtuous cycle of capability and capacity improvement.
Southeast Asian countries with improved defense capabilities and capacity
can contribute more to regional maritime security. This, in turn, would free
up resources that Japan and South Korea would otherwise be expending
on trying to fill that gap, allowing them to invest even further in the region
and on their own forces—an increasing priority for both countries. Rather
than competing for influence in the region in a zero-sum way, Japan and
South Korea can achieve positive gains by coordinating maritime security
cooperation with Southeast Asian countries.

Mekong River
South Korea and Japan are both large investors in mainland Southeast
Asia, particularly in the greater Mekong subregion of Laos, Thailand,
Cambodia, and southern Vietnam. The Mekong River serves as the lifeblood
of this subregion, which is home to a population of roughly 300 million, by
providing the primary source of water, calories, and economic opportunity
for 60 million people.61 Japan and South Korea each have the opportunity to
expand their security partnerships with the Mekong subregion across three
lines of effort: riverine maritime domain awareness, riverine law enforcement,
and investments and construction that support more sustainable damming,
thus contributing to human and economic security.
Japan’s modern security relations in the Mekong subregion began
with its leadership of the United Nations Transitional Authority in

60 Zack Cooper and Gregory Poling, “The Quad Goes to Sea,” War on the Rocks, May 24, 2022 u

https://warontherocks.com/2022/05/the-quad-goes-to-sea.

61 Brian Eyler, Last Days of the Mighty Mekong (London: Zed Books, 2019).

[ 119 ]

asia policy

Cambodia (UNTAC).62 By taking a primary position in rebuilding Cambodia’s
human security, Japan witnessed firsthand the importance of the Mekong River
for the entire subregion. Within approximately a decade, Japan had staked
a strong leadership claim in the Mekong subregion, pledging $1.5 billion in
Mekong-related investments in 2003, and demonstrated its larger commitment
to Southeast Asia by signing ASEAN’s Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
2004.63 With these initiatives as a baseline, each successive government in
Tokyo continued to deepen Japanese outreach to the Mekong. For example,
in 2009, the government launched its own Japan-Mekong summit, providing
a long-term investment pledge of $5 billion toward infrastructure, medical
aid, and government improvement projects in the region. This placed Japan
solidly as the largest donor and investor in the Mekong.64 These now-yearly
summits are complemented by several other regular meetings of ministers,
development agencies, and investment organizations focused specifically on
Japan-Mekong opportunities and initiatives. The Mekong River also factors
into Japan’s bilateral ties in the region, with one example being its May 2022
defense agreement with Thailand that allows for future exports of maritime
radars and other relevant technologies.65
Despite having a larger focus on economic development in the Mekong,
Tokyo is willing to sign onto more strategic initiatives there too, including
those led by the United States. In 2019, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo
criticized Chinese actions along the Mekong River at the Lower Mekong
Initiative ministerial meeting in Bangkok and announced a series of
multilateral initiatives on electricity, technology, governance, and criminal
justice that included Japan, South Korea, and ASEAN. These U.S.-led activities
are, unsurprisingly, intended to oppose increasing Chinese influence in
the subregion.66 It is also no surprise that Japan’s overall vision for security
assistance to Southeast Asia—its “Vientiane Vision”—was promulgated in a
Mekong riverine state. Included in the Vientiane Vision is an initiative for

62 Tadashi Ikeda, The Road to Peace in Cambodia: Japan’s Role and Involvement (Tokyo: Tokyo

University Press, 1998).

63 Kanako Takahara, “ASEAN Leaders Arrive in Tokyo ahead of Landmark Two-Day Summit,”

Japan Times, December 11, 2003 u https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2003/12/11/national/
asean-leaders-arrive-in-tokyo-ahead-of-landmark-two-day-summit.

64 Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), “Mekong-Japan Action Plan 63,” November 7, 2009 u

https://www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/mekong/summit0911/action.html.

65 “Kishida Agrees to Defense Deal with Thailand,” Japan Times, May 3, 2022 u https://www.

japantimes.co.jp/news/2022/05/03/national/politics-diplomacy/kishida-thailand-defense-deal.

66 “China ‘‘Taking Control’ of Mekong River via Dam-Building Spree, U.S. Warns,” South

China Morning Post, August 2, 2019 u https://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/3021062/
china-taking-control-vital-mekong-river-through-dam-building-spree-mike.

[ 120 ]

[146.110.152.37] Project MUSE (2025-09-03 15:50 GMT)

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

training maritime police forces that is focused on countering organized crime
and piracy along key waterways.67
While South Korean efforts in the Mekong have been comparatively
modest, Seoul is increasingly a player in the Mekong River basin’s human
security efforts. Its outreach to the Mekong subregion began in earnest in
2011 with the first Mekong-ROK Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, at which South
Korea promulgated its Han River Declaration. Under the declaration, South
Korea pledged to undertake sustainable development in the Mekong River
basin, narrow development gaps within ASEAN, and foster cooperation
within East Asia to promote a larger regional community.68 In the years since,
South Korea has proposed two additional Mekong-ROK “plans of action,”
identifying six priority sectors: information and communication technology,
human resource development, green growth, water resource management,
rural development, and infrastructure.69
In September 2019, President Moon initiated the “ROK-Mekong Vision”
at the first ROK-Mekong head-of-state-level summit. This vision included an
expanded economic and cultural initiative based on a three-pillar approach
of people-to-people exchanges, sustainable development, and prosperity
through “experience sharing.” Of note, this new vision included an explicit
sub-priority of advancing nontraditional security—the first official mention
of security in ROK–Mekong subregion relations.70 While South Korean efforts
have thus far not included security cooperation, Seoul is well-positioned to
provide such assistance to the Mekong countries. South Korea boasts a robust
navy, a capable shipbuilding industry, and an advanced technology sector
active in the development of tools that are useful for maritime security.
The first sector ripe for Japan-ROK cooperation is building the maritime
domain awareness capabilities of the Mekong riverine states. Although it
is typically associated with larger bodies of water, like the South China Sea
67 Prashanth Parameswaran, “Vientiane Vision 2.0 Puts Japan’s Asia Security Role into Focus,”

Diplomat, November 19, 2019 u https://thediplomat.com/2019/11/vientiane-vision-2-0-putsjapans-asia-security-role-into-focus.

68 Mekong Institute, “A Decade of Mekong–Republic of Korea Cooperation,” December 22, 2021 u

https://www.mekonginstitute.org/news-activities/detail/2021/09/22/a-decade-of-mekong-r.

69 “Ambassador Attached to the Ministry for Mekong Cooperation Delivered a Keynote

Address at the Mekong–Republic of Korea (ROK) Regional Forum on the 10th
Anniversary of the Establishment of the Mekong–ROK Cooperation,” Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (Thailand),Press Release, October 8, 2021 u https://www.mfa.go.th/en/content/
mekong-rok-10th-anniversary-2?cate=5d5bcb4e15e39c306000683e.

70 “Press Statement by the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand for the 1st Mekong-

ROK Summit,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Thailand), Press Release, November 27, 2019 u
https://www.mfa.go.th/en/content/111769-press-statement-by-the-prime-minister-of-thekingdom-of-thailand-for-the-1st-mekong-rok-summit?page=5d5bd3cb15e39c306002a9ac&me
nu=5d5bd3dc15e39c306002ab1c.

[ 121 ]

asia policy

or the Pacific Ocean, maritime domain awareness is a critical capability for
large rivers such as the Mekong. Each riverine state struggles with managing
relevant information from the river that is critical to national security and
sovereignty, ranging from the number of boats passing through a country’s
territorial waters to the level of water flows following a weather event.71 Both
South Korea and Japan regularly showcase their own top-line technologies
in maritime domain awareness, including Japanese space-based information
systems and South Korean maritime radar.
A practical example of assistance that Japan and South Korea can provide
is water quality monitoring. Information on the Mekong River’s “health”
(i.e., water flows, biological habitats, and ship activity) is often lacking,
despite the efforts of the interregional Mekong River Commission (MRC).
Both Seoul and Tokyo can provide funding, training, and operational support
for local governments to install and operate the water sensors that provide
critical information on ecological and security concerns. This support could
be noncompetitive, as Japan and South Korea could collaborate and pool
resources in the MRC as a third party.
A second example of potential Japan-ROK cooperation is bolstering
riverine policing in the region. The Mekong River is infamous as a conduit
for drug trafficking and crime, dating back to its association with the Golden
Triangle of drug cultivation in the mid-twentieth century. Today, the Mekong
River is the heart of a larger regional illicit network of drug, contraband, and
human smuggling with an economic value estimated at $71 billion.72 Beyond
their human cost and the associated rise in regional crime and corruption,
these illicit activities compound the traditional security threat posed by
China to the region. By pointing to the failures of the riverine states in the
so-called 2011 Mekong River massacre, in which organized criminals killed
thirteen Chinese sailors allegedly carrying methamphetamine pills, China
successfully asserted its right to deploy a law-enforcement presence along
Laotian, Cambodian, and sometimes Thai portions of the river.73 Today,
China pressures the riverine countries to conduct combined patrols with its
People’s Armed Police maritime units, often under the umbrella of its own
Mekong regional body, the Lancang-Mekong Cooperation organization.

71 Eyler, Last Days, 96–98.
72 United Nations Mission in Thailand, “Drug Trade in Golden Triangle Grows despite Pandemic,”

September 5, 2020 u https://thailand.un.org/en/91513-drug-trade-golden-triangle-grows-despitepandemic.

73 Eyler, Last Days; and Prashanth Parameswaran, “China’s Mekong Security Role in the Headlines

with New Joint Patrols,” Diplomat, March 31, 2020 u https://thediplomat.com/2020/03/
chinas-mekong-security-role-in-the-headlines-with-new-joint-patrols.

[ 122 ]

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

Japan has a long history of training overseas law enforcement, including
those in Cambodia during its leadership of UNTAC.74 Additionally, maritime
law enforcement is one of the named initiatives of its Free and Open
Indo-Pacific initiative. Vietnam is currently the largest recipient of Japanese
law-enforcement assistance, including a 2020 grant of six coast guard patrol
boats worth $345 million and a $2.84 million grant to the Public Security
Ministry in Hanoi for unspecified counterterrorism equipment.75 Vietnam
is not alone in desiring Japanese law-enforcement assistance. Thailand, for
example, has cited Japan as a model for its own policing reform.76
In 2015 the Korean National Police Agency (KNPA) launched the “K-cop”
program to export South Korean police training and resources to developing
countries. The program’s backers explicitly name the KNPA’s rehabilitation of
its historically negative reputation as an example for governments with their
own poor human rights histories. Vietnam is the primary recipient of this
program so far, with a recent example of law-enforcement cooperation being
a 2021 collaboration on digital criminal science research between the KNPA
and the Vietnamese Public Security Ministry.77
Law-enforcement assistance offers Japan and South Korea the opportunity
to deepen their strategic ties with Southeast Asian states and improve regional
security, while also working on a more cooperative basis. Ideally, such support
could be deconflicted (if not coordinated) between Japan and South Korea,
allowing each country to provide its own unique training and support
capabilities without competing with the other for time or resources. Both
countries can also offer lessons on how to carry out internal police reform as
well as improve human rights in places with a history of troubled governance.
A third area for Japan-ROK cooperation in the Mekong subregion is
in addressing the nontraditional and human security threats caused by
widespread upstream damming along the river. Although not included in
most Western definitions of security, damming projects on the Mekong River
(known as the Lancang River upstream in China) have profound implications
for regional food and economic security. Mitigating these risks through
human security projects is increasingly a priority within the subregion and a

74 Ikeda, The Road to Peace.
75 Huynh Tam Sang, “Vietnam-Japan Relations: Growing Importance in Each Other’s Eyes,” ISEAS

Perspective, no. 31 (2021) u https://www.iseas.edu.sg/articles-commentaries/iseas-perspective/202031-vietnam-japan-relations-growing-importance-in-each-others-eyes-by-huynh-tam-sang.

76 “Japan Police Model Cited,” Nation (Thailand), August 9, 2017 u https://www.nationthailand.com/

in-focus/30323346.

77 Ministry of Public Security (Vietnam), “MPS and National Police Agency of the Republic of Korea

Continue Project on Improving Criminal Science Capacity,” August 4, 2021.

[ 123 ]

asia policy

leading cause of the riverine states’ demand for greater overseas investment
and aid. In 2021 a meeting between ASEAN and the MRC specifically
identified “water security” as one of the region’s top priorities, calling for
greater regional management of water resources to be a national priority of
each member government.78
A notable example of the impact of damming on the subregion’s food
security is the depletion of fish stocks. The MRC estimates that upstream
damming has led to a 40% drop in fish stocks in the last ten years. Because
millions of Lao, Thai, Cambodians, and Vietnamese depend on Mekong
River fish for upward of 80% of their daily protein intake, human security
concerns such as declining fish stocks can outweigh more traditional hard
security issues in regional capitals.79 Yet these same governments still hope to
harness the potential of the Mekong River for hydroelectricity, making a fully
conservationist vision for the river implausible. Japan and South Korea can
bolster their credentials in Southeast Asia by providing an alternative source
of sustainable investment in improving water management infrastructure.
This would help arrest the human security and livelihood concerns caused
by current damming, which in turn will decrease the burden of negative side
effects, such as drug and human trafficking, on local governments.
As with the previously outlined areas for cooperation targeted by Japan
and South Korea, both countries have preexisting resources and capabilities
well suited to this task. Certainly, Japan is ahead of South Korea in some
respects, having already pledged $7 billion in 2016 toward water infrastructure
along the Mekong.80 Yet South Korea has much to offer in the effort, including
investments in Korean-made water desalination technologies, a recent focus
area of the government. Most importantly, both Seoul and Tokyo have the
sort of regional trust necessary to gain access to Mekong River development,
a highly sensitive national resource for local governments.

conclusion and policy options
Japan and South Korea share strategic priorities in Southeast Asia, as
evidenced by both countries’ prioritization of deeper security relations with
countries across the region. Southeast Asian countries, in turn, widely welcome
78 Mekong River Commission, “Water Security in the Mekong and ASEAN Key to a Safe and

Sustainable Future,” August 24, 2021 u https://www.mrcmekong.org/news-and-events/news/
pr-20210824.

79 Eyler, Last Days.
80 Ibid.

[ 124 ]

ashley and fraser

•

common waters

these increased ties, as Japan and South Korea can provide advanced military
capabilities without the drawbacks of U.S.-China great-power competition.
Yet larger tensions between Japan and South Korea have thus far precluded
any coordination on security matters. However, security cooperation in
Southeast Asia can be viewed as a diplomatic opportunity for Japan and South
Korea even if more immediate bilateral relations are strained.
Such cooperation would also benefit U.S. foreign policy goals. Despite its
appeal as a non-U.S. option, Japanese and South Korean defense cooperation
in Southeast Asia would improve military capabilities and maritime
domain awareness in the region, directly contributing to U.S. security goals.
Washington should incentivize South Korea and Japan to deepen their
security partnerships in Southeast Asia and directly appeal to both countries
to coordinate and collaborate wherever possible. This is especially true now
during an apparent window of increased Seoul-Tokyo cooperation under
the Yoon administration. The United States can promote such beneficial
cooperation in the following ways:
1. Incentivize Japan-ROK cooperation via Quad Plus. One of the avenues
reopened to Seoul-Tokyo relations by Yoon is collaboration via Quad
Plus groupings (i.e., working groups that include more than the main
four Quad members: the United States, Japan, Australia, and India).
Specifically, the United States should advocate for a South Korean
presence in all Quad Plus activities regarding the South China Sea,
the Mekong River, and maritime domain awareness capacity building.
2. Expand the General Security of Military Information Agreement
(GSOMIA). As one of the hallmark institutions of Japan-ROK
cooperation, GSOMIA allows for limited information and intelligence
sharing between Seoul and Tokyo. Although the agreement currently
focuses on North Korean missile threats, GSOMIA is ideal to act as
a clearinghouse to deconflict exports of sensitive technologies to
third-party countries. Such a move could come with an additional
benefit of institutionalizing and “normalizing” information sharing
between Japan and South Korea through GSOMIA on less contentious
geopolitical areas, which could increase the durability of the agreement
during future ebbs in the bilateral relationship.
3. Support Japanese and South Korean strategic latitude in Southeast
Asia. This article argues that South Korea and Japan each can offer
Southeast Asia several comparative advantages in maritime security,
even compared to the United States. As such, Washington should
not see its role as “valuing” its allies’ alignment with immediate
U.S. security actions in Southeast Asia. Rather, Washington should
take a more pragmatic approach that encourages both countries to
pursue their own relationships and comparative advantages free of
[ 125 ]

asia policy

association with harder-edged U.S. security actions in the region.
This will allow Seoul and Tokyo to maintain their appeal as lower-risk
security partners in Southeast Asia, while still indirectly advancing
U.S. national security interests in upholding freedom of navigation
and a rules-based order in the Indo-Pacific.
In sum, Japan and South Korea face a unique opportunity for cooperation
in Southeast Asia through maritime security. To be sure, prospects for
improved ties face obstacles, as evidenced in the more widely discussed areas
of wartime memory and bilateral military exercises. Nevertheless, Southeast
Asia offers a zone of potential cooperation that appeals to their mutual
self-interests and can remain somewhat separate from the fraught issues of
bilateral reconciliation. While this article is not suggesting that coordinating
maritime security activities in Southeast Asia will necessarily help bridge these
more enduring issues in the Japan-ROK relationship, such coordination can
serve as a basic trust-building measure and result in net gains by contributing
to stronger security forces throughout the region. 

[ 126 ]

