sustainability
Article

China’s Incentives and Efforts against IUU Fishing in the South
China Sea
Chengyong Yu 1 and Yen-Chiang Chang 2, *
1
2

*

School of Law, Shandong University, Qingdao 266200, China
School of Law, Dalian Maritime University, Dalian 116026, China
Correspondence: ycchang@dlmu.edu.cn

Abstract: Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing is a massive problem that poses a
significant threat to the sustainability of marine ecosystems and the livelihoods of millions of people
who depend on fishing for their food and income. Many issues have emerged, such as declining
fishery resources, regional fishery incidents, political impacts, and disputes over sovereignty, which
all have mutual and complicated effects on IUU fishing, eventually hindering the sustainability of
marine fisheries. In this situation, the People’s Republic of China (hereinafter referred to as China)
has tried to undertake some efforts to combat IUU fishing over the past few years using domestic
regulation and international cooperation, especially in the South China Sea. This article discusses
the seriousness of IUU fishing; examines the causes of IUU fishing in the South China Sea; analyzes
why frequent fishing conflicts have increased in the South China Sea; identifies what IUU fishing
is, based on its definition in the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU) and in other countries; and examines what actions
have been undertaken to prevent IUU fishing in China from international and national perspectives.
By analyzing the cause of IUU fishing, identifying its scope and nature, and demonstrating China’s
position on it, this study aims to prove that China has taken some positive measures to combat IUU
fishing in the South China Sea. To promote the sustainable development of fisheries in the South
China Sea, uniting China and other South China Sea states against IUU fishing could be an efficient
way in the future.
Keywords: South China Sea; illegal; unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing; maritime Silk Road;
Agreement of Port State Measures (PSMA)
Citation: Yu, C.; Chang, Y.-C. China’s
Incentives and Efforts against IUU
Fishing in the South China Sea.
Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255.

1. Introduction

https://doi.org/10.3390/su15097255

Aside from maritime disputes and growing state competition, states’ interests in the
sea can be generally summarized using the “three Ps”: politics, petroleum, and protein
(fish). Fisheries are the main source of protein and play a vital role in providing food
and ensuring economic development. Utilizing fishery resources to their fullest potential
has led to overfishing becoming a major problem globally, largely due to poor fishery
management and IUU fishing. The results suggest that a country’s risk of IUU fishing
is positively related to the number of commercially significant species found within its
territorial waters and its proximity to known ports of convenience [1]. The South China
Sea is a marginal sea of the Western Pacific Ocean covering approximately 3.5 million
km2 . Most coastal states in the South China Sea are developing or underdeveloped, with
abundant fishery resources and important sites for the coastal aquaculture industry. The
South China Sea is a vital region for the fishing industry, providing a major source of food
and livelihood for the coastal communities in the area. However, in recent years, the issue
of IUU fishing has become a significant problem in the South China Sea, leading to the
depletion of fish stocks and damage to the marine ecosystem.
IUU fishing harms a country’s economy, environment, and marine protected areas,
causing a loss of economic income, environmental damage, and decline in fish stocks. IUU

Academic Editor: Tim Gray
Received: 27 February 2023
Revised: 22 April 2023
Accepted: 25 April 2023
Published: 27 April 2023

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15097255

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

2 of 11

fishing disrupts the sustainability of marine ecosystems and is a major threat to a country’s
sustainable fishery production. From an economic point of view, IUU fishing undermines
the efforts of legitimate fishing industries and results in significant economic losses for
coastal communities and countries [2]. From an environmental point of view, the use of
illegal fishing equipment, such as mesh, fixed lines, and explosives, severely damages the
marine ecosystem. Therefore, the study of combating IUU fishing in the South China Sea
could have several positive impacts on regional sustainability, including the preservation
of marine biodiversity, promotion of sustainable fishery-management practices, regional
cooperation, and protection of food security.
2. Causes of IUU Fishing in the South China Sea
2.1. Sharp Decline of Fisheries Resources and Overfishing in the South China Sea
The South China Sea is a habitat for some of the world’s richest reef systems, with
more than 3000 fish species, accounting for approximately 12 percent of the total number of
fish caught worldwide [3]. However, the fisheries in this region are in severe danger. Since
the late 20th century, the fishery resources in the South China Sea have gradually shown a
trend of rapid decline. States around the South China Sea generally have long coastlines,
which strongly depend on the fishery industry. To pursue the maximum benefits of marine
economics in the short term, coastal states are inclined to over-exploit fishery resources in
this area. With the development of science and technology, more advanced and efficient
fishing techniques have exacerbated overfishing in the South China Sea [4]. In addition,
because the South China Sea is a typical semi-enclosed sea that relies mainly on the marine
environment, the regeneration ability of its fishery resources is limited. As the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) published in “The State of World
Fisheries and Aquaculture 2018 (SOFIA),” most fish populations in the mid-western Pacific,
especially in the western part of the South China Sea, are over-fished [5].
2.2. Regional Fishery Conflicts and International Political Impacts
Regional fishery conflicts in the South China Sea are complex and multifaceted, with
issues ranging from maritime disputes to overfishing and IUU fishing. In the South China
Sea, fishery conflicts among fishers and fishing vessels from Vietnam, Indonesia, the
Philippines, and China have occurred frequently in recent years [6]. The emergence of
fishery incidents is one of the most crucial maritime threats, resulting in constant conflicts
among states. For example, from the end of 2014 to April 2016, Indonesia seized 153
fishing boats from its maritime neighbors for “illegal fishing”. Among them, 50 were from
Vietnam, 43 were from the Philippines, and one was from China [7]. Another example
is that, on 21 May 2017, Vietnam and Indonesia had a confrontation in the waters off the
Natuna Islands, which Indonesia claims to be its exclusive economic zone. Indonesian
patrol boats intercepted five Vietnamese fishing boats that had intruded into their exclusive
economic zones and detained 11 Vietnamese fishers following their own laws [8]. In 2019,
a Vietnamese fishing boat was sunk by a Chinese coast guard vessel near the disputed
Paracel Islands, sparking protests from Vietnam [9]. These incidents highlight the ongoing
tensions and conflicts in the South China Sea over fishing rights and territorial disputes.
The lack of a comprehensive and effective framework for managing these conflicts has
resulted in frequent incidents and escalated tensions among the countries involved [10].
The South China Sea is a region of great geopolitical importance due to its strategic
location, rich natural resources, and overlapping maritime claims by several countries. IUU
fishing is a significant problem in the region, and the involvement of external powers can
complicate efforts to address it. One way in which external powers can complicate the issue
of IUU fishing in the South China Sea is by supporting the maritime claims of one or more
countries in the region. Doing so can exacerbate tensions and lead to an increase in IUU
fishing activities, as countries may seek to assert their dominance over disputed waters.
External powers can also contribute to IUU fishing in the region by providing financial
or technical support to fishing activities. For example, subsidies provided by external

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

3 of 11

powers to their fishing companies may encourage overfishing and IUU fishing activities.
Conflicting interests among external powers can also make it challenging to coordinate
efforts to address IUU fishing in the South China Sea. For example, some countries may
prioritize environmental concerns and sustainable fishing practices, while others may
prioritize their security interests in the region. Therefore, addressing IUU fishing effectively
in the South China Sea will require coordinated efforts and cooperation among countries
and stakeholders.
2.3. Disputes over Sovereignty and IUU Fishing
The ongoing disputes over sovereignty in the South China Sea have significant impacts
on IUU fishing in the region. These disputes create uncertainty and instability in the waters,
making it difficult for countries to effectively manage their fisheries and prevent IUU
fishing activities. Sovereignty disputes typically arise when neighboring countries lay claim
to overlapping maritime areas, such as exclusive economic zones (EEZs) or continental
shelves [11]. In the South China Sea, several countries have made overlapping maritime
claims, including China, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei. China has made
a sweeping claim over most of the South China Sea, including areas that fall within the
EEZs of other countries [12]. This conflict is due to differences in opinion on the South
China Sea claims. China’s claim has the nine-dash line, a map that outlines its historical
claims to the region, as its historical background, and this line was first drawn by the
Chinese government in the 1940s and has been a source of tension between China and
its neighboring countries [13]. In contrast, other countries use a geographical location
that refers to the International Law of the Sea Convention (UNCLOS), and they claim an
exclusive economic zone (EEZ) extending 200 nautical miles (370 km) from their coasts and
a continental shelf beyond that under the UNCLOS.
At the same time, the more deadlocked that the demarcation process is, the more
likely that it is that the littoral states are to “increase their presence” in the South China
Sea to strengthen their so-called sovereignty [14]. In this situation, fishing is endowed
with distinct political colors; not only are fishing disputes in the South China Sea over
fishery resources, but they also represent the political game between coastal states [15].
The fishing and sovereignty of the South China Sea have been firmly combined. From this
perspective, the slow process of maritime delimitation in the South China Sea seriously
hinders substantive solutions to the problem of IUU fishing.
In summary, due to the decrease in fishery resources and increase in demand, fishery
disputes are escalating, further aggravating maritime conflicts over the sovereignty of
the South China Sea, increasing the importance of the geopolitical situation in the South
China Sea [10]. Currently, there is no effective regional cooperation in the conservation of
fishery resources in the South China Sea, and IUU fishing behavior and fishery conflicts
are constantly occurring. If coastal states do not undertake appropriate action in the South
China Sea, marine biodiversity will be lost, and fishery resources may be depleted shortly
thereafter [5]. In the states around the South China Sea, this depletion will be a fatal blow
to fishery businesses and people’s livelihoods and will cause serious damage to the marine
environment of the South China Sea and the world.
3. How to Identify IUU Fishing
3.1. Definition Standards
3.1.1. Definition in IPOA-IUU
To define IUU fishing in the South China Sea, the current definition by international
society should first be examined. It is predominantly defined in Article 3 of the International
Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated
Fishing (IPOA-IUU), which was developed by member states of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) [16]. It mainly offers the definitions of the three
fishing activities in question—“illegal,” “unreported,” and “unregulated”—as well as other
terms used in the instrument. Although it is a soft law, the objective of the IPOA is to

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

4 of 11

“provide all states with comprehensive, effective transparent measures by which to act,
including through appropriate regional fisheries management organizations established in
accordance with international law.”
IUU fishing is an integrated activity, not a specific activity [17]. Article 3.1 of the
IPOA-IUU defines the basic elements of illegal fishing: “contravention of a state’s laws and
regulations,” “contravention of the conservation and management measures adopted by the
organization which the flag states are joined, or international law,” and “contravention of
the conservation of national law or international obligation.” Regarding unreported fishing
activities, Clause 3.2.1 of the IPOA-IUU refers to those “which have not been reported, or
have been misreported, to the relevant national authority, in contravention of national laws
and regulations,” and Clause 3.2.2 refers to those “which have not been reported or have
been misreported, in contravention of the reporting procedures of that organization.” As
opposed to Clause 3.3.1, these clauses govern those countries that are members of Regional
Fisheries Management Organizations (RFMOs), which are the international organizations
regulating regional fishing activities on the high seas. Thus, unreported fishing is a special
case of “illegal” fishing due to violations of national law. Unregulated fishing appears to be
the inverse. Unregulated fishing activities can be legal or illegal if national laws are enacted
or if relevant international obligations are applied.
Moreover, the IPOA-IUU does not list specific activities related to all three factors.
However, this approach gives states a great deal of discretion in making decisions based
on the IPOA-IUU. In other words, states can argue that the definition is in line with their
different activities. The UNCLOS, the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement [13], the
Compliance Agreement [18], and the FAO Code of Conduct [19] all consider and abide
by the definition in the IPOA-IUU when identifying specific activities. Article 3 of the
IPOA-IUU is an international guide currently used for the identification of IUU fishing.
3.1.2. Definitions in Different States
Apart from the IPOA-IUU and other international documents, there are also different
interpretations from different entities that further complicate the issue.
To prevent, deter, and eliminate IUU fishing, the Philippines officially passed Republic
Act No. 10,654 (Amending Philippine Fisheries Code of 1998) in 2014, including several
new provisions that became the basis for an important shift in national legislation to
combat IUU fishing. In Section 3, illegal fishing refers to fishing activities conducted by
Philippine fishing vessels operating in violation of Philippine laws, Regional Fisheries
Management Organization resolutions, and laws of other coastal states [20]. China’s official
documents provide multiple definitions and descriptions of IUU fishing. Article 2 of the
Regulations on the Prevention and Control of Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing
in the People’s Republic of China (referred to as the “IUU Fishing Regulations”) defines
“illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing” as fishing activities conducted in violation of
international, regional, or national laws, rules, and agreements. The China National Marine
Fisheries Administration’s “Guiding Opinions on Combating IUU Fishing” states that IUU
fishing includes, but is not limited to, fishing in prohibited areas or times, using illegal
fishing tools or methods, fishing for fish that do not meet specified standards, and failing
to report or misreporting fishing activities. Overall, China’s official definition is generally
consistent with UNCLOS’s definition.
In fact, compared with the definition from coastal states in the South China Sea, the
European Union (EU) and US have undertaken the most far-reaching legislative efforts
to specifically define and address IUU fishing. The EU has enacted Council Regulation
(EC) No. 1005/2008 (referred to as the EU Regulation), adopting the scope and nature of
the IPOA-IUU and creating a list of activities that can be considered IUU fishing. The EU
IUU Regulation also states that a vessel is presumed to be engaged in IUU fishing if it
transships or participates in joint fishing operations or supports or resupplies other vessels
that are determined to be engaged in IUU fishing [21]. Overall, the EU IUU regulation has
stronger legal force, more specific measures, stricter enforcement, and a traceability system

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

5 of 11

that make it more effective in combating IUU fishing than the IPOA-IUU. In 2007, the US
adopted amendments to the Magnuson–Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management
Reauthorization Act (MSA) on IUU fishing. The new Section 609 has two main components:
a definition of IUU fishing and measures for the identification and listing of foreign nations
with vessels that have engaged in IUU fishing. This definition further considers the impact
of fishing activities on habitats and ecosystems, an area not discussed in the IPOA-IUU [21].
While the IPOA-IUU is an important international agreement that encourages sustainable
fishing practices, the MSA is a more robust and comprehensive framework that provides
stronger legal and scientific guidelines for managing and conserving fish populations.
3.2. Constitutive Elements of IUU Fishing
Based on previous opinions, the IPOA-IUU specifies the scope of each component.
When identifying IUU fishing in the South China Sea, based on the provisions of Article 3
of the IPOA-IUU, the following conditions should be met.
3.2.1. Fishing Activities
(1)

(2)

(3)

Fishing activities: IUU fishing can be identified throughout the fishing process, which
means that every step of fishing could be considered IUU fishing. Although Article
3.4 is an exception, the basic criterion of IUU fishing for the judgment of fishing
behavior is whether the behavior complies with the laws, regulations, or international
obligations with which the behavior should comply.
Behavior subject: vessels. The IPOA-IUU does not provide a definition of this term, but
it is defined in the FAO Compliance Agreement as “any vessel used or intended for use
for the purposes of the commercial exploitation of living marine resources, including
mother ships and any other vessels directly engaged in such fishing operations” [18].
Behavior patterns: obtaining fishery resources. The current definition of the word
“fishing” is provided in WTO fishery subsidy negotiation documents [22].

3.2.2. The Law of the Place Where an Act Occurs Should Be Applicable to Identifying
IUU Fishing
Regarding jurisdiction, Articles 3.1.1 and 3.2.1 of the IPOA-IUU refer to illegal and
unreported fishing activities in the waters under the jurisdiction of a state, while Articles
3.1.2 and 3.2.2 refer to illegal and unreported fishing activities in the areas under the
jurisdiction of the RFMOs. Within the purview of the RFMOs, Articles 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 of
the IPOA-IUU apply to activities “conducted by vessels flying the flag of states that are
parties to a relevant regional fisheries management organization” and “those undertaken
by states cooperating with a regional fisheries management organization,” respectively,
limiting the scope of application. However, regardless of stipulations, the identification of
fishing behavior is based on the nature of the water where the conduct occurs; that is, the
place where fishing activities occur determines the choice and application of the law.
Whether based on the definition or elements of IUU fishing, identifying IUU behaviors
is a complex and controversial issue. Factors such as the nature of the fishing area, the nature
of the fishing vessel, the specific conduct, and the regional and international organizations
to which the flag state belongs all need to be considered. In this process, the determinant
is the nature of the water in which fishing occurs. However, it is clear that this issue is
extremely controversial in the South China Sea, and identification must be performed more
prudently.
4. China’s Position and Measures on Combating IUU Fishing
4.1. China’s Stance on Combating IUU Fishing
4.1.1. International Concerns about China
IUU fishing is a global issue, and China is one of the countries that has been criticized for engaging in this practice. Several international organizations and countries have
expressed concerns about China’s IUU fishing activities. The United Nations Food and

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

6 of 11

Agriculture Organization (FAO) has raised concerns about China’s lack of effective measures to combat IUU fishing. In a 2016 report, the FAO noted that China was responsible
for 20 percent of the world’s fishing catch but that a significant portion of that catch was
obtained through illegal, unreported, or unregulated means [23]. The European Union (EU)
has also been critical of China’s IUU fishing activities. In 2012, the EU issued a warning to
China that it could face a ban on seafood imports if it did not undertake steps to address its
IUU fishing practices [24]. In 2020, the EU renewed its warning and identified China as
one of the top five countries engaged in IUU fishing [25].
4.1.2. China’s Participation against IUU Fishing and the Sustainability of Global Fisheries
In addition, the international community has long argued that China has been unwilling to align its domestic policies with international rules on global fisheries governance [26].
China has been a major player in global fisheries governance and has been involved in
various international agreements, such as the UNCLOS and the FAO Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries. However, there have been concerns among the international
community that China has not fully aligned its domestic policies with these international
rules, particularly in terms of sustainable fishing practices and IUU fishing. One issue
that has been raised is China’s large distant-water fishing fleet, which operates in waters
around the world and has been accused of engaging in overfishing and IUU practices [27].
China has also been criticized for subsidizing its fishing industry, which could contribute to
overfishing and distort global markets [28]. Additionally, there have been concerns about
China’s lack of transparency in reporting its fishing activities and the management of its
fisheries [29]. There is still room for improvement, and the international community will
continue to monitor China’s progress in aligning its domestic policies with international
rules in global fisheries governance.
However, as the world’s largest fishing economy in terms of catch, production, and
exports, China’s actions to stop IUU fishing are important for the sustainable development
of global fisheries. Moreover, China has undertaken steps to combat IUU fishing in recent years and has increased its participation in global efforts to address this issue. The
Agreement on Port State Measures (PSMA) is the first binding international agreement
to specifically target IUU fishing, aiming to prevent, deter, and eliminate IUU fishing by
preventing vessels engaged in IUU fishing from using ports and landing their catches.
China is a signatory to the PSMA and has taken steps to implement its provisions. In
2014, China enacted the “Regulations on the Administration of Port Inspection and Quarantine of Imported and Exported Aquatic Products,” which are intended to help prevent
IUU fishing by requiring that foreign vessels provide documentation demonstrating that
their catch was obtained legally before being allowed to enter Chinese ports [30]. Overall,
China’s participation and cooperation against IUU fishing in the South China Sea have
been increasing, and the country has shown a willingness to work with its neighbors
and international organizations to promote sustainable fishing practices and preserve the
marine environment.
4.2. China Firmly Regards UNCLOS as Its Legal Basis in Combating IUU Fishing
China’s recent international norm-setting activities and domestic legislation regarding
IUU fishing indicate a shift in Chinese policy from its previous reluctance to undertake
action against IUU fishing. China hopes to improve its fisheries policy by updating its domestic fishing policies [31] and participating in international anti-IUU fishing negotiations.
IUU fishing directly endangers the sustainable development of fishery resources in
the South China Sea; therefore, combating IUU fishing is an important task for all coastal
states in the South China Sea. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(referred to as UNCLOS) specifically formulated the clause of “Conservation of living
resources” for coastal states in Article 61, emphasizing that coastal states should adopt
conservation and management measures to ensure that the living resources in exclusive
economic zones (EEZs) are not endangered by over-exploitation. For instance, the coastal

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

7 of 11

state shall determine the allowable catch of the living resources in its EEZs, taking into
account fishing patterns, the interdependence of stocks, any generally recommended
international minimum standards, and available scientific information; and other data
relevant to the conservation of fish stocks should be contributed and exchanged on a
regular basis. Furthermore, according to Article 123 of the 1982 UNCLOS, the states of
a semi-closed sea such as the SCS “should cooperate” with one another in the area of
fisheries [32]. Therefore, China has undertaken active measures to control IUU fishing in
the South China Sea, fulfilling its obligations under UNCLOS and international law.
4.3. China Is Implementing Measures to Keep Pace with the PSMA
The Agreement of Port State Measures (PSMA) was the first binding international
agreement to specifically target IUU fishing [33]. The provisions of the PSMA can be
applied to vessels trying to enter a designated port of a state that differs from their flag
states. Its purpose is to restrain, deter, and reduce IUU fishing by preventing vessels from
remaining in ports and unloading their catch. With this method, the PSMA limits the
incentive for vessels engaged in IUU fishing to continue operation, keeping the fishery
products of IUU fishing from entering domestic and international markets. The PSMA
repeatedly emphasizes the value of the region, and unifying the various regions plays a
basic role in the governance of global IUU fishing.
China signed the PSMA on 22 November 2016, indicating its intention to become
a party to the treaty. However, China has not yet completed the ratification process by
submitting the necessary instruments of ratification to the FAO. It is important to note that,
even though China has not yet ratified the PSMA, it has undertaken steps to implement its
provisions, including enacting domestic regulations to prevent IUU fishing and establishing
a National Plan of Action to Combat IUU Fishing. Meanwhile, in the current measures
against IUU fishing in the South China Sea, China has also made full reference to the ideas
and measures in the PSMA. In addition to identifying IUU fishing vessels according to the
IUU list provided by regional fishery organizations, some provisions of China’s Fisheries
Law (revised draft) include port state supervision of foreign fishing vessels [34]. At the
same time, to implement the PSMA in the future, China has actively engaged in the staffing
of law enforcement personnel, construction of port infrastructure, and capacity building of
multi-sectoral cooperation.
4.4. Controlling IUU Fishing Aligns with the Idea of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road
Advocated by China
The 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is part of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)
proposed by China [35]. The South China Sea is one of the most important areas in the
“21st Century Maritime Silk Road.” China proposes that states along the Belt and Road
should jointly undertake the tasks of protecting the marine ecological environment and
providing quality marine ecological services, with the goal of safeguarding global marine
ecological security [36]. Based on the BRI, China adheres to three main principles in IUU
fishing management: first, IUU fishing management should follow the premise of mutual
respect; second, China will safeguard channels for dialogue and consultation, and maritime
disputes will be resolved through dialogue, sincerity, and patience; third, states need to
pursue win–win cooperation [37].
In this background, the pace of fishery cooperation at bilateral and multilateral levels
between China and other neighboring states has been accelerated. For example, in 2013,
China and Brunei signed the Joint Statement between the People’s Republic of China and
Brunei Darussalam. In 2018, China and Malaysia signed the Joint Statement, stating that
the two states should continue to strengthen cooperation in fisheries. At the multilateral
level, for example, the Declaration on the Coastal and Marine Environmental Protection of
the South China Sea in the Next Ten Years (2017–2027), signed in 2017, stated that China
and ASEAN should strengthen cooperation in fisheries, environmental protection, and
ecology. Although China has signed a number of bilateral or multilateral agreements,

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

8 of 11

most agreements focus on the cooperation and coordination of fishery resources, and their
provisions lack specific content [38]. The BRI would provide an opportunity for coastal
states in the South China Sea to develop and implement fisheries governance frameworks
and policies.
4.5. National Efforts to Control IUU Fishing
Effective prevention and reduction of IUU fishing in domestic fishery activities, including domestic fishers and large fishery enterprises, is necessary. In addition to economic
sanctions, judicial and administrative instruments are required. China has undertaken
considerable efforts to combat and address IUU fishing from a national perspective to
reduce, control, and eliminate IUU fishing activities (See Table 1).
Table 1. National Regulations to Combat IUU Fishing.
Regulation

Main Content

Nature

Time of Adoption

The Fisheries Law of the
People’s Republic of China
(2013 Amendment)

Implementing a fishing quota system in
accordance with the principle that the
fishing amount shall be lower than the
increasing amount of the fishery
resources; a fishing license system; legal
liability, such as fines, revoking of fishing
licenses, confiscating of fishing vessels,
and criminal liabilities.

Legally binding

28 December 2013

Revised Draft of the Fisheries
Law for Comments
(September 2019)

Enforcing regulations on IUU fishing;
creating a ‘blacklist’ of IUU fishing in
pelagic fisheries; reporting of fishing
boats inbound and outbound; a fixed
landing system for large- and
medium-sized fishing boats; and a ban
on foreign IUU fishing boats from
entering Chinese ports.

Legally binding

Estimated take effect
in 2023

Detailed Rules for the
Implementation of the
Fisheries Law of the People’s
Republic of China (2020
Second Revision)

Improving fishery supervision and
administration; tightening circumstances
of fishing licenses; detailing and
aggravating punishments.

Legally binding

29 November 2020

Measures of the People’s
Republic of China on the
Registration of Fishing Vessels
(2019 Amendment)

To strengthen the supervision and
administration of fishing vessels;
determine the ownership, nationality,
port of registry, and other relevant legal
relations of fishing vessels; and safeguard
the legitimate rights and interests of all
parties involved in fishing vessel
registration.

Legally binding

25 April 2019

Provisions for the
Administration of
Pelagic Fishery

Prohibiting pelagic fishing enterprises,
vessels, and ships engaging in illegal
fishing.

Legally binding

1 April 2020

Measures for Monitoring the
Location of Ocean-going
Fishing Vessels
(Revised Version)

To support the requirements of RFOs,
when regional fishery organizations of
which China is a member have stricter
regulations on ship position monitoring,
Chinese vessels shall abide by and
implement the stricter regulations.

Legally binding

2019

The existing domestic measures of IUU fishing are scattered among legal documents
of various ranks in China, including the Fisheries Law of the People’s Republic of China
(2013 Amendment), Detailed Rules for the Implementation of the Fisheries Law of the

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

9 of 11

People’s Republic of China (2020 Second Revision), and Measures of the People’s Republic
of China on the Registration of Fishing Vessels (2019 Amendment). Overall, a legal system
for fishery governance with Chinese characteristics, based on the Fisheries Law and supplemented by various laws, regulations, rules, and international treaties, has taken shape.
The Fisheries Law was amended in 2013. Since 2019, substantial amendments to the
Fisheries Law have been proposed and initiated. The Revised Draft for Comments was
completed in September 2019, and it has made great progress in controlling IUU fishing
in China. It is estimated that the revised Fisheries Law will take effect as soon as possible.
The revised draft will tighten regulations on IUU fishing; meanwhile, the “blacklist” of
IUU fishing in pelagic fisheries, the reporting of fishing boats inbound and outbound, a
fixed landing system for large- and medium-sized fishing boats, and a ban on foreign IUU
fishing boats from entering Chinese ports are all included in the revised draft. If the revised
draft is formally implemented, Chinese fishing vessels that seriously violate the provisions
could be “confiscated from their fishing vessels, suspended or canceled as deep-sea fishing
enterprises, and the persons responsible put on a blacklist of deep-sea fishing employees”
according to the law. Several provisions in the revised draft have been prepared for the
implementation of the PSAM, for example, establishing procedures for the inspection of
foreign vessels in non-fishing ports. The revised draft improves the legal effectiveness of
the system to combat IUU fishing, reflecting the importance that China attaches to fishery
resources; however, it could be more in line with relevant international treaties.
Simultaneously, support for the regulations of the Fisheries Law has developed. On
1 April 2020, provisions for the administration of pelagic fisheries came into force, and
pelagic fishing enterprises, vessels, and ships were explicitly prohibited from engaging in
IUU fishing activities [39]. Supporting increasingly stringent requirements for the management of fishing vessels from regional fishing organizations, at the end of August, China
issued a revised version of the measures for monitoring the location of oceangoing fishing
vessels, which came into force in 2019 [40]. According to these regulations, when regional
fishery organizations in which China is a member have stricter regulations on ship position
monitoring, Chinese ships shall abide by and implement stricter regulations, and fishing
boats that dismantle or close their position monitoring systems without authorization will
have their fishery subsidies deducted for that year [41].
5. Conclusions
IUU fishing poses a significant threat to fishery management, food security, state
interests, and social stability. However, because the identification of IUU fishing is complex,
and the causes of IUU fishing include many controversial issues, eliminating IUU fishing
has a long way to go. In this situation, China’s measures against IUU fishing have been
criticized, but China’s efforts to control IUU fishing, especially in the South China Sea,
cannot be neglected [42]. Apart from adopting efficient measures from national and
international perspectives to prevent IUU fishing, various forms of fisheries cooperation
have been undertaken at the bilateral level. Simultaneously, China has undertaken efforts to
conclude treaties in the region and actively refers to and intends to join the APSM. Certainly,
some negative factors, such as maritime disputes, lack of trust, and weak enforcement,
are challenging for China in establishing effective international cooperation in combating
IUU fishing in the South China Sea. Addressing these challenges will require efforts to
build trust among countries, address economic concerns, and strengthen enforcement
measures. For example, joining SEAFDEC could be a positive step for China toward
achieving this goal. In addition, the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS)
fisheries blueprint proposes several measures for China to improve the management of its
fisheries resources, including strengthening its enforcement capabilities, improving data
collection and sharing, promoting sustainable fishing practices, and enhancing international
cooperation. Adopting these measures could help China to address the challenges that it
faces in managing its vast and complex fisheries sector. Overall, China’s participation and
further efforts would play key roles against IUU fishing in the South China Sea and could

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

10 of 11

help to ensure that fishery resources are managed in a sustainable and equitable way for
future generations.
Author Contributions: Writing—original draft, C.Y.; Writing—review & editing, Y.-C.C. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The fieldwork was supported by the following project: General Base Project of Liaoning
Province Economic and Social Development Research, Research on Legal Basis for Construction of
Maritime Capital City in Liaoning Province, China, Grant No. 2023lsljdybkt-004.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Petrossian, G.A. Preventing illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing: A situational approach. Biol. Conserv. 2015,
189, 39–48. [CrossRef]
Alqattan, M.E.; Gray, T.S.; Stead, S.M. The illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in Kuwait: Problems and solutions. Mar.
Policy 2020, 116, 103775. [CrossRef]
Sumaila, U.R.; Cheung, W. Boom or Bust: The Future of Fish in the South China Sea. Living Ocean. Rep. Nov. 2015, 2, 5–10.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FAO. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2018: Meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2018.
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Fisheries Administration. China Fishery Statistics Yearbook, 1st ed.; China Agriculture
Press: Beijing, China, 2019; pp. 40, 42.
Williams, M.J. Will new multilateral arrangements help Southeast Asian states solve illegal fishing? Contemp. Southeast Asia 2013,
35, 258–283. [CrossRef]
“Indonesia Sinks Scores of Fishing Boats to Deter Poachers, Reuters”, Reuters. Available online: https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-indonesia-fisheries/indonesia-sinks-scores-of-fishing-boats-to-deter-poachers-idUSKCN0X00T0 (accessed on 5 April
2016).
“Vietnam Says Indonesia Seized Fishing Boat in Disputed Waters”, Reuters. Available online: https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-vietnam-indonesia/vietnam-says-indonesia-seized-fishing-boat-in-disputed-waters-idUSKBN18I0J8 (accessed on 22 May
2017).
Darmayadi, A.; Purnamasari, E.N. The Indonesia–China Relations in the Natuna Sea Dispute Resolution: Struggle for Sovereignty.
J. East. Eur. Cent. Asian Res. 2022, 9, 41–48. [CrossRef]
Buszynski, L. The South China Sea: Oil, maritime claims, and US–China strategic rivalry. Wash. Q. 2012, 35, 139–156. [CrossRef]
South China Sea Expert Working Group. A blueprint for fisheries management and environmental cooperation in the South
China Sea. AMTI Update. 2017, 1, 13.
Wenquan, Y. Different Contexts and Policy Options for Fisheries Conflict in the South China Sea. Southeast Asian 2021, 2, 106–154.
Mohan, M. Historical Fiction: China’s South China Sea Claims. World Aff. 2013, 1, 87.
Zhang, H. Fisheries cooperation in the South China Sea: Evaluating the options. Mar. Policy 2018, 89, 67–76. [CrossRef]
Tran, Y.H. The South China Sea Arbitral Award: Legal implications for fisheries management and cooperation in the South China
Sea. Camb. Int. Law J. 2017, 6, 87–94. [CrossRef]
International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU). Available
online: https://www.fao.org/3/Y1224E/y1224e.pdf (accessed on 10 October 2022).
Song, A.Y.; Fabinyi, M.; Barclay, K. China’s approach to global fisheries: Power in the governance of anti-illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing. Environ. Politics 2022. ahead of print. [CrossRef]
FAO. Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas;
FAO: Rome, Italy, 1993.
FAO. The 1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (FAO Code of Conduct); FAO: Rome, Italy, 1995.
Espenilla, J.J.F. Phillipines: Philippine Law Reform Initiatives against Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing. Asia-Pac. J.
Ocean. Law Policy 2019, 4, 97–102. [CrossRef]
Palma, M.A.E.; Tsamenyi, M.; Edeson, W.R. Promoting Sustainable Fisheries: The International Legal and Policy Framework to Combat
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing; Brill: Leiden, The Netherlands, 2010; Volume 6, pp. 240–245, 248–249.
Fisheries Subsidies Working Document Communication from the Chair. 2018. Available online: https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/
Pages/FE_Browse/FE_B_003.aspx (accessed on 10 October 2022).

Sustainability 2023, 15, 7255

23.

24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

11 of 11

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2016. Contributing
to Food Security and Nutrition for All. Rome. 2016. 200p. Available online: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5555e.pdf (accessed on
10 October 2022).
European Commission. EU Warns China on Illegal Fishing Practices. 15 November 2012. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/
fisheries/press/eu-warns-china-illegal-fishing-practices_en (accessed on 3 October 2022).
European Commission. EU Issues Annual Warning on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing. 22 June 2020. Available
online: https://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/press/eu-issues-annual-warning-illegal-unreported-and-unregulated-fishing (accessed
on 3 October 2022).
Riddle, K.W. Illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing: Is international cooperation contagious? Ocean. Dev. Int. Law 2006,
37, 265–297. [CrossRef]
Watson, R.A.; Kitchingman, A.; Gelchu, A.; Pauly, D. Mapping global fisheries: Sharpening our focus. Fish Fish. 2004, 5, 168–177.
[CrossRef]
Sumaila, U.R.; Ebrahim, N.; Schuhbauer, A.; Skerritt, D.; Li, Y.; Kim, H.S.; Mallory, T.G.; Lam, V.W.L.; Pauly, D. Updated estimates
and analysis of global fisheries subsidies. Mar. Policy 2019, 109, 103695. [CrossRef]
Krogstad, J. China’s Fishing Fleet in the South Pacific: Examining Beijing’s Commitment to Regional Governance. Asia Pac. Policy
Stud. 2018, 5, 256–270.
“Regulations on the Administration of Port Inspection and Quarantine of Imported and Exported Aquatic Products.” The State
Council of the People’s Republic of China. 2014. Available online: http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2014-04/16/content_2655358.htm
(accessed on 7 October 2022).
The High Seas and Promoting the Sustainable Development for Offshore Fisheries. Available online: http://www.moa.gov.cn/
nybgb/2020/202007/202008/t20200811_6350178.htm (accessed on 10 October 2022).
He, J. Enhancing Chinese law and practice to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and trade. Asia Pac. J. Environ.
Law 2016, 19, 4–28. [CrossRef]
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Agreement of Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, Revised ed. 2016. Available online: http://www.fao.org/port-state-measures/
resources/detail/en/c/1111616/ (accessed on 7 October 2022).
Fisheries Law of the People’s Republic of China; Revised Draft; NPC Standing Committee: Beijing, China, 2019.
Lam, J.S.L.; Cullinane, K.P.B.; Lee, P.T.W. The 21st-century Maritime Silk Road: Challenges and opportunities for transport
management and practice. Transp. Rev. 2018, 38, 413–415. [CrossRef]
Jianren, L. The 21st century maritime silk road and China-ASEAN industry cooperation. Int. J. China Stud. 2016, 7, 375.
Yi, H.; Katherine, T. Re-contemplating the South China Sea issue: Sailing with the wind of the 21st century Maritime Silk Road.
Chin. J. Glob. Gov. 2016, 2, 63–95. [CrossRef]
Chang, Y.-C.; Zhang, X.; Liu, S. Is There a Need for a Regional Fishery Agreement in the South China Sea? Hong Kong LJ. 2021,
51, 573.
Provisions for the Administration of Pelagic Fishery; Fisheries of the People’s Republic of China: Beijing, China, 2020.
The Measures for Monitoring the Location of Ocean-Going Fishing Vessels; Fisheries of the People’s Republic of China: Beijing,
China, 2019.
Hsiao, A. Opportunities for fisheries enforcement cooperation in the South China Sea. Mar. Policy 2020, 121, 103569. [CrossRef]
Huang, Y.; Vuong, P.T. Fisheries Cooperation and Management Mechanisms in the South China Sea: Context, Limitations, and
Prospects for the Future. Chin. J. Comp. Law 2016, 4, 128–148. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

