The Paciﬁc Review

ISSN: 0951-2748 (Print) 1470-1332 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpre20

Not our war. What ASEAN governments’
responses to the Ukraine war tell us about
Southeast Asia
Frederick Kliem
To cite this article: Frederick Kliem (2024) Not our war. What ASEAN governments’ responses
to the Ukraine war tell us about Southeast Asia, The Paciﬁc Review, 37:1, 211-243, DOI:
10.1080/09512748.2023.2202925
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2023.2202925

Published online: 21 Apr 2023.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1250

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpre20

The Pacific Review
2024, VOL. 37, NO. 1, 211–243
https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2023.2202925

Not our war. What ASEAN governments’
responses to the Ukraine war tell us about
Southeast Asia
Frederick Kliem
S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University Centre
for Multilateralism Studies, Singapore, Singapore

ABSTRACT

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has been widely condemned by governments of
the ‘political West’. Most other states have been either neutral or even Russialeaning in this war. Southeast Asia is no exception. There is a sense in the West
that the primary explanation for this reluctance to unambiguously side against
Russia is the relationship, perhaps even dependency, that these states may have
vis-à-vis Moscow; prima facie, a logical presumption. This article finds that while
there is some truth to this claim, the relations between individual governments’
responses to the war and their bilateral relationships with Moscow is too uneven
to suffice as a satisfactory explanation. Instead, one must look beyond materialistic, mono-causal explanations. To get the full picture, one must appreciate
Southeast Asia’s diplomatic tradition, their form of open and inclusive regionalism and the continued focus on domestic politics. This research provides the
first comprehensive empirical categorisation of Southeast Asian responses to
the Ukraine war and traces these to ASEAN’s diplomatic culture.

KEYWORDS ASEAN; diplomacy; Russia-ASEAN relations; strategic studies; Ukraine war

Introduction
The purpose of this article is to gauge and explain the resistance by most
Southeast Asian states to condemn Russia for its invasion of Ukraine on
24 February 2022—despite international pressure to do so. Governments
of the ‘political West’, primarily the United States (US), the European Union
(EU), Great Britain, Japan and Australia strongly condemned the invasion.
US President Biden called it ‘naked aggression [in pursuit of ] Putin’s desire
for empire by any means necessary’ (The White House, 2022a), and Western
governments implemented fierce sanctions against Russia, seeking to
isolate it internationally and inflict significant damage to the Kremlin. Most
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies are supporting Ukraine
CONTACT Frederick Kliem

Fredkliem@gmail.com

© 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

212

F. KLIEM

financially, diplomatically and with military weapons and intelligence. In
Europe, the Ukraine war has ignited a complete overhaul of traditional
foreign and security policy, both on supranational- and national-level
(Kliem, 2022a), as governments outbid each other on who is ‘tougher’
on Russia.
However, two-thirds of the global population live in countries whose
governments have been either neutral or even Russia-leaning (EIU, 2022).
Biden’s early attempt to characterise this war as ‘the great battle […]
between democracy and autocracy’ (The White House, 2022b), quickly
turned out to be inaccurate, as democracies such as India and Brazil also
refused to side with Western efforts (Hirsh, 2022). The Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is no exception. Initial responses by the
ASEAN member states (AMS)—including two US treaty allies (Thailand and
Philippines)—were for the most part reserved, even indifferent, and
ASEAN’s institutional response remained muted.
This article analyses the response to Russia’s war against Ukraine by
individual AMS and ASEAN. At this stage, predictions that the war would
end with a swift Russian victory turned out to be false, and AMS have found
and settled into their respective position—and the West has accepted that.
As significant adjustments in any AMS are highly unlikely, the article can
at this stage present three major findings: first, views among AMS diverge;
second, the depth and quality of bilateral relationships with Russia alone
do not adequately explain the relative restraint by the majority of AMS;
and three, thus, additional explanatory factors, namely ASEAN’s political
tradition of neutrality and ASEAN leaders’ preoccupation with domestic and
regional affairs, complement the picture and offer a more holistic explanation.
This research provides the first empirical analysis of Southeast Asian
responses to the war, and it produces quantifiable data to assess the
quality of AMS’ bilateral relationship with Moscow. Further, an inquiry into
the drivers of AMS’ responses adds to a deeper understanding of ASEAN’s
and AMS’ diplomatic culture in general. This both fills an empirical gap
of contemporary relevance and adds to the broad literature on Southeast
Asia’s international relations and approach to extra-mural crises. With this,
the below exercise concurrently serves as an exemplary case study for
Southeast Asian diplomacy and agency, thereby allowing us to draw general conclusions beyond the singularity of the Ukraine war. These insights
may contribute to an appreciation of ASEAN’s political culture as a driver
of AMS behaviour beyond seemingly obvious mono-causal materialistic
explanations, such as volume of arms trade.

Analytical approach
The hypothesis going into this research was that the response of individual
AMS to Russia’s invasion was contingent on the individual government’s
relationship with Moscow, i.e. the deeper the political relationship with and/
or materialistic dependency on Russia, the more restrained the reaction. The

The Pacific Review

213

independent variable is, thus, the quality of the bilateral relationship, the
dependent variable the respective response. In a first qualitative analytical
step, individual AMS’ official public responses were classified in a taxonomy
with four distinct categories along a response spectrum: explicit condemners;
cautious hedgers; impassive bystanders; and full supporters. In a second
step, this taxonomy was benchmarked against the independent variable of
the primary hypothesis, i.e. the respective bilateral relationship, deep or
superficial, assessed with the help of four key indicators: diplomatic relations;
defence relations; arms procurement; and overall economic relations.

Diplomatic Relations
Defence Relations

Arms Procurement
Economic Relations

•
•
•
•
•

existing intergovernmental commissions;
high-level diplomatic visits;
formal bilateral partnership agreements;
other noteworthy diplomatic arrangements.
[Extra point for Myanmar]

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

joint bilateral military exercises;
high-level meetings of defence officials;
military education exchanges;
military agreements;
and port calls.
Percentage of overall procurement.
Percentage of overall trade;
other economic linkages.

Arms procurement and trade are measured in percentage of the AMS’
overall volume. More difficult to quantify are defence and diplomatic
relations, which is done here with the help of a scoring system. Each
indicator in each category scores one point if cooperation in this indicator
exists; zero points if there is no cooperation. Thus, the highest score,
denoting the closest relationship, that can be achieved for defence diplomacy is five points and four points for diplomatic relationships. In the
case of Myanmar, an extra point for diplomatic relations was awarded
because of Russia’s immediate treatment of the military junta as Myanmar’s
legitimate government after the February 2021 military coup.
Analytical matrixes visualise the degree of correlation between the bilateral relationship and the AMS’s position in the taxonomy. The Y-axis denotes
the quality of the relationship, the X-axis the AMS’s response category.
The following analysis will show that the quality of the bilateral relationship alone cannot satisfactorily explain state behaviour. While there is
some overlap—most obviously in arms procurement—the causality is not
consistent and, thus, insufficient to adequately explain the broad range
of responses and AMS’ overall restraint. Overall, bilateral relations are better
understood as an intervening, not independent variable. Two additional,
equally important intervening variables are being explored: a normative
explanation, namely Southeast Asia’s tradition of impartiality; and a practical, namely a prioritisation of domestic (and regional) over foreign policy
issues among most AMS. An appreciation of ASEAN’s political tradition is
imperative to a holistic understanding of the international relations of
Southeast Asia.

214

F. KLIEM

National responses
The qualifying markers of each category of national responses are exclusively based on the robustness and candour of official governmental
reactions to the war. These include both rhetoric and action. Not all qualifying indicators are equally matched in all cases and assignment to one
or another category is not binary, but approximate.
1

Explicit Condemners

Singapore

•
•
•

2

Cautious Hedgers
Moved up from
Impassive Bystanders:

Vietnam Indonesia
Cambodia
Philippines

3

Impassive Bystanders

Brunei
Laos
Malaysia
Thailand

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

4

Full Supporters

Myanmar

•
•
•

1.

Condemning act, identified as war and
unprovoked invasion of a sovereign state
Naming Russia as the aggressor and Ukraine
as the victim
Strong action: Imposition of sanctions, no
bilateral visits/meetings
Priority: balancing between Russia and the West
Measured condemnation of war
Not terming it unlawful or invasion
Not identifying aggressor or victim
Some moderate diplomatic action
Bilateral meetings may still take place
Priority: Not getting involved in any way
May refer to it as Russia-Ukraine war or conflict
in neutral terms but not speak of invasion
Not identifying aggressor or victim
No condemnation, merely expressions of
concern
No diplomatic action, bilateral meetings still
take place
Stating full support for the invasion
Russia seen as defending legitimate security
interests
West identified as the original aggressor

Explicit Condemners

This category is as clear as it is sparsely populated. Condemners are
expected to react similarly to Western countries in terms of both language
and action. Governments in this category condemn the Russian invasion
and clearly identify it as such. They would voice moral and offer diplomatic
support for Ukraine and strongly denounce the violation of international
law, such as Article 2 of the United Nations (UN) Charta. Strong action in
the form of sanctions is expected, while bilateral meetings with Russian
elites are unlikely.
Singapore has reacted strongest of all AMS. Singapore’s government
repeatedly condemned Russian aggression against Ukraine, called it both
an illegal war and an unprovoked attack and military invasion numerous
times and in various settings, including international fora which other
AMS states attended. Furthermore, for the first time in over four decades,
Singapore imposed unilateral sanctions on another country (Ministry of
Foreign Affairs Singapore, 2022a). Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong reasoned
that ‘[Russia’s invasion] endangers the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries, especially small ones’ (Prime Minister’s

The Pacific Review

215

Office Singapore, 2022a), such as the city-state Singapore. The prime minister and various cabinet ministers have repeated this position numerous
times in various settings (Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore, 2022b),
including at the Group of Twenty (G-20) Summit, hosted by Indonesia in
Bali (Prime Minister’s Office Singapore, 2022b).
In practical consequence, Singapore has banned export of all goods
that could potentially aid Russia’s capacity to wage war against Ukraine
and implemented financial sanctions (Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore,
2022c). It should be noted, however, that Singapore has made it abundantly clear that they are decidedly not aligning with the West against
Russia but taking a stance solely based on international law. Neither is
Russia is seen as an enemy, nor the West as virtuous. The very senior
Minister for Law and Home Affairs, K. Shanmugam, also blamed the West
for the war and criticised all big powers, US and Russia, for violating
international law and interpreting it the way it suits them – though he
condemned the invasion and identified Putin as primarily responsible
(Ministry of Law Singapore, 2023).
2.

Cautious Hedgers

Hedgers respond to the war much less categorically than the West and
without taking a stand against Moscow. At the same time, hedgers do not
want to be seen as indifferent to the plight of Ukraine and the strong
feelings ASEAN’s Western Dialogue Partners (DP)1 espouse. The rhetorical
compromise is to condemn the attack as such but not necessarily characterise it as an illegal war of aggression. Hedgers might instead accept the
Russian nomenclature of ‘conflict’ or ‘military campaign’ or refer to it neutrally
as the Russia-Ukraine war. Hedgers also tend to avoid identifying Russia as
the responsible perpetrator. In practice, Russian political elites are neither
seen nor treated as pariahs – bilateral meetings are still possible. Hedgers
may also undertake some diplomatic activity, including mediation efforts,
track-two engagement or humanitarian support for Ukraine.
Indonesia’s response was relatively muted, condemning the attack on
Ukraine as such but without naming Russia as the aggressor of an unprovoked war. President Joko Widodo called for an end to hostilities but
focussed his concern on the war’s potential to derail the still feeble postCOVID-19 economic recovery and threatening food security. Foreign Minister
Retno Marsudi talked to her Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov numerous
times, including at numerous in-person meetings (Antara, 2022), doubling
down on Indonesia’s message that while being committed to the principles
of international law, the specific concern is the war’s impact on the regional
economy (Yazid, Firdaus, & Ramadhan, 2022). Widodo resisted Western pressure to both withdraw the G-20 invitation to Russia and to condemn Russia
at the summit.2 With this, technically, Indonesia ought to be in the ‘impassive
bystanders’ category was it not for the fact that Jakarta was inadvertently
drawn into the conflict by holding both the G-20 presidency in 2022 as

216

F. KLIEM

well as the ASEAN chairmanship in 2023, which requires direct engagement
with Moscow, including physical presence of Russian representatives in
Indonesia. On June 30, Widodo also travelled to both Kiev and Moscow.
This locates Indonesia inevitably in the hedgers category.
Vietnam has also abstained from any direct criticism of Russia and not
used the term ‘invasion’. Hanoi only expressed deep concern and that all
‘relevant parties’ should ‘exercise restraint’ (VNA (Vietnam News Agency),
2022a). Hanoi appeared sympathetic to Moscow in general and even used
its domestic propaganda machine to mobilise pro-Russian sentiments and
provide counter narratives to the West (Dror, 2022). Lavrov met his
Vietnamese counterpart in person several times, including at a personal
visit to Hanoi in July 2022, where he was afforded ‘red carpet treatment’
(Fischler, 2022). However, Vietnam also emphasised that disputes should
be resolved peacefully and offered to contribute to a solution (VNA
(Vietnam News Agency), 2022b). Indeed, personal conversations in Hanoi
with Vietnamese diplomats and the wider foreign policy community
revealed great concern as to the potentially dangerous precedent Moscow
is setting. Particularly Russia’s pseudo-historical claim to Ukrainian territory
unsettles Vietnamese diplomats, fearing China’s claim to ‘historical rights’
in the South China Sea might at some point translate into similar action
– though most of these conversations stopped well short of blaming
Russia and instead quickly pointed out NATO’s alleged responsibility.3
Covertly, Vietnamese officials have offered help to mediate on both trackone and -two level to facilitate conversations among Ukrainian and Russian
stakeholders. And Hanoi vowed to support Ukraine with humanitarian aid,
albeit with only a modest amount. On Ukraine’s Independence Day,
Vietnamese President Nguyễn Xuân Phúc sent a congratulatory message to
Ukraine’s President Zelenskyy (VOA Tiếng Việt, 2022). Although the
Vietnamese government continues to engage deeply and cordially with the
Kremlin, it appears sympathetic towards Ukraine and genuinely interested
in pulling its weight to help to bring about an end to the war (Le Hong, 2022).
The Philippines and Cambodia are the only two AMS that have changed
their early position as ‘impassive bystanders’ and quickly settled into the
‘cautious hedgers’ category. Manila was mostly concerned with evacuation
efforts of Philippine nationals from Ukraine. Then-president Rodrigo Duterte
initially remained silent on the war. Then-defence minister Lorenzana stated
that the Philippines would remain neutral because the conflict was ‘none of
our business’ (CNN Philippines, 2022). However, on 12 April, Duterte himself
expressed explicit condemnation of the invasion of Ukraine and remarked
that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was ‘brutal’ and deserved ‘condemnation’
(Parrocha, 2022). At the same time, Duterte emphasised that Putin was his
friend and repeated numerous times in various settings that Manila would
remain neutral (Lalu, 2022). With this, Manila still fits into the ‘cautious hedgers’ category despite the condemnation. Manila did not follow up with any
meaningful policy or diplomacy, and Duterte’s emphasis on his personal
friendship and his country’s neutrality substantially qualifies his criticism.

The Pacific Review

217

Duterte’s successor, Ferdinand Marcos Jr., has rarely spoken publicly on the
conflict other than mentioning numerous times his ‘independent policy’ and
that there was ‘no need to take a stand’ (Mercado, 2022). Generally, Marcos
is likely to continue to straddle this cautious hedging strategy, as his National
Security Adviser Clarita Carlos confirmed (Gita-Carlos, 2022).
Similarly, Cambodia’s Prime Minister Hun Sen was originally among the
most reserved ASEAN leaders. Early on, he only expressed his hope for a
‘peaceful solution’ (Niseiy, 2022) and emphasised Cambodia’s neutrality
(Sochan, 2022a). Over time, however, Hun Sen’s rhetoric became more
robust (Storey, 2022b). He stated that Cambodia ‘stand[s] in solidarity with
the Ukrainian people’ and condemned this ‘unacceptable act of aggression’
as violating Ukraine’s independence and sovereignty (Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Cambodia, 2022). Reversing his earlier position, Cambodia could
not be neutral in this conflict despite Russia being Cambodia’s ‘friend’
(Sochan, 2022b). Notably, Hun Sen related the Ukraine war to Cambodia’s
own historical experiences, such as US attacks against Cambodia during
the Vietnam War and the 1979 Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia (Khmer
Times, 2022). With this change of tone, Cambodia is closer to Singapore
on the response spectrum rhetorically, and it even co-sponsored a United
Nations General Assembly (UNGA) resolution condemning Russia’s war in
Ukraine. However, Phnom Penh is often fickle and fell well short of any
meaningful action severing ties with Russia.
3.

Impassive Bystanders

This category includes AMS that clearly expressed their neutrality in the
conflict and barely reacted at all. These states fell short of referring to the
war as an invasion or identifying who is aggressor or victim. No blame is
assigned, directly or indirectly, by any government in this category. Instead,
impassive bystanders express things such as ‘grave concern’ regarding ‘the
situation/conflict in Ukraine’. The war does not trigger any meaningful
action and bilateral meetings are still taking place unimpededly.
Malaysia’s Prime Minister Ismail only remarked that he was ‘saddened’ by
events, and his office later issued a statement of ‘serious concern’. Instead
of naming Russia, Malaysia urged ‘all concerned parties’ to de-escalate (Prime
Minister’s Office of Malaysia, 2022). Malaysia has abstained from a UN vote
to suspend Russia from the UN Human Rights Council (HRC), stressing that
such a decision ‘should not be made in haste’ (The Malaysian Reserve, 2022).
Malaysia’s Foreign Affairs Minister reaffirmed in July that Malaysia is utmost
committed to remaining neutral in the ‘current crisis in Ukraine’, that ‘Malaysia
does not support either side of the conflict’ and does ‘not wish to be drawn
into any political disputes or conflicts’ (Jaafar, 2022).
Thailand’s Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha similarly expressed ‘deep
concern’ and highlighted ‘territorial integrity, international law, and the UN
Charter’ (Tan, 2022), but he did not identify who was breaching what, if
any, and was always clear that Bangkok would remain ‘neutral’ in this

218

F. KLIEM

situation (Rujopakarn, 2022). A position he defended in the lead-up to the
US-ASEAN Summit, which would ‘not compel Thailand to choose a side’.
Nor, the prime minister emphasised, would he allow to let the Ukraine
situation become the dominant issue at the summit (Phaicharoen, 2022).
Prayuth argued that it was time to ‘change the narrative of the Ukraine
situation from conflict to humanitarian consideration for those who are
affected by the Ukraine situation (Phaicharoen & Watcharasakwet, 2022)’.
Foreign Minister Don Pramudwinai remarked that there was no need for
Thailand to condemn the war and would not ‘rush into playing a role’ (Thai
PBS World, 2022). He then visited Russia to meet Lavrov in person to discuss
deepening of bilateral relationships and especially trade ties (Shabbir, 2022).
Laos did not even express any concern. Almost identically to Vietnam,
though, the Foreign Affairs Ministry released a press statement that it was
closely following the ‘evolving, complex and sensitive developments’ and
cautioned ‘all parties concerned to exercise utmost restraint and pursue
efforts in deescalating’ (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Lao PDR, 2022).
However, unlike Vietnam, there are no signs that indicate any concern or
indeed interest beyond this call. President Thongloun Sisoulith also criticised Western sanctions and embargoes, which would ‘not make the world
a better place’. Laos had a ‘clear foreign policy direction’, which would be
to ‘not take sides in today’s conflicts and disputes’ (Phonevilay, 2022).
The small but wealthy Sultanate of Brunei initially responded similarly
to Indonesia, condemning the ‘violation of sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of any country’ in the immediate aftermath of the
invasion (Ministry of Foreign Affairs Brunei Darussalam, 2022), but Brunei’s
leaders have remained silent and entirely passive ever since.
4.

Full Supporters

The ‘full supporter’ category is self-explanatory and consists of only Myanmar,
who has fully endorsed Russia’s invasion and uncritically adopted Moscow’s
view of this ‘military campaign’ in defence of Russia’s national security interests, violated by the illegitimate Ukrainian government and the West.
Myanmar junta spokesperson Zaw Min Tun argued that Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine was ‘justified’, as Russia was protecting ‘their sovereignty’ and
was showing its ‘position […] as a world power’ (Al Arabiya News, 2022).
Myanmar’s leader Min Aung Hlaing visited Russia numerous times since
the invasion of Ukraine, discussing deepening the already ‘positive ties’
across all domains, and he regularly expresses his great friendship with
and admiration of Putin, calling him the ‘leader of the world’ (CAN, 2022).
It should be noted that this is the position of the junta government, the
so-called State Administration Council (SAC). In contrast, the exiled National
Unity Government (NUG) takes the opposite position and condemned the
Russian invasion. However, as the junta are and will for the foreseeable future
remain the de facto government in Naypyidaw (Seah, 2021; Thuzar, 2021),
unfortunately, this is Myanmar’s official position for the time being.

The Pacific Review

219

ASEAN’s multilateral response
Many observers have pointed out ASEAN’s lack of unity, which in combination
with its diplomatic tradition of consensus severely complicates strong positions
on any international crisis (See Ha, 2022; Khoo, 2004; Kraft, 2017; Le Thu, 2019;
Narine, 2009). Correspondingly, when there are divergent views across membership, as is the case here, ASEAN can at best function as a bridge-builder.
Its role then is best understood in minimalist terms: to facilitate an exchange
of views among AMS rather than taking a united and coherent institutional
position. At the same time, ASEAN is sensitive to both the views of more
forward-leaning members and its international reputation, especially with
Western DP. This means that ASEAN leaders must strike a balance based on
weak compromises while also meeting international requirements.
This balancing act is reflected in ASEAN’s position on the Ukraine war.
At various occasions, statements were issued that share three broad characteristics: stressing the need for a peaceful resolution and humanitarian
assistance; support for international law and principles of ASEAN’s Treaty of
Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), to which Russia is a party;
and, despite invoking the TAC, no ASEAN statement condemns Russia or its
aggression. Neither does ASEAN identify Ukraine as the victim, merely as
the place where the war occurs. For example, on 26 February, ASEAN foreign
ministers expressed ‘deep concern’ and hope that all ‘relevant parties’ would
‘exercise maximum restraint’ (ASEAN, 2022a). Numerous statements followed
but none went beyond calling for a ceasefire and dialogue between ‘conflicting parties’ over ‘the situation in Ukraine’ (ASEAN, 2022b). The issue was
discussed at the US-ASEAN Summit, but, remarkably, the joint statement
did not mention Russia and only included equally weak references to Ukraine
(ASEAN, 2022d), suggesting that Biden failed to convince ASEAN leaders to
take a tougher position. The 29 pages joint communique of the ASEAN
Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in August addressed the ‘situation in Ukraine’ in
a mere 100 words without mentioning either the word ‘Russia’ or ‘war’
(ASEAN, 2022e). The closest ASEAN got to jointly expressing sympathy for
the Ukrainian victims was a call to establish an independent investigation
into alleged atrocities against civilians in Bucha (ASEAN, 2022c). The ASEANled East Asia Summit (EAS), which includes Russia and the US among others,
ended without a joint communique because of divergent views on the war.
Former ASEAN practitioners are somewhat divided on how successful
and cohesive ASEAN is in global multilateral forums. (Mahbubani & Sng,
2017; Natalegawa, 2018, p. 153). Ideally, AMS would speak in unity.
However, there generally is academic consensus that voting patterns
among AMS in UN forums, for example, are characterised by diversion
rather than cohesion. To the extent that any alignments exist, this is rather
coincidental convergence of national interests than astute diplomacy
(Burmester & Jankowski, 2014; Nguitragool & Rüland, 2015). Sometimes,
diplomatic cohesion is poor even in cases that directly affect Southeast
Asia (Natalegawa, 2018, p. 221).

220

F. KLIEM

Unsurprisingly then, UN voting alignment on the Ukraine war is mediocre, with only a modicum of ASEAN unity. Singapore was the only AMS
joining 80 other nations in co-sponsoring UN Security Council (UNSC)
resolution S/2022/155 on 25 February condemning and deploring Russia’s
aggression, which ultimately failed due to a Russian veto. Four days later,
the UNGA adopted resolution ES-11/1, titled ‘Aggression against Ukraine’,
approved by 141 states with five votes against it and 35 abstentions. Eight
AMS voted in favour, Vietnam and Laos abstained. Myanmar is officially
on record as pro-ES-11/1, for it is represented at the UNGA by the NUG
exile government—an arrangement predating the 2021 military coup. Had
Myanmar’s de facto government, the SAC, be present at the UNGA,
Myanmar would have opposed the resolution, technically leaving the ‘real’
ASEAN ratio at seven supports, one in opposition and three abstentions.
A slightly different picture unfolded in April 2022, when no AMS was
among the co-sponsors of the draft resolution to suspend Russia from the
UNHRC. This resolution (ES‑11/3) was eventually adopted in the UNGA with
only two AMS supporting it (Philippines and Myanmar), two against (Vietnam
and Laos) and six, notably including Singapore, abstaining. Again, Myanmar
technically clouds the official record. On the other hand, Timor-Leste, a
possibly soon eleventh AMS, supported both resolutions.

Response Spectrum from Condemnation to Support
In sum, except for Singapore—and to a lesser extent Vietnam and
Cambodia—AMS and ASEAN remain reserved, in stark contrast to the
positions taken by Western governments. Most political spectrums tend
to be middle-heavy, i.e. most subjects trend somewhere around the centre
rather than at the extremes. However, this response spectrum’s middle-ground denotes not necessarily a virtuous middle-way but rather
visualises the great reluctance in Southeast Asia to go along with Western
criticism and isolation of Russia. From a Western perspective, in a crisis
of such immense proportion, Singapore’s strong position could be seen
as an expected default reaction rather than the extreme outlier that it de
facto is. Both Singapore’s and Myanmar’s are isolated positions, which no
other AMS will likely emulate, not even silently admire. Four AMS are still
hedging their bets, not taking a position against Moscow while at the
same time not wanting to be seen as indifferent especially to the strong
feelings of the Western DP. A further four AMS remain impassive, keen
not to side with the West and, most importantly, not to make this European
war a Southeast Asian problem. Corresponding with this overall reluctance,
ASEAN’s position has been a muted, with only generic calls for a peaceful
resolution. Southeast Asian voting patterns at the UN-level equally show
measured restraint rather than resolve.

The Pacific Review

221

Sources of Southeast Asia’s reluctance
The primary hypothesis of this research presumed a causal relation between
the quality of bilateral relationships with Russia and the specific government’s position. The following analysis will investigate this and provide a
• bilateral explanation, i.e. the varying degree of individual national
relationship links with the Russian state;
Due to the unsatisfactory explanatory power of this mono-causality,
however, two further drivers will be investigated:
• normative explanation with Southeast Asia’s diplomatic tradition of
impartiality;
• practical explanation, a still prevalent preoccupation by regional leaders with domestic affairs.
In their sum, these three explanations provide a good picture as to the
mixed but ultimately reserved national responses as well as ASEAN’s institutional indifference to the war in Ukraine.

Unpacking individual bilateral relationships with Russia
Although Russia is an ASEAN DP, its engagement with the organisation is
limited. Under Putin, Moscow sees ASEAN predominantly as an entry point
to gain a voice in Asian regionalism (Buszynski, 2006). This serves not
least to strengthen Russian influence in global affairs as well as its great
power prestige (Rangsimaporn, 2009). Moscow’s primary focus is still on
developing bilateral ties with individual AMS. Russia and AMS have
enhanced their economic, diplomatic and military engagement, in particular arms procurement, since the early 2000s. Moscow specifically emphasises its long-standing relationship with Vietnam and lately increasingly
with the otherwise isolated Myanmar junta. Moscow also seeks to cultivate
ties with Indonesia and Malaysia—seen as particularly important and
traditionally non-aligned—as well as with US allies who might still be
receptive to Russian advances, i.e. post-coup Thailand and the Philippines
since President Duterte (Gorenburg & Schwartz, 2019). Generally, Moscow
tends to exploit tensions between the West and AMS over the former’s
pressure on human rights and democratic backsliding to gain a deeper
foothold in these countries.

Diplomatic relations
Diplomatic relations are difficult to quantify. Measurement was, thus, done
with help of a simple scoring system from zero to four points.

222

F. KLIEM

Author’s Own Illustration
Although sound diplomatic relations could act as a deterrent against strong
condemnation of Russia’s war, there is no consistency at first sight. The three
AMS with the closest diplomatic relations with Moscow (Vietnam, Laos and
Myanmar), cover all response categories from two or four. Vietnam is the most
interesting case. Hanoi and Russia are tied by a very close diplomatic relationship
and a historical intimacy vis-à-vis Russia among Vietnamese bureaucrats and
the military. Parts of the population, too, have pro-Russian sentiments, which
are directly translated into public support among a significant proportion of
conservatives (Ha & Luong, 2022). In 2012, both elevated their ‘strategic partnership’ to ‘comprehensive strategic partnership’ (Thayer, 2012), and there are
plenty regular mechanisms for diplomatic exchange. However, Hanoi has moved
much closer to the West in recent years (Tung, 2022). And Hanoi’s unease with
Russia’s behaviour somewhat contradicts this close diplomatic partnership. Unlike
Vietnam, Lao PDR is often seen as peripheral to Asian diplomacy. But like
Vietnam, Russia and Laos have historically good political relations, which both
sides seek to protect. Laos was a significant recipient of Soviet aid for fellow
communist regimes and many Laotian bureaucrats and indeed currently leading
political figures, including Thongloun Sisoulith, pursued their education in Russia.
Lastly, Myanmar scores only averagely in terms of diplomatic relationships with Moscow. The two neither have a strategic partnership nor other
noteworthy formal diplomatic cooperation agreements. However, because
of the exceptionally strong mutual diplomatic support, Myanmar has been
awarded a ‘bonus’ point in this category, and Min Aung Hlaing visited
Russia at least twice since the Ukraine war; he even met Putin personally.
The Kremlin took the exceptional diplomatic step to engage with the SAC
as Myanmar’s government and supporting the junta at the UN-level—
though stopping short of official diplomatic recognition (International
Crisis Group, 2022; Reuters, 2017; Storey, 2022c).
Although bilateral diplomatic relations seem have some explanatory power
as far as Laos and Myanmar are concerned, there is no obvious trend. The
three highest scoring AMS in this assessment category are not at all uniform

The Pacific Review

223

in their response to the war. Likewise, Indonesia sticks out as having comparatively strong ties with Russia, including mutual high-level visits. Indonesia and
Russia also hold a regular bilateral consultation forum and have drawn up plans
to draft a comprehensive strategic partnership agreement, which has not yet
materialised (Sheany, 2018). Like Malaysia, Indonesia’s interest in Russia is partially motivated by maintaining a regional balance among all great powers.
Moscow for its part sees Indonesia, not incorrectly, as the most consequential
AMS (Weatherbee, 2013). Nonetheless, Indonesia—a ‘cautious hedger’—has
generally been les reserved than other AMS. Lastly, even the three lowest
scoring AMS (Thailand, Brunei and Malaysia) are straddling the middle ground
in terms of their position on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. They have a more
distanced diplomatic relationship with the Kremlin than for example Indonesia
but have been much more reserved in their reaction. Similarly, Singapore—the
only ‘explicit condemner’—has stronger diplomatic ties with Moscow than others.

Defence relations
Defence relations were measured by consulting five indicators and awarding a maximum of five points. Although Russia lags far behind the US
and China, and experts see this gap as increasing (Storey, 2021a), this is
an important indicator of comprehensive bilateral relationship as it signals
a degree of both trust and desire on AMS’ part to include Russia as a
regionally consequential power. It is important to note that a substantial
part of these defence ties are essentially Cold War relics, carried over the
fall of the Soviet Union. Nonetheless, exchanges continue to foster good
relations and mutual understanding among defence elites.

Author’s Own Illustration
Myanmar aside, which has increasingly close military ties with Russia,
three AMS stand out: Indonesia and Vietnam score full points while
Malaysia scores lowest. In the light of an only recently (2016) lifted Western
arms embargo and a mutual Cold War history, close Russia-Vietnam defence
relations are unsurprising. There are regular high-level visits among defence

224

F. KLIEM

officials, and Vietnam even participated in Russia’s Army Games in August
2022 and future military exercises with Russia cannot be ruled out (Thayer,
2022). Highly noteworthy is Russia’s preferential access to Vietnam’s Cam
Ranh Bay since 2014, which allows Russia to access the facility almost at
will (Storey & Thayer, 2001; TASS, 2014). Russia mostly inherited this, including the Cam Ranh Bay access, from the Soviet Union. Regardless of origin,
such favourable arrangements put Moscow in a good position and enables
regular correspondence and trust-building with Hanoi.
Once again, Indonesia has not forgotten the substantial economic, political and diplomatic support it received from the Soviet Union in the early
days post-independence (Boden, 2008; Wilborn, 1980). Present-day Indonesia
maintains these long-standing defence ties, including dialogues, technology
transfer and even joint development and production (Parameswaran,
2019b). Recently, Indonesia hosted the ASEAN-Russia Naval Exercise (ARNEX).
Though a minor symbolic exercise (Storey, 2021b), it indicates that Jakarta
continues to see Russia as an important regional balancer. As is the case
with Vietnam, a large number of Indonesian officers continue to study at
first Soviet and now Russian defence academies (Storey, 2021a). Although
the Cold War legacy plays an important role, contemporary Indonesia—and
likewise Malaysia—value Russia as a balancer particularly of US global
influence. Furthermore, while the US is often seen as having a global
anti-Islam agenda, Russia and especially Putin are regarded as one of the
few non-Muslim Islam-friendly world leaders.
Malaysia shares these sentiments (Gorenburg & Schwartz, 2019) but is,
somewhat surprisingly, on the other end of the spectrum. Malaysia is
important to Russia’s overall Southeast Asia strategy and was the driving
force behind Russia’s incorporation into ASEAN’s institutional infrastructure.
But despite sizable arms acquisitions in the past and regular port calls,
Malaysia has little other defence cooperation with Russia. Perhaps an
obstacle to closer security cooperation, especially against the backdrop
of the Ukraine war, is the 2014 downing of a Malaysian Airlines flight.
MH-17 was shot down by Russian separatist forces over Ukraine during
the 2014 war in Donbas, killing all 295 people, including 43 Malaysians.
In defence relations, Malaysia scores lowest but is more reserved in
their response to the Ukraine war than either Indonesia or Vietnam,
although the latter two have much closer and historic defence relations
with Russia. This second category is, thus, equally indefinite as to the
causal relationship between the quality of bilateral relationships and the
response to the invasion of Ukraine.

Arms procurement
Although arms sales could justifiably be part of the previous category, it is
Russia’s primary activity in Southeast Asia, and given the difficulty to switch
procurement sources, there is a degree of path-dependency. This justifies a
separate category. Furthermore, while there is some overlap, the two results

The Pacific Review

225

are not synonymous in their analytical value. The most obvious cases are
Thailand and Singapore, who both score in the mid-range in defence diplomacy but procure very little (Thailand) or no arms at all (Singapore) from Russia.

Author’s Own Illustration; Source: SIPRI (Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute) (2019).
Superbly analysed by experts in the field (Storey, 2021a, 2022a), Russia has
been the leading weapons exporter to Southeast Asia since 2001 with sales
amounting to over US$10 billion, although overall value has been on the
decline since 2014 and the invasion of Ukraine is likely to perpetuate this
downward trend. In absolute numbers, Russia’s largest customers in ASEAN
are Vietnam, with a very significant lead over second-placed Myanmar, closely
followed by Malaysia and Indonesia. Singapore, Philippines and Brunei do not
import any weapons from Russia. Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos, and previously
Vietnam, have little choice but to buy from Russia (or China) due to Western
arms embargoes. Especially Vietnam has relied on Russian weapons to modernise its armed forces since the mid-1990s and has purchased most its current
day military hardware, including fighter jets and warships, from Russia. Hanoi
continues to buy from Moscow, and given its embargo experience, Hanoi will
likely not switch to European or US equipment. Indeed, Malaysia and Indonesia
have a tradition of buying both Russian and Western systems, but US pressure
recently forced Jakarta to cancel a deal with Moscow for eleven combat aircraft
(Suorsa, 2021). Russia is Malaysia’s largest source with purchases summing up
to USD1.2 billion since 2000, including combat aircraft. Likewise, Laos is a
traditional Russian customer. Although the overall amount is minimal due Laos’
limited resources, the country relies on Russia for almost half of its military
imports. Intransparency is particularly high in this case, and Russia is known
to transfer weapons to Laos for non-monetary payment, including swap deals
and mining rights (Parameswaran, 2019a), which distorts the statistic.

226

F. KLIEM

More important for this research than these details are relative percentages. Vietnam, Myanmar, Laos and Malaysia stand out. Vietnam
imported over 80% of its weaponry from Russia, Malaysia around 30%.
Russia is the single largest source for these AMS except for Myanmar, who
procures marginally more from China. Of all four categories, arms procurement closest corresponds with the state’s position in the response
taxonomy, that is a large share of Russian equipment puts the state closer
towards the supportive end of the response spectrum. Although Myanmar,
the only clear supporter, purchases more from China than Russia, MyanmarRussia defence cooperation is very strong and will likely increase. According
to the primary hypothesis, one would also expect Laos and Malaysia to
be located where they are, i.e. trending towards the top right in the chart.
Two AMS appear to be defying the trend, albeit on different ends of
the spectrum: While Vietnam relies heavily on Russian arms, exports to
Thailand have been miniscule over the past 20 years, a mere USD70 million
or less than two percent of Bangkok’s overall procurement. Despite being
a formal US ally Thailand’s acquisitions are very diversified. Predominantly
Western kit, but China has filled a Western vacuum since Thailand’s 2014
military coup. However, Vietnam has displayed greater unease with Russia’s
war than Thailand. Hence, in terms of arms procurements from Russia and
the AMS’ respective position in the response taxonomy, Vietnam and
Thailand are noteworthy outliers, obscuring the hypothesis (the greater
the dependency on arms imports from Russia the more reserved the
response), while other AMS seem to confirm it.

Economic relationships
Economic relationships are often seen as a hallmark of bilateral relationships, and indeed dependency (Reuveny & Kang, 1998). This is not the
case with Russia and Southeast Asia.

The Pacific Review

227

Author’s Own Illustration; Sources: Various trade accounting websites,
including Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC), World Trade
Organisation (WTO) and Trading Economics.
There are no bilateral free-trade agreements in place, although Singapore
has an agreement with the Eurasian Economic Union. Russia has investment treaties with several AMS, often dating to the late 1990s. While there
had been almost no progress for two decades, Russian foreign direct
investment into ASEAN is gradually increasing, Singapore is of increasing
interest to Russian services investment (Shira, 2021), while a significant
proportion of Russian investments in Vietnam are in energy extraction
operations in the South China Sea. Russia is now overall just about the
tenth largest investment source for AMS.
Many AMS have long-standing and deep diplomatic and defence ties
with Moscow, but trade volume remains miniscule. Despite Russia’s size,
proximity and historical role in the region as well as numerous agreements
to promote ASEAN-Russia economic relations, such as the 2012 Roadmap
for ASEAN-Russia Comprehensive Economic Cooperation (Chipman Koty,
2021; Corbin, 2018), Russia is not even a top-ten trade partner of any AMS
and remains the second last trade partner among all ASEAN DP (ASEAN,
2020). Even all ten AMS combined do not make it into Russia’s top-ten
trade partners, totalling less than USD20 billion—only a third of the bilateral trade between Singapore and Malaysia. Vietnam has the greatest trade
ties to Russia in ASEAN, even though Russia accounts for less than one
percent of Vietnam’s overall trade volume. For most AMS, trade with Russia
accounts for something around the half-percent mark of overall trade.
A deeper data analysis reveals that in a few specific sectors, economic
ties are stronger than meets the eye. For example, Thailand receives a very
significant number of Russian tourists, especially in Phuket, where Russians
are the largest tourists group. This is especially the case currently, with
Russians seeking to sit-out the crisis at home and access to European destinations curtailed. Likewise, agriculture is a critical sector in most AMS, and
ASEAN as a whole imports almost ten percent of its fertilizers from Russia.
Even in terms of energy cooperation—Russia’s strongest competitive
advantage—little takes place beyond the investments in Vietnam. As compared to Europe or China, ASEAN fossil fuel imports from Russia are miniscule, relying on imports from the Middle East and Africa instead.
Geography is a factor, of course, especially for pipeline-bound gas, but
one might have expected a much larger share of Russian oil shipping. In
terms of energy partnerships, in July 2022, state-run Russian energy company Rosatom agreed with Myanmar’s SAC to cooperate on nuclear energy,
a source to which Myanmar thus far has no access to. But this remains a
notable exception in Southeast Asia.
Despite greater interest to expand Russia’s economic footprint in
Southeast Asia (Lukin, 2012), seasoned observers identify a degree of
disillusionment in ASEAN as to Russia’s economic potential (Cheang, 2017;
Chongkittavorn, 2016). Thus, as the overall trade volume chart visualises,

228

F. KLIEM

of all four categories, trade relations are the weakest factor in terms of
its explanatory value. All AMS are scattered across the chart seemingly at
random. For example, Singapore and Myanmar, on opposing ends of the
response spectrum to Russia’s invasion, have similar relative trade volumes
with Russia. The chart also clearly shows that the ‘hedgers’ and ‘bystanders’
are not distinct either in terms of their trade relationship with Russia.

Additional explanations
Except for Myanmar, there is no unambiguous pattern that would allow
mono-causal conclusions. Although some categories correspond closer with
the hypothesis than others, the positioning in the matrix across all four
categories is too uneven to clearly identify a causal relationship and bilateral
relations as the primary motivating factor of AMS’ reserved response. Overall,
bilateral relations are important. But they are better understood as intervening, not the independent variable. One must, thus, look beyond materialistic quantifiable indicators and get a deeper understanding of AMS
diplomatic culture and their perspective on global and regional matters.

Normative explanation: Southeast Asia’s tradition of active impartiality
One of the main reasons the original five AMS founded ASEAN in 1967 was
to help the comparatively smaller-sized Southeast Asian states to insulate
the region from external interference against the backdrop of post-colonialism, the expansion of communism in Indochina and the general binary
and later tripartite pressure from the great powers during the Cold War. In
November 1971, at the height of the Cold War, ASEAN declared Southeast
Asia as a Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN). The deteriorating
situation in Vietnam in mind, ASEAN stressed its commitment to retain ‘the
right of every state, large or small, to lead its national existence free from
outside interference’, with ‘the neutralisation of South East Asia’ seen as a
‘desirable objective’ (ASEAN, 1971). Regionalism and neutralisation—though
different interpretations of neutralisation existed—were pursued in conjunction (Acharya, 2009), at times in somewhat contradictory ways, with multiple
mechanisms to promote regional stability. The primary objective was to
shield Southeast Asians from the ‘push and pull’ dynamics of the Cold War
and to realise a degree of autonomy, explicitly rejecting great power dominance in Southeast Asia in order to construct a regional space of stability,
peace and prosperity (Acharya, 2014).
In the post-Cold War era, when great power competition in Asia became
more multipolar—most obviously including China and India—ASEAN
sought to increase its agency creating multilateral institutions. These
included numerous ‘ASEAN Plus-One’ mechanisms for regular strategic
conversations with specific DP as well as inclusive multilateral mechanisms
to keep these partners in discussion with ASEAN and amongst themselves,

The Pacific Review

229

such as the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and EAS (Koga, 2017). Simplified,
ASEAN’s role in this institutional architecture has become known as ‘ASEAN
centrality’. Although a contested concept (Acharya, 2017; Ba, 2017;
Caballero-Anthony, 2014), ASEAN centrality refers to the association’s role
as the driver, convener and facilitator of regionalism (Haacke, 2013). The
objective is to include as many relevant extra-mural stakeholders as possible, enabling ASEAN to influence the agenda of regional affairs and
retaining a disproportionately outsized role for these comparatively small
states that would be unattainable otherwise (Tan, 2017). Although the
success is disputed (Jones & Smith, 2007), there is largely consensus among
ASEAN scholars that both ZOPFAN as well as post-Cold War centrality are
genuine attempts to retain a degree of autonomy to promote peace and
stability, (see Acharya, 2017; Alagappa, 1991; Ba, 2017; Caballero-Anthony,
2014; Emmers, 2018; Koga, 2012; Narine, 1998). Despite the many differences, AMS share an acute sense of vulnerability, deeply rooted in the
colonial experience, that produces a shared conviction that ASEAN-based
multilateralism and ASEAN’s central role as a neutral convener of great
powers, are essential to their independence and prosperity (Kuik, 2016).
To that end, ASEAN sought to project its own norms to the wider region
(Ba, 2009). Abundant literature discusses these institutional norms, commonly
known as the ‘ASEAN way’, including ASEAN’s most important normative
foundations, such as non-interference, sacrosanctity of state sovereignty and
territorial integrity and a commitment to non-violent conflict resolution—
many of these are universal UN Charta norms (see Beeson, 2009; Haacke,
2013; Nischalke, 2000). But as many influential ASEAN scholars and practitioners have argued, ASEAN’s role in managing regional affairs is contingent
on it being perceived as neutral and non-threatening to any great power,
including Russia (Kausikan, 2015; Mahbubani & Sng, 2017; Narine, 2018).
Some critics mock ASEAN as an empty rhetorical shell that gives form
without substance to its proclaimed norms (Jones & Smith, 2002, 2007). In
this view, ASEAN and its institutional mechanism are, even if they wanted
to, incapable of managing regional let alone global security affairs. While
this is an exceptionally pessimistic view of ASEAN, even optimistic scholars
agree that ASEAN has little meaningful agency as far as global security
crises are concerned. The primary reason that ASEAN can function as a
‘bridge-builder’ between great powers is the association’s relative weakness
and virtual irrelevance in matters of broader global security and great power
competition (Acharya, 2014, Ba, 2009, Kausikan, 2015, Kuik, 2016).
Neutrality, on the other hand, is a complex concept, and both the
interpretation of neutrality itself as well as the degree to which it is being
practiced differs among AMS, especially with regards to the United States,
and as Emmers (2018, p. 361) explains, ASEAN’s sense of neutrality has
evolved over time as the association reassessed opportunities and limitations over time depending on circumstances. Some critics have pointed
out that ZOPFAN was never a feasible objective (Southgate, 2021). But
while this may be so, it misses the point that there is a shared

230

F. KLIEM

understanding among all AMS that engagement with external powers is
crucial to their survival but feasible only if ASEAN adopts neutrality. The
essence of ASEAN neutrality should be understood not as ‘lying low’ but
as impartiality—the objective is to not choose the side of any external
power and, thus, be neutral ground—an ASEAN that can ‘provide for all’,
as Marty Natalegawa (2018) put it. Neutrality, thus, does not mean Cold
War non-alignment or neutralisation of states in a legal and absolute
sense. Instead, it refers to the ability to retain a degree of regional autonomy while allowing some flexibility for individual AMS to maintain relationships with external great powers as they see fit (Acharya, 2014, p. 52).
Kuik (2016, 2020) identifies this as ‘small state hedging’—multi-layered
alignments that develop and change in pragmatic, overlapping and flexible
ways without any commitment to either great power.
So, the quest for ASEAN autonomy, both as a response to Cold War
uncertainties and later as an attempt to hedge between China’s rise and
the Western response, was always about creating ‘a platform for greater
manoeuvrability among the great powers’, as Weatherbee (2009, p. 2) puts
it. This manoeuvrability allows AMS to have a modicum of strategic autonomy—to make own sovereign choices free from pressure, coercion or manipulation by external powers; indeed, the rejection of all external leadership
(Kliem, 2022b). The preservation of this strategic autonomy took various
forms over the past decades but has remained a key objective of ASEAN
since its inception (Acharya, 2014, p. 49; Roy, 2005). Instead, AMS act in
their own national interest, both strategic and immediate. Often, this includes
ignoring the concerns even of the great powers. For example, Washington
has pushed its allies and partners hard to reject both China’s Belt and Road
Initiative and Huawei’s 5-G technology. These campaigns were mostly
ignored as AMS made individual decisions according to own national needs,
and ASEAN as an organisation remained entirely passive.
In historical practice, ASEAN has, thus, distanced itself from most cases
and forms of inter-state conflicts, both in principle and out of necessity.
Internally, ASEAN principles and norms restrict a meaningful ASEAN role in
inter-state conflict—although ASEAN has occasionally deviated from this
general rule (Haacke, 2023). The 2011 Preah Vihear temple conflict between
Thailand and Cambodia is the only recent example of two AMS in direct
military confrontation. ASEAN’s role was at best supplementary to a coincidentally strong and determined Indonesian ASEAN chair and the person
Marty Natalegawa as Indonesia’s foreign minister. As far as global conflicts
are concerned, ASEAN’s role is even less significant. In response to America’s
invasion of Iraq, for example, AMS had diverging views but generally distanced themselves from the war the same way they do with regards to
Ukraine. The exception were Indonesia and Malaysia, for whom the US ‘war
on terror’ in general involved an ethno-religious element. But even then,
involvement was limited to a few statements addressing Muslims at home
(Smith, 2003). Closer to home, Vietnam’s 1979 invasion of Cambodia precipitated a firm and coherent ASEAN response, galvanising international

The Pacific Review

231

support in opposing Vietnam’s occupation of Cambodia. This involvement
in a crisis beyond its membership—neither Vietnam nor Cambodia were
ASEAN members at the time—remains the notable exception that validates
the rule. Not least because of this, ASEAN’s opposition to the Vietnamese
occupation is frequently cited as ASEAN’s single greatest achievement on
the global stage (Mahbubani & Sng, 2017, p. 56).
This diplomatic tradition helps to explain AMS’ reluctance to follow the
Western lead, even pressure, to take a strong stand against Russia in the
Ukraine war. Russia has been an ASEAN DP since 1996. As such, Moscow
is a participant in all major ASEAN-led strategic forums, including the ARF,
EAS and the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus). From
a Russian perspective, active participation in these formats is valuable for
the degree of influence in the Indo-Pacific and regional institutions it
accords Moscow as a great power as well as in terms of acknowledgment
of Russia as a great power by ASEAN by having an equal level of representation as China or the US (Buszynski, 2006; Rangsimaporn, 2009).
Likewise, Russia’s value to ASEAN is not materialistic per se, though arms
imports and energy cooperation are important. Instead, Russia was and
remains a consequential great power and its global standing and geopolitical heft make it an important partner in ASEAN’s ‘omni-enmeshment’
strategy—to borrow Evelyn Goh’s (2008) much acclaimed terminology—of
binding all great powers to deepen multi-directional interdependence, to
foster a multipolar balance in Asia and give all great powers a stake in
regional stability. In that quest, ASEAN does not take moral positions as
such on any great power’s behaviour. It should be no surprise to ASEAN
experts that while Russian Group of Eight (G-8) membership was suspended following the annexation of Crimea in 2014, ASEAN not only
maintained its relationship with Russia but even proceeded to elevated it
to the level of Strategic Partnership in 2018.
Nonetheless, ASEAN’s call for an independent investigation into Bucha
is evidence that ASEAN’s impartiality has limits. This is equally obvious in
the difference in AMS’ support for UNGA resolution ES-11/1 and ES-11/3.
The comparatively strong support among AMS for the resolution condemning Russia’s invasion demonstrates that most AMS stand behind the
principles of the UN and ASEAN Charter as well as the TAC. The significant
decline in support for the suspension of Russia from the UNHRC, however,
shows that many AMS states do not simply follow an anti-Russian Western
agenda at the UN but instead exercise their sovereign strategic choice to
either lend support or not based on their own individual priorities. A
resolution on the violation of the territorial integrity of a sovereign state
is not the same as suspending Russia from the UNHCR.
Unlike the West, AMS do not see Russia as an enemy. Indeed, Southeast
Asian diplomacy does not operate in such binary terms, enemy or ally.
Southeast Asia has only ‘a million friends and zero enemies’, as former
Indonesian President Yudhoyono once said about his country (cited in
Anwar, 2020). This applies to Russia just as much as to China. ASEAN’s

232

F. KLIEM

accentuation of impartiality and regional autonomy leaves its members
to choose their own path on individual issues and broader strategic objectives. Overall, this approach has served the region well and it helps to
explain AMS’ reluctance to take a strong stand against Russia. This reluctance should be seen as independent agency rather than passivity.

Practical explanation: prioritisation of domestic and regional issues
Beyond materialistic and diplomatic considerations, one must account for
the general foreign policy apathy that continues to characterise Southeast
Asian politics. To this day, many AMS grapple with nation-building, as predominantly colonial legacies complicate domestic consolidation despite
many decades of independence and economic growth (Narine, 2009). Some
governments struggle with the reconciliation of often vastly disparate ethnic
and religious identities; others with domestic political turmoil resulting from
unclear or yet unsettled domestic institutional hierarchies. Most AMS remain
weak states in terms of governance capacity, challenged by both institutional, social and political limitations—Singapore is arguably the only exception. As is rather common among smaller post-colonial states around the
world (Ayoob, 1998), ASEAN leaders are primarily concerned with creating
stable domestic conditions and regime legitimisation (Katsumata & Tan, 2007).
The primary purpose of ASEAN at its inception was to enhance domestic
socio-economic development and build political resilience on the national
level. ASEAN was and remains a shield from external vulnerabilities (Acharya,
1998; Anwar, 1997, 2000; Jorgensen-Dahl, 1982; Weatherbee, 2009), and
although all AMS have made substantial socio-economic progress since,
nothing has fundamentally changed in terms of the inward-looking nature
of Southeast Asian regionalism (Anwar, 2020; Katsumata, 2003). Polls regularly show that domestic political challenges continue to dominate the
agenda of most AMS’ elites, including the widening socio-economic gap
and political instability (ISEAS, 2020, ISEAS., 2022). Although such polling is
often elite-biased, this prioritisation of domestic stability is not a top-down
attempt by political elites jealously guarding their grip on power. As Vatikiotis
(2022) observes, even when national leaders take global diplomatic initiatives, ‘these efforts lack full-hearted support […]. They tend to be regarded
cynically by domestic constituencies more interested in how their governments are addressing domestic issues […]’. As a result, ‘the region tends
toward insularity […]’. Marty Natalegawa (2018, p. 153) frequently criticises
ASEAN’s tendency to regard any development outside of Southeast Asia as
distant to its interests. This is particularly true for some AMS that would
have the capacity to lead ASEAN, including Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.
Indeed, experience shows that ASEAN when leaders occasionally found the
collective will to act on international challenges, these tend to be regional
rather than global issues (Kliem, 2022b, 156ff ).
It is no surprise therefore that local issues dominate the current ASEAN
agenda. The war in Ukraine is primarily seen as a regional war in Europe,

The Pacific Review

233

some 6000 km away. Closer to home, post-pandemic economic recovery is
still fragile, inflation high and food protectionism has become a problem.
There was an important political transition in the Philippines, lingering
political instability in Malaysia as well as possible leadership transitions and
an ever-explosive power balance between the monarchy, the military, the
executive government and other political factions in Thailand. As far as
international issues are concerned, the region is grappling with an increasingly volatile civil war in Myanmar. For those countries that are in a state
of democratic consolidation (Indonesia, Malaysia) or democratic backsliding
(Cambodia, Thailand), in acute turmoil (Myanmar), or entering a new political
era (Philippines, Singapore), domestic preoccupations will likely continue to
effect Southeast Asia’s global position. In this context, a war in Ukraine, on
which no AMS realistically has any meaningful impact, is not a priority.
The position of Indonesia reflects this most visibly. As discussed above,
Jakarta is utmost concerned with the economic consequences of the
Ukraine war. President Widodo’s visit to Russia appears to have been very
cordial, and although the war was evidently being discussed, it was predominantly in the context of its impact on global food supply. The meeting
focussed on securing supply chains as well as increasing trade and investment relations and even reinvigorating tourism between Indonesia and
Russia (President of Russia, 2022). That such agenda items are being discussed at a critical time of the war supports the argument that the war
is only relevant in so far as it might have broader economic ripple effects.
As shown above, responses varied in nuance, and there are notable exceptions. Most obviously Singapore, whose leaders tend to take a more global
and long-term perspective. But even Singapore’s position does not make
Russia its primary reference point. Indeed, Minister Shanmugam blamed the
West, too, and condemned Western attempts to present Russia as the enemy
(Ministry of Law Singapore, 2023). Instead, the concern is territorial integrity
of small states as a general principle—a fundamental part of Singapore’s
foreign policy identity. In ASEAN, Singapore remains an exception, and
Singapore is not investing political capital into galvanizing ASEAN in response
to the war. Cambodia and Vietnam also stood out as being somewhat concerned by the Ukraine war, predominantly because of own experiences with
invasion by larger states as well as close links to Moscow in Hanoi’s case.
However, by and large interest in the war across ASEAN remains only
peripheral. Yet, it would be highly unfair to criticise ASEAN and AMS’
leaders as ignorant to global challenges or even myopic. Instead, one
ought to recognise ASEAN’s tradition of impartiality and that the tangible
benefits from a pursuit of a strong position on a distant war are minor.
At times of many compounding challenges, there are more urgent priorities
(Kliem & Seow, 2022). A domestic focus and a global outlook are not
necessarily mutually exclusive, and ASEAN can function very well if it
prioritises appropriately. It is important to recall that the primary objective
of all AMS was and remains increasing national resilience. In other words,
AMS trust regionalism to maintain peace and stability in the immediate

234

F. KLIEM

region to concentrate on nation-building and national socio-economic
development at home. Everything else is secondary.

Conclusion
President Putin has focussed on developing closer economic, diplomatic
and military relations with Southeast Asia both bilaterally and multilaterally.
There is a sense in the West that the primary explanation of the reluctance
by many states to unambiguously side against Russia is the relationship
that these states may have with Moscow. In some cases, the dependency
on Russian arms is being cited; in others the interest in Russian and
Ukrainian food supply chains or the interests to buy oil and gas at discounted prices. This article has tested this hypothesis for AMS and demonstrated that this explanation does not suffice in its mono-causality. It is
undeniable that Russia uses its military and diplomatic resources to project
influence in Southeast Asia and beyond to punch above its weight in
global affairs (Krastev & Holmes, 2014). However, while bilateral relationships do have an impact, the reasons for Southeast Asian apathy are more
complex and better understood in terms of the region’s political tradition
rather than as a dependence on or independence from Russia.
This article offers a tripartite explanation that in its sum helps to understand the relative restraint among AMS as well as ASEAN’s institutional
indifference with regards to Russia’s war against Ukraine. A bilateral explanation, i.e. the varying degree of individual national relationships with Russia;
a normative explanation, i.e. ASEAN diplomatic tradition of impartiality; and
a practical explanation, i.e. a still prevalent prioritisation of domestic and
regional issues over global affairs by most ASEAN leaders. There are also
more general conclusions that can be drawn. Particularly the explanatory
power of diplomatic culture. Not only do such musings help understand
ASEAN and appreciate AMS’ agency beyond materialistic dependencies. The
above analysis could also be seen as a general case study blueprint for
other potential extra-mural crises. So perhaps one should understand
ASEAN’s overall neutrality in the Indonesian sense of bebas dan aktif—not
as ‘fence-sitting’ but as the maintenance of strategic autonomy; not to bow
to either side but seek creative ways to strike a balance.
These three motivating factors are not necessarily exhaustive. In fact,
there are several alternative drivers that may also be relevant. The most
obvious ones are anti-American sentiments or general suspicions against
an allegedly hypocritical West in some AMS, especially Malaysia and
Indonesia. Beyond Southeast Asia, it would be interesting to apply this
analytical framework to India, too. All this shall be left for further research.
Unfortunately, the tragedy that is the war in Ukraine is likely going to
continue in one form or another for many years, perhaps decades. Going
forward, it is rather unlikely that the war in Ukraine will substantially impact
Southeast Asia’s diplomatic relations with Russia. For example, it is highly likely
that Russia will be invited to all ASEAN forums as per usual. This will put AMS

The Pacific Review

235

in a difficult position, as the G-20 dilemma for Indonesian President Joko
Widodo showed. AMS and much of the non-Western world have no desire
to isolate Russia and exclude it from participation in mechanisms of global
and regional governance. Yet, ASEAN’s Western DP might continue to articulate
their protest with ‘walk-outs’ or even skip important meetings that have Russian
participation. That notwithstanding, no AMS—except for Myanmar perhaps,
whose junta has found common ground with Moscow—sees their nation’s
future primarily with Moscow, militarily or otherwise. Vietnam and Russia have
been drifting apart for decades, not least because of the close Sino-Russian
relationship and a widening of options for Hanoi. And yet, Russia remains an
integral part of the regional security architecture in the Indo-Pacific region
because most in ASEAN want this so. It is perhaps time to question the validity
of binary perspectives and mono-causal explanation attempts and appreciate
the great diversity in tradition and perspective that exists globally.

Notes
1. ASEAN has “Dialogue Partnerships” with eleven states/organisations of particular importance.
2. Jokowi also invited Ukraine to the G-20.
3. Personal conversations with government and track-two representatives in Hanoi, August 2022.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

ORCID
Frederick Kliem

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1151-5846

References
Acharya, A. (1998). Culture, security, multilateralism: The ‘ASEAN way’ and regional order. Contemporary Security Policy, 19(1), 55–84. doi:10.1080/13523269808404179
Acharya, A. (2009). Whose ideas matter? Agency and power in Asian regionalism.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Acharya, A. (2014). Constructing a security community in Southeast Asia: ASEAN and
the problem of regional order (3rd ed.). London and New York, NY: Routledge.
Acharya, A. (2017). The Myth of ASEAN Centrality? Contemporary Southeast Asia: A
Journal of International and Strategic Affairs, 39(2), 273–279. doi:https://doi.org/
muse.jhu.edu/article/667776
Al Arabiya News. (2022, February 25). Myanmar Junta says Russian invasion of
Ukraine ‘justified.’ Retrieved from https://english.alarabiya.net/News/
world/2022/02/25/Myanmar-junta-says-Russian-invasion-of-Ukraine-justified-.
Alagappa, M. (1991). Regional arrangements and international security in Southeast
Asia: Going beyond ZOPFAN. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 12(4), 269–305.
doi:10.1355/CS12-4A

236

F. KLIEM

Antara. (2022, April 1). Indonesia urges immediate end of Russia’s offensive in
Ukraine. Jakarta Globe. Retrieved from https://jakartaglobe.id/news/indonesiaurges-immediate-end-of-russias-offensive-in-ukraine.
Anwar, D. F. (1997). ASEAN and Indonesia: Some reflections. Asian Journal of Political
Science, 5(1), 20–34. doi:10.1080/02185379708434092
Anwar, D. F. (2000). National versus regional resilience? An Indonesian perspective.
In D. da Cunha (Ed.), Southeast Asian perspectives on security (pp. 81–97).Singapore:
ISEAS Publishing.
Anwar, D. F. (2020). Indonesia and the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific.
International Affairs, 96(1), 111–129. doi:10.1093/ia/iiz223
ASEAN. (1971). Zone of peace, freedom and neutrality declaration. Retrieved from
https://cil.nus.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/1971-Zone-of-Peace-Freedomand-Neutrality-Declaration-1-1.pdf.
ASEAN. (2020). ASEAN-Russia economic relations. Retrieved from https://asean.org/
our-communities/economic-community/asean-russia-economic-relations/.
ASEAN. (2022a, February 26). ASEAN foreign ministers’ statement on the situation
in Ukraine. Retrieved from https://asean.org/asean-foreign-ministers-statementon-the-situation-in-ukraine/.
ASEAN. (2022b, March 3). ASEAN foreign ministers’ statement calling for a ceasefire
in Ukraine. Retrieved from https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/ASEANForeign-Ministers-Statement-calling-for-Ceasefire-in-Ukraine-EN.pdf.
ASEAN. (2022c, April 8). ASEAN foreign ministers’ statement on the reported killing
of civilians in Ukraine. Retrieved from https://asean.org/asean-foreign-ministersstatement-on-the-reported-killing-of-civilians-in-ukraine/.
ASEAN. (2022d, May 14). Joint vision statement of the ASEAN-U.S. Special summit,
2022. Retrieved from https://asean.org/joint-vision-statement-of-the-asean-u-sspecial-summit-2022/.
ASEAN. (2022e, August 5). Joint communique of the 55th ASEAN foreign ministers’
meeting. Retrieved from https://asean.org/joint-communique-of-the-55th-aseanforeign-ministers-meeting/.
Ayoob, M. (1998). Subaltern realism: International relations theory meets the third
world. In S. Neuman (Ed.), International relations theory and the third world (pp.
31–54).Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Ba, A. D. (2009). (Re)negotiating East and Southeast Asia: Region, regionalism, and
the association of Southeast Asian nations. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Ba, A. D. (2017). The institutionalisation of Southeast Asia: ASEAN and ASEAN
centrality. In A. D. Ba, C. C. Kuik, & S. Sudo (Eds.), Institutionalizing East Asia:
Mapping and Reconfiguring Regional Cooperation (pp. 11–34).London: Routledge.
Beeson, M. (2009). ASEAN’s ways: Still fit for purpose? Cambridge Review of
International Affairs, 22(3), 333–343. doi:10.1080/09557570903137776
Boden, R. (2008). Cold war economics: Soviet aid to Indonesia. Journal of Cold War
Studies, 10(3), 110–128. doi:10.1162/jcws.2008.10.3.110
Burmester, N., & Jankowski, M. (2014). The unsolved puzzle: Pacific Asia’s voting cohesion
in the United Nations general assembly—A response to Peter Ferdinand. The British
Journal of Politics and International Relations, 16(4), 680–689. doi:10.1111/1467-856X.12028
Buszynski, L. (2006). Russia and Southeast Asia: A new relationship. Contemporary Southeast
Asia, 28(2), 276–296. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25798785. doi:10.1355/CS28-2E
Caballero-Anthony, M. (2014). Understanding ASEAN’s centrality: Bases and prospects in an evolving regional architecture. The Pacific Review, 27(4), 563–584. do
i:10.1080/09512748.2014.924227

The Pacific Review

237

Channel News Asia. (2022, September 7). Putin meets Myanmar Junta Chief, hails
‘positive’ ties. Retrieved from https://www.channelnewsasia.com/asia/putin-meetsmyanmar-junta-chief-hails-positive-ties-2925056.
Cheang, C. (2017). Russia-ASEAN relations: Where are they headed? RSIS Commentaries.
Singapore: Nanyang Technological University. Retrieved from https://hdl.handle.
net/10356/86508.
Chipman Koty, A. (2021, October 5). The ASEAN-Russia trade and investment cooperation roadmap. ASEAN Briefing. Retrieved from https://www.aseanbriefing.
com/news/the-asean-russia-trade-and-investment-cooperation-roadmap/.
Chongkittavorn, K. (2016, May 15). Russia: A new ‘strategic partnership’ for ASEAN?
Nikkei Asia. Retrieved from https://asia.nikkei.com/Politics/Kavi-ChongkittavornRussia-A-new-strategic-partnership-for-ASEAN.
CNN Philippines. (2022, February 25). Defense chief: PH ‘neutral’ on Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine. Retrieved from https://www.cnnphilippines.com/news/2022/2/25/
Philippines-Ukraine-Russia-attack.html.
Corbin, M. (2018). A Russian pivot to Asia? Russian trade with Asia from 2006 to 2016.
Washington, DC: The Wilson Center. Retrieved from https://www.wilsoncenter.
org/publication/kennan-cable-no-33-russian-pivot-to-asia-russian-trade-asia-2006to-2016.
Dror, O. (2022, June 17). Weaponising Ho Chi Minh in Vietnamese discourse on
the war in Ukraine. Fulcrum. Retrieved from https://fulcrum.sg/weaponising-hochi-minh-in-vietnamese-discourse-on-the-war-in-ukraine/.
EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit. (2022, March 30). Russia can count on support
from many developing countries. Economist Intelligence Unit. Retrieved from
https://www.eiu.com/n/russia-can-count-on-support-from-many-developingcountries/.
Emmers, R. (2018). Unpacking ASEAN neutrality: The quest for autonomy and
impartiality in Southeast Asia. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 40(3), 349–370.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/26545299. doi:10.1355/cs40-3a
Fischler, N. (2022, July 7). Why Vietnam can’t and won’t leave Russia’s side. Asia
Times. Retrieved from https://asiatimes.com/2022/07/why-vietnam-cant-and-wontleave-russias-side/.
Gita-Carlos, R. A. (2022, June 10). Marcos gov’t to keep ‘neutral’ stance on RussiaUkraine war. Philippine News Agency. Retrieved from https://www.pna.gov.ph/
articles/1176429.
Goh, E. (2008). Great powers and hierarchical order in Southeast Asia: Analyzing
regional security strategies. International Security, 32(3), 113–157. doi:10.1162/
isec.2008.32.3.113
Gorenburg, D., & Schwartz, P. (2019). Russia’s relations with Southeast Asia.
Russia/NIS Center, IFRI. Retrieved from https://www.ifri.org/sites/default/files/
atoms/files/gorenburg_schwartz_russia_relations_southeast_asia_2019.pdf.
Ha, H. T. (2022). Understanding the institutional challenge of Indo-Pacific minilaterals to ASEAN. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 44(1), 1–30. doi:10.1355/cs44-1a
Haacke, J. (2013). ASEAN’s diplomatic and security culture: Origins, development and
prospects. London: Routledge.
Haacke, J. (2023). ASEAN and conflict management. In J. Dosch & F. Kliem (Eds.),
The Elgar companion to ASEAN (pp. 76–93).Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Ha, H. T., & Luong, D. N. A. (2022, April 27). 2022/44 the Russia-Ukraine war:
Unpacking online Pro-Russia narratives in Vietnam. ISEAS Perspectives. Retrieved
from https://www.iseas.edu.sg/articles-commentaries/iseas-perspective/2022-44-

238

F. KLIEM

the-russia-ukraine-war-unpacking-online-pro-russia-narratives-in-vietnam-byhoang-thi-ha-and-dien-nguyen-an-luong/.
Hiep, L. H. (2022, May 17). PM Chinh Goes to Washington: Equal importance of
foreign and domestic goals. Fulcrum. Retrieved from https://fulcrum.sg/pm-chinhgoes-to-washington-equal-importance-of-foreign-and-domestic-goals/.
Intelligence Online. (2022, September 8). Rosoboronexport suffers setbacks in
Kubinka and Hanoi. Retrieved from https://www.intelligenceonline.com/
international-dealmaking/2022/09/08/rosoboronexport-suffers-setbacks-inkubinka-and-hanoi,109810734-art.
International Crisis Group. (2022, August 4). Coming to terms with Myanmar’s
Russia embrace. Retrieved from https://www.crisisgroup.org/asia/south-east-asia/
myanmar/b173-coming-terms-myanmars-russia-embrace.
ISEAS. (2020). The State of Southeast Asia: 2020. Singapore: ISEAS - Yusof Ishak
Institute. Retrieved from https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/
TheStateofSEASurveyReport_2020.pdf.
ISEAS. (2022). The State of Southeast Asia 2022 Survey Report. Singapore: ISEAS Yusof Ishak Institute. Retrieved from https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wp-content/
uploads/2022/02/The-State-of-SEA-2022_FA_Digital_FINAL.pdf.
Jaafar, F. (2022, July 18). Malaysia remains neutral for Russia-Ukrainian war. The
Malaysian Reserve. Retrieved from https://themalaysianreserve.com/2022/07/18/
malaysia-remains-neutral-for-russia-ukrainian-war/.
Jones, D., & Smith, M. (2002). ASEAN’s imitation community. Orbis, 46(1), 93–109.
doi:10.1016/S0030-4387(01)00108-9
Jones, D., & Smith, M. (2007). Making process, not progress: ASEAN and the evolving East Asian regional order. International Security, 32(1), 148–184. doi:10.1162/
isec.2007.32.1.148
Jorgensen-Dahl, A. (1982). Regional organization and order in South-East Asia.
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Katsumata, H. (2003). Reconstruction of diplomatic norms in Southeast Asia: The
case for strict adherence to the ‘ASEAN way’. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 25(1),
104–121. doi:10.1355/CS25-1F
Katsumata, H., & Tan, S. S. (Eds.), (2007). An ideal ASEAN for people and governments. In People’s ASEAN and governments’ ASEAN (pp. 1–16).Singapore: S.
Rajaratnam School of International Studies.
Kausikan, B. (2015, October 6). ASEAN is a ‘cow, not a horse.’ Human Rights in ASEAN.
Retrieved from https://humanrightsinasean.info/news/asean-is-a-cow-not-a-horse/.
Khmer Times. (2022, March 28). PM Condemns Russian invasion of Ukraine as ‘act
of aggression.’ Retrieved from https://www.khmertimeskh.com/501048629/pmcondemns-russian-invasion-of-ukraine-as-act-of-aggression/.
Khoo, N. (2004). Rhetoric vs. reality: ASEAN’s clouded future. Georgetown Journal
of International Affairs, 5(2), 49–56.
Kliem, F. (2022b). Great power competition and order building in the Indo-Pacific:
Towards a new Indo-Pacific equilibrium. New York: Routledge.
Kliem, F. (2022a). Shaking Europe out of complacency. RSIS Commentary. Retrieved
from https://www.rsis.edu.sg/rsis-publication/rsis/invasion-of-ukraine-shakingeurope-out-of-complacency/?doing_wp_cron=1661505753.82092690467834472
65625#.YwiQ3OxBxQI.
Kliem, F., & Seow, I. (2022, August 27). Should ASEAN take a stronger position on
the Ukraine war? The Diplomat. Retrieved from https://thediplomat.com/2022/08/
should-asean-take-a-stronger-position-on-the-ukraine-war/.

The Pacific Review

239

Koga, K. (2012). The process of ASEAN’s institutional consolidation in 1968–1976:
Theoretical implications for changes of third-world security oriented institution.
Singapore: NTU. Retrieved from https://hdl.handle.net/10356/94385.
Koga, K. (2017). Reinventing regional security institutions in Asia and Africa: Power
shifts, ideas, and institutional change. London: Routledge.
Kraft, H. (2017). Great power dynamics and the waning of ASEAN centrality in
regional security. Asian Politics & Policy, 9(4), 597–612. doi:10.1111/aspp.12350
Krastev, I., & Holmes, S. (2014). Russia’s aggressive isolationism. The American Interest,
10(3) Retrieved from http://www.the-american-interest.com/2014/12/10/russiasaggressive-isolationism/.
Kuik, C.-C. (2016). How do weaker states hedge? Unpacking ASEAN states’ alignment
behavior towards China. Journal of Contemporary China, 25(100), 500–514. doi:
10.1080/10670564.2015.1132714
Kuik, C.-C. (2020, June 6). Hedging in post-pandemic Asia: What, how, and why?
The Asan Forum. Retrieved from https://theasanforum.org/hedging-in-postpandemic-asia-what-how-and-why/.
Lalu, G. P. (2022, May 24). Duterte will ask ‘friend’ putin to control troops in Ukraine.
INQUIRER. Retrieved from https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/1601673/in-the-name-ofhumanity-duterte-says-hell-ask-friend-putin-to-control-soldiers-in-ukraine.
Le Thu, H. (2019). China’s dual strategy of coercion and inducement towards ASEAN.
The Pacific Review, 32(1), 20–36. doi:10.1080/09512748.2017.1417325
Le Hong, H. (2022, May 11). Why Biden’s anti-Putin democracy crusade is failing.
Foreign Policy. Retrieved from https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/05/11/us-russiawar-ukraine-democracy-autocracy/.
Lukin, A. (2012, September 1). “Russia’s APEC moment.” East Asia Forum. Retrieved
from https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2012/09/01/russias-apec-moment/.
Mahbubani, K., & Sng, J. (2017). The ASEAN miracle: A catalyst for peace. Singapore:
Ridge Books.
Mercado, N. A. (2022, June 13). Bongbong Marcos to maintain ‘independent policy’ on
Russia-Ukraine conflict. INQUIRER. Retrieved from https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/1610066/
bongbong-marcos-to-maintain-independent-policy-on-russia-ukraine-conflict-envoy.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Brunei Darussalam. (2022, February 26). Brunei
Darussalam’s statement on the situation in Ukraine. Retrieved from https://www.
mfa.gov.bn/Lists/Press%20Room/news.aspx?id=969&source=https://www.mfa.gov.
bn/pages/PressRoom.aspx?archive=1.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Cambodia. (2022, March 20). Joint statement between
the Kingdom of Cambodia and Japan. Retrieved from https://www.mfaic.gov.
kh/posts/2022-03-20-Press-Release-Joint-Statement-between-the-Kingdom-ofCambodia-and-Japan–on-the-occasion-of-the-Official-Visit-of–20-42-54.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Lao PDR. (2022). Press statement by the spokesperson of the MOFA on 26 February. Retrieved from http://www.mofa.gov.la/index.
php/statements/mofa-statement/4675-press-statement-by-the-spokesperson-ofthe-ministry-of-foreign-affairs-of-the-lao-pdr-on-26-february-2022.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore. (2022a). The situation in Ukraine & its implications for Singapore. News in Focus, no. 2. Retrieved from https://www.mindef.
gov.sg/oms/nexus/resources/News%20In%20Focus%2002-2022.pdf.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore. (2022b, March 5). Sanctions and restrictions
against Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine. Retrieved from https://
www.mfa.gov.sg/Newsroom/Press-Statements-Transcripts-and-Photos/2022/
03/20220305-sanctions#:∼:text=SINGAPORE.

240

F. KLIEM

Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore. (2022c, June 17). Transcript of remarks by minister for foreign affairs Dr Vivian Balakrishnan at the ministerial session of the 12th
Delhi dialogue in New Delhi. Retrieved from https://www.mfa.gov.sg/Newsroom/
Press-Statements-Transcripts-and-Photos/2022/06/20220617mintranscriptdelhi.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore. (2022d, August 3). 55th ASEAN foreign ministers’ meeting. Retrieved from https://www.mfa.gov.sg/Newsroom/PressStatements-Transcripts-and-Photos/2022/08/20220803-55th-ASEAN-ForeignMinisters-Meeting.
Ministry of Law Singapore. (2023, March 8). Address by minister for home affairs
and law. Retrieved from https://www.mlaw.gov.sg/news/speeches/2023-03-08keynote-address-k-shanmugam-iseas-yusof-ishak-workshop/.
Narine, S. (1998). ASEAN and the management of regional security. Pacific Affairs,
71(2), 195–214. doi:10.2307/2760976
Narine, S. (2009). ASEAN in the twenty-first century: A sceptical review. Cambridge
Review of International Affairs, 22(3), 369–386. doi:10.1080/09557570903104065
Narine, S. (2018). The new ASEAN in Asia Pacific and beyond. Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner Publishers.
Natalegawa, M. (2018). Does ASEAN matter? A view from within. Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing.
Nguitragool, P., & Rüland, J. (2015). ASEAN as an actor in international fora: Reality,
potential and constraints. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nischalke, T. (2000). Insights from ASEAN’s foreign policy co-operation: The ‘ASEAN
way’, a real spirit or a phantom? Contemporary Southeast Asia, 22(1), 89–112.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/25798480. doi:10.1355/CS22-1D
Niseiy, S. P. (2022, February 25). Cambodia calls for peaceful solution to Ukraine
crisis. Cambodianess. Retrieved from https://cambodianess.com/article/cambodiacalls-for-peaceful-solution-to-ukraine-crisis.
Parameswaran, P. (2019a, January 3). What’s in the new Russian battle tanks deal
for Laos? The Diplomat. Retrieved from https://thediplomat.com/2019/01/whatsin-the-new-russian-battle-tanks-deal-for-laos/.
Parameswaran, P. (2019b, February 9). Russia-Indonesia military ties in focus with Defense
ministers meeting. The Diplomat. Retrieved from https://thediplomat.com/2019/02/
russia-indonesia-military-ties-in-focus-with-defense-ministers-meeting/.
Parrocha, A. (2022, April 12). Russia’s invasion of Ukraine deserves ‘condemnation’: PRRD.
Philippine News Agency. Retrieved from https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1172124.
Phaicharoen, N. (2022, May 6). Prayuth to attend US-ASEAN summit; won’t take
sides in Ukraine war. Benar News. Retrieved from https://www.benarnews.org/
english/news/thai/summit-trip-05062022141511.html.
Phaicharoen, N., & Watcharasakwet, W. (2022, May 2). At bilateral meet, Japanese,
Thai PMs urge end to war in Ukraine. Radio Free Asia. Retrieved from https://
www.rfa.org/english/news/vietnam/japan-ukraine-05022022183801.html.
Phonevilay, L. (2022, May 29). President Thongloun says Laos will not take sides
in today’s conflicts. Laotian Times. Retrieved from https://laotiantimes.
com/2022/05/30/president-thongloun-says-laos-will-not-take-sides-in-todaysconflicts/.
President of Russia. (2022, June 30). Press statements following Russian-Indonesian
talks. Retrieved from http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/68789.
Prime Minister’s Office of Malaysia. (2022, February 26). Statement by Prime Minister
of Malaysia: The situation in Ukraine. Retrieved from https://www.pmo.gov.
my/2022/02/statement-by-prime-minister-of-malaysia-the-situation-in-ukraine/.

The Pacific Review

241

Prime Minister’s Office Singapore. (2022a, March 31). PM Lee Hsien Loong at the
dialogue with CFR. Retrieved from https://www.pmo.gov.sg/Newsroom/PM-LeeHsien-Loong-at-the-Dialogue-with-Council-on-Foreign-Relations-Mar-2022.
Prime Minister’s Office Singapore. (2022b, November 15). Intervention by PM Lee at
the G20 Bali summit. Retrieved from https://www.pmo.gov.sg/Newsroom/Interventionby-PM-Lee-Hsien-Loong-on-Food-and-Energy-Security-at-the-G20-Bali-Summit.
Rangsimaporn, P. (2009). Russia’s search for influence in Southeast Asia. Asian
Survey, 49(5), 786–808. doi:10.1525/as.2009.49.5.786
Reuters. (2017, March 18). China, Russia block U.N. Council Concern about Myanmar
violence. Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/article/us-myanmar-rohingyaun-idUSKBN16O2J6.
Reuveny, R., & Kang, H. (1998). Bilateral trade and political conflict/cooperation:
Do goods matter? Journal of Peace Research, 35(5), 581–602. https://www.jstor.
org/stable/425700. doi:10.1177/0022343398035005003
Roy, D. (2005). Southeast Asia and China: Balancing or bandwagoning? Contemporary
Southeast Asia, 27(2), 305–322. doi:10.1355/CS27-2G
Rujopakarn, P. (2022, May 9). Thailand affirms neutral stance on Russia-Ukraine
crisis. National News Bureau Thailand. Retrieved from https://thainews.prd.go.th/
en/news/detail/TCATG220509131754333.
Seah, S. (2021, July 26). ASEAN and the problem of legitimacy. Fulcrum. Retrieved
from https://fulcrum.sg/asean-and-the-problem-of-legitimacy/.
Shabbir, F. (2022, September 6). Russian, Thai foreign ministers to discuss preparation for APEC Forum. UrduPoint. Retrieved from https://www.urdupoint.com/
en/world/russian-thai-foreign-ministers-to-discuss-pr-1558323.html.
Sheany. (2018, April 5). As Russia faces colder relations with West, Indonesia opens
a door. Jakarta Globe. Retrieved from https://jakartaglobe.id/news/russia-facescolder-relations-west-indonesia-opens-door/.
Shira, D. (2021, June 16). Russian outbound investment into ASEAN. ASEAN Briefing.
Retrieved from https://www.aseanbriefing.com/news/russian-outboundinvestment-into-asean-southeast-asia/.
SIPRI (Stockholm International Peace Research Institute). (2019). SIPRI arms transfers database. Retrieved from https://www.sipri.org/databases/armstransfers.
Smith, A. (2003). Strategic effects of the conflict with Iraq: Southeast Asia. Switzerland:
ETH Zurich. Retrieved from https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/14110/Strategic%20
Effects%20of%20the%20Conflict%20in%20Iraq%20-%20Southeast%20Asia.pdf.
Sochan, R. (2022a, March 2). Kingdom rejects meddling in Ukraine ‘proxy war’: PM.
The Phnom Penh Post. Retrieved from https://www.phnompenhpost.com/nationalpolitics/kingdom-rejects-meddling-ukraine-proxy-war-pm.
Sochan, R. (2022b, March 28). PM: No neutrality in Ukraine row. The Phnom Penh
Post. Retrieved from https://www.phnompenhpost.com/national-politics/pm-noneutrality-ukraine-row.
Southgate, L. (2021). ASEAN: Still the zone of peace, freedom and neutrality?
Political Science, 73(1), 31–47. doi:10.1080/00323187.2021.1967762
Storey, I. (2021a, March 18). Russia’s defence diplomacy in Southeast Asia: A tenuous lead
in arms sales but lagging in other areas. ISEAS Perspectives. Retrieved from https://www.
iseas.edu.sg/articles-commentaries/iseas-perspective/2021-33-russias-defence-diplomacyin-southeast-asia-a-tenuous-lead-in-arms-sales-but-lagging-in-other-areas-by-ian-storey/.
Storey, I. (2021b, December 6). Russia’s maritime exercise with ASEAN: Punching
below its weight. Fulcrum. Retrieved from https://fulcrum.sg/russias-maritimeexercise-with-asean-punching-below-its-weight/.

242

F. KLIEM

Storey, I. (2022a, May 5). The Russia-Ukraine war and its potential impact on Russia’s
arms sales to Southeast Asia’ by Ian Storey. ISEAS Perspectives. Retrieved from
https://www.iseas.edu.sg/articles-commentaries/iseas-perspective/2022-47-therussia-ukraine-war-and-its-potential-impact-on-russias-arms-sales-to-southeastasia-by-ian-storey/.
Storey, I. (2022b, May 25). The war in Ukraine: Cambodia’s surprisingly hard-line
stand. Fulcrum. Retrieved from https://fulcrum.sg/the-war-in-ukraine-cambodiassurprisingly-hard-line-stand/.
Storey, I. (2022c, August 6). The embrace between ‘forever friends’ Myanmar and
Russia tightens. The Straits Times. Retrieved from https://www.straitstimes.com/
opinion/byinvitation-the-embrace-between-forever-friends-myanmar-and-russia-ti
ghtens?login=true&close=true.
Storey, I., & Thayer, C. A. (2001). Cam Ranh Bay: Past imperfect, future conditional. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 23(3), 452–473. Retrieved from https://www.
jstor.org/stable/25798562. doi:10.1355/CS23-3D
Suorsa, O. P. (2021, March 18). Air force modernisation: Indonesia’s troubled acquisition. RSIS. Retrieved from https://www.rsis.edu.sg/rsis-publication/idss/airforce-modernisation-indonesias-troubled-acquisition/#.YxDzsOxBxQL.
Tan, S. S. (2017). Rethinking ‘ASEAN centrality’ in the regional governance of East Asia.
The Singapore Economic Review, 62(03), 721–740. doi:10.1142/S0217590818400076
Tan, T. M. (2022, May 2). Japan and Thailand discuss situation in Ukraine and
Myanmar at meeting to strengthen ties. The Straits Times. Retrieved from https://
www.straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/japan-and-thailand-discuss-situation-in-ukraineand-myanmar-at-meeting-to-strengthen-ties.
TASS. (2014, November 27). Russia, Vietnam agree on simplified Cam Ranh Port
entry for Russian warships. Retrieved from https://tass.com/world/763988.
Thai PBS World. (2022, March 1). Thailand will not rush to condemn Russia over Ukraine,
says foreign minister don. Retrieved from https://www.thaipbsworld.com/thailandwill-not-rush-to-condemn-russia-over-ukraine-says-foreign-minister-don/.
Thayer, C. (2012, October 9). The Russia–Vietnam comprehensive partnership. East
Asia Forum. Retrieved from https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2012/10/09/the-russiavietnam-comprehensive-partnership/.
Thayer, C. (2022, April 27). Is Vietnam going to hold a military exercise with Russia?
The Diplomat. Retrieved from https://thediplomat.com/2022/04/is-vietnam-goingto-hold-a-military-exercise-with-russia/.
The Malaysian Reserve. (2022, April 8). Malaysia says suspension of Russia in HRC should
not be made in haste. Retrieved from https://themalaysianreserve.com/2022/04/08/
malaysia-says-suspension-of-russia-in-hrc-should-not-be-made-in-haste/.
The White House. (2022a, February 24). Remarks by President Biden on Russia’s
unprovoked and unjustified attack on Ukraine. Retrieved from https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/02/24/remarks-bypresident-biden-on-russias-unprovoked-and-unjustified-attack-on-ukraine/.
The White House. (2022b, March 26). Remarks by President Biden on the united
efforts of the free world to support the people of Ukraine.” Retrieved from
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/03/26/
remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-united-efforts-of-the-free-world-to-supportthe-people-of-ukraine/.
Thuzar, M. (2021, December 6). Myanmar: Recognition is the name of the game.
Fulcrum. Retrieved from https://fulcrum.sg/myanmar-recognition-is-the-name-ofthe-game/.

The Pacific Review

243

Tung, N. C. (2022). Uneasy embrace: Vietnam’s responses to the U.S. Free and Open
Indo-Pacific strategy amid U.S.–China rivalry. The Pacific Review, 35(5), 884–914.
doi:10.1080/09512748.2021.1894223
Vatikiotis, M. (2022, July 6). Indonesia’s Jokowi blazes a trail for Asian peacemaking. Nikkei Asia. Retrieved from https://asia.nikkei.com/Opinion/Indonesia-sJokowi-blazes-a-trail-for-Asian-peacemaking.
VNA (Vietnam News Agency). (2022a, February 25). Vietnam raises great concern
over armed conflict in Ukraine. VietnamPlus. Retrieved from https://en.vietnamplus.
vn/vietnam-raises-great-concern-over-armed-conflict-in-ukraine/222620.vnp.
VNA (Vietnam News Agency). (2022b, March 15). Vietnamese, Russian foreign
ministers hold phone talks on Ukraine situation. VietnamPlus. Retrieved from
https://en.vietnamplus.vn/vietnamese-russian-foreign-ministers-hold-phone-talkson-ukraine-situation/223548.vnp.
VOA Tiếng Việt. (2022, August 25). Quan Chức Việt Nam Gửi Điện Mừng Ukraine Nhân
Ngày Độc Lập. Retrieved from https://www.voatiengviet.com/a/6716072.html.
Weatherbee, D. E. (2009). International relations in Southeast Asia: The struggle for
autonomy (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Weatherbee, D. E. (2013). Indonesia in ASEAN: Vision and Reality. Singapore: Institute
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Wilborn, T. (1980). The Soviet Union and ASEAN. Pennsylvania, PA: US Army War College.
Yazid, E. K., Firdaus, S., & Ramadhan, K. (2022, March 16). Russian Invasion of
Ukraine and Risk to Indonesia Price Stability and Socioeconomic.” CSIS Blog.
Retrieved from https://blog.csis.or.id/russian-invasion-of-ukraine-and-risk-toindonesia-price-stability-and-socioeconomic-73ba3a201f61.

