The Round Table
The Commonwealth Journal of International Aﬀairs

ISSN: 0035-8533 (Print) 1474-029X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ctrt20

What CARICOM can learn from other
regionalism(s) in an era of deglobalisation
Tinesh Indrarajah, Victoria Desimoni & Tavis D. Jules
To cite this article: Tinesh Indrarajah, Victoria Desimoni & Tavis D. Jules (2024) What CARICOM
can learn from other regionalism(s) in an era of deglobalisation, The Round Table, 113:1, 56-70,
DOI: 10.1080/00358533.2024.2307798
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00358533.2024.2307798

Published online: 05 Mar 2024.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 184

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ctrt20

THE ROUND TABLE
2024, VOL. 113, NO. 1, 56–70
https://doi.org/10.1080/00358533.2024.2307798

What CARICOM can learn from other regionalism(s) in an era
of deglobalisation
Tinesh Indrarajah

a

, Victoria Desimoni

b

and Tavis D. Jules

c

a

Doctoral Student, Program in Higher Education, School of Education, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago,
USA; bDoctoral Student, Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College, Arizona State University, Arizona, USA; cProfessor
Senior Norrag Fellow, Program in Higher Education, School of Education, Loyola University Chicago,
Chicago USA
ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

Applying a comparative regionalism approach to study regionalism­
(s) in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Latin America (LA), and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), this paper out­
lines what lessons Latin America and ASEAN regionalism(s) hold for
CARICOM based on its current updated model of that concept. With
the rise of deglobalisation and the retreat towards regionalism,
analysing how different regionalism models approach global, regio­
nal, and national power dynamics outlines how these regional insti­
tutions manage the externalities of colonialism and imperialism over
time. The article concludes by recommending what further policies
and principles CARICOM might ‘borrow’ from these counterparts to
strengthen its regional project for the next 50 years.

CARICOM; open regionalism;
mature regionalism; ASEAN

Introduction
The pause of the current incarnation and wave of neoliberalism globalisation founded
on embedded liberalism and the prevalence of protectionism and popularism have
given rise to deglobalisation (the retreat towards regionalisation and the reversal of
the trend towards global integration). With the advent of globalisation, our economic
systems have become more integrated, and free-trade zones flourish under new
regionalism. For many scholars, deglobalisation, which is often traced to the post2008 economic crisis, is the rectification of the historical wrongs that America and the
West committed through slavery, enslavement, indentureship, and the loss of indi­
genous cosmologies. The argument goes that the 2008 global financial crisis
unleashed global forces, including slower growth, rising inequality, and widening
backlash against open borders and incumbent liberal leaders in the West, which
eventually led to the rise of protectionism as fragmentation or renationalisation
surged (James, 2018; Sharma, 2016). The 2016 Brexit referendum further com­
pounded these events, the 2016 elections of Donald Trump in the United States,
the 2018 elections of Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil, as well as the outcome of other minor
elections and referendums across Europe and the Americas. Hence, deglobalisation is
an integral part of the globalisation journey, which is frequently seen through the lens
CONTACT Tinesh Indrarajah
© 2024 The Round Table Ltd

tindrarajah@luc.edu

THE ROUND TABLE

57

of ‘winners and losers’, where the dynamic interplay of power, various elements like
individuals, groups, cultures, institutions, norms, ideologies, and ways of knowing are
frequently (re)created and disseminated. Collectively, these events have led to the rise
of regionalism(s). With the rise of regionalism(s), we see that countries are entering
into multiple regional arrangements that may be beneficial or conflictual for the
region.
In this paper, we use a comparative regionalism approach to study regionalism(s) in
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Latin America (LA), and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We discuss what lessons Latin America and ASEAN
regionalism(s) hold for CARICOM and what CARICOM might ‘borrow’ from these
counterparts to strengthen its regional project further. Here our emphasis is on SouthSouth knowledge transfer as opposed to North-South transfer. In essence, this tripartite
conceptual study of different regionalism models and histories allows us to posit better
how various regions in the world approach deglobalisation and, subsequently, the lessons
and strategies that may be relevant for CARICOM to embrace moving forward.
Collectively, each regional approach reflects the complicated existing and historical
relationships rooted in colonialism and imperialism. However, with the impetus of
deglobalisation, regionalism(s) globally are cautious of navigating superpower dynamics,
ensuring economic progression, and maintaining political and social harmony amidst
consequences of globalisation, namely immigration, poverty, and aid restrictions. The
following section outlines our theoretical approach to comparative regionalism. This is
followed by a discussion of CARICOM’s updated model of regionalism. Next, we discuss
the evolution of regionalism(s) in LA and ASEAN, outlining the fundamental principles
that influence regional governance in both areas. We then outline avenues for policy
borrowing where practices from LA and ASEAN are framed into possible recommenda­
tions that CARICOM may want to consider as it thinks about its regional project for the
next 50 years.

Comparative regionalism as an approach
Comparative regionalism, a novel approach to studying regionalism(s), enables the
comparison of different regimes without relying on Europe as a model or benchmark.
This methodology and theory have become crucial in understanding the contemporary
world system as we transition into a new world order organised in regions (De
Lombaerde et al., 2010; Sőderbaum, 2013, 2015a, 2015b), in which nearly all countries
participate in one or more regional agreements (multiple regionalism).
Because comparative regionalism emerged, in part, due to the recognition that the
European Union should not be considered the ‘gold standard’ of regional integration,
comparative regionalism is often reduced to simply ‘the study of a single regional project
outside of Europe’ (Sbragia, 2008, p. 33). Rather than a problem or limitation, studying
one single regional project to understand the historical process of the project is, in fact,
a valid strategy for understanding regionalism(s). This is identified by De Lombaerde
et al. (2010) as ‘idiographic research’ (p. 744). However, De Lombaerde et al. (2010)
further note that comparative regionalism benefits from including ‘nomothetic research’
(p. 744) as well (see also Warleigh-Lack & Van Langenhove, 2010). This qualitative
approach ‘studies multiple cases with an emphasis on finding general explanations that

58

T. INDRARAJAH ET AL.

account for all the phenomena studied’ (De Lombaerde et al., 2010, p. 744). Therefore,
the ideal is an ‘in between’, otherwise designated ‘the comparative case study method’
(De Lombaerde et al., 2010, p. 744).
In this conceptual paper, we employ comparative regionalism as the framework to
consider the insights CARICOM can gain from studying ASEAN and regional initiatives
in LA. We argue that these comparisons can offer valuable insights into ways to enhance
CARICOM’s regional cooperation efforts while facilitating South-South knowledge
transfer.

CARICOM: the rise of neoliberal regionalism
After its foundation in 1973 under the Treaty of Chaguaramas, by 1989, the then 13
countries of CARICOM had a crisis of confidence as its reliance on ‘old regionalism’ had
not brought about the transformations it had envisioned. Old regionalism is a form of
regional cooperation that emerges in the context of dominant hegemonic actors or from
‘outside’ and ‘above’. It is characterised by bipolarity and has specific and narrow
objectives (such as security and economic development in the case of independent
colonies). The failure of old regionalism in the region was further compounded by the
predicament of ‘ideological pluralism’, where Guyana, Jamaica, and Grenada sought to
enact different forms of socialism and disavowed a capitalist development trajectory.
Given the small size of CARICOM countries, in the 1980s, after the era of ‘ideological
pluralism’ across the region that plagued the stagnation of economic regionalism, the use
of regional trading agreements (RTAs) became the norm to revitalise economic region­
alism and the drive towards production integration in the form of open regionalism was
born. Open regionalism is an outward-oriented form of regionalism that focuses on
increasing the region’s competitiveness at the international level. It ‘seeks to assure that
regional agreements will in practice be building blocks for further global liberation rather
than stumbling blocks that deter such process’ (Bergsten, 2002, p. 545). This was to
counter multilateralism, where regional leaders wanted to access globalisation (through
trade liberalisation) on their own terms. So, in 1989, when CARICOM leaders finally met,
they came up with a new deal that focused on widening economic integration through
open regionalism to accommodate the goals of developing the CARICOM Single Market
and Economy (CSME). The Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas (CARICOM, 2001)
extended production integration, which was ‘inward-looking, resourced-based, and
state directed’ and a ‘prisoner of the market place and international competitiveness”’
(Odle, 2006, p. 30). Thus, the CSME became premised upon ‘full use of labour (full
employment) and full exploitation of the other factors of production (natural resources
and capital); competitive production leading to greater variety and quantity of products
and services to trade with other countries’ (CARICOM, 1989, p. 1).
As a market-based strategy, open regionalism, in addition to widening CARICOM’s
membership by adding Haiti and Suriname, called for (i) the ability of Caribbean
nationals to move goods, services, capital and labour; (ii) the creation of common
trade and external tariff policies and harmonisation of laws; and (iii) the right to
establishment – i.e., the ability to set up a business in any territory – as a way to facilitate
entry into the knowledge-based economy. However, with the arrival of new regionalism –
a form of regionalism that emerges from ‘within’ and ‘below’, and is characterised by its

THE ROUND TABLE

59

multipolarity and its inclusion of a wide variety of goals beyond economic growth and
security – regional leaders recognised that the integrative project had stalled since
regional decisions were not implemented at the national level due to CARICOM’s
governance structure that combines attributes of ‘intergovernmentalism’ (see
Moravcsik, 1993) and ‘neo-functionalism’ (Haas, 1958). Under intergovernmentalism,
CARICOM’s member nations steer the course of integration, determining its depth and
strength through agreements on policy responses and consensus on institutional arrange­
ments – all without compromising national sovereignty. The neo-functionalist approach
enables CARICOM states to dismantle regional trade barriers through collaboration,
which has a ripple effect, fostering integration in one sector and paving the way for
interconnected progress in other areas. To rectify these challenges, CARICOM leaders
adopted the Rose Hall Declaration (CARICOM, 2003), which calls for ‘improving
governance to deepen the integration process’ (p. 1), thus giving rise to mature region­
alism (discussed below). Therefore, it can be argued that the emergence of new region­
alism in CARICOM, a market market-driven approach, was neoliberal. In short, it was a
market driven approach to regionalism that focused on providing labour for the knowl­
edge based economy.

The rise of mature regionalism
The Grand Anse Declaration (CARICOM, 1989), the principal instrument that estab­
lished the Revised Treaty, calls for both the deepening of regional governance mechan­
isms (in the form of developing regulatory mechanisms that move integration beyond
a Caribbean Common Market as designated in the Original Treaty and towards a Single
Market and Economy as identified in the Revised Treaty) and the widening of economic
relations (by expanding the economic mass of the CARICOM in the form of open
regionalism). As such, a key driver of neoliberalism regionalism in CARICOM has
been the implementation of the CSME, with the single market coming into effect in
2006. This system aims to allow the free movement of skills and labour across member
states to address labour shortages and promote a more integrated and competitive
regional labour market. The CSME is also an example of CARICOM’s reliance on
open (wider) regionalism and later mature (deeper) regionalism by prioritising regional
versus global alliances to serve economic and functional areas. The goals of the CSME are
ultimately reflected in the prioritisation of functional (health, education, and transporta­
tion) integration within the region (Jules, 2022). When open regionalism fell short of
delivering its promise of unrestricted labour movement, mature regionalism emerged as
a new regulatory mechanism. The deepening is what contextualises the current phase,
which is driven by mature regionalism, a form of meta-governance, is a regulatory
framework of regional governance distributed across diverse forms – conceptually,
materially, and institutionally – aiming to synchronise all facets, including economic,
foreign relations, security, and functional dimensions, within the realm of Caribbean
regional governance. Neoliberalism regionalism relies on the regulatory mechanism of
mature regionalism and is an amalgamation of vertical (CARICOM-led) and horizontal
(member state-led) coordination and collaboration.
Thus, neoliberal regionalism, comprising economic and functional aspects, as con­
ceptualised and exhibited by CARICOM, emphasises the pursuit of neoliberal aims more

60

T. INDRARAJAH ET AL.

narrowly focused on the regional level, given that CARICOM members are composed of
small and microstates. The crisis of modernity and the challenge towards globalisation
has led to the rise of neoliberal regionalism, allowing us to witness different forms of
market fundamentalism based on a different development track grounded in cooperation
and collaboration premised upon the rediscovery of local knowledge to produce local
human resources. The reconfiguration of neoliberalism has given rise to an era of
multilevel governance where subnational, national, intergovernmental, and superna­
tional all have a place in the regional coordination of activities around labour mobility.

From old to new regionalism
LA’s lengthy and challenging regional integration process began in the early 19th century.
The shared struggle for independence, state formation, and security against invaders
created a sense of unity among LA countries (Paz Motalbán, 2016). These initial forms of
cooperation fall within old regionalism that emerged in Western Europe in the 1940s and
1970s and spread through the developing world, acquiring unique characteristics linked
to colonialism/anti-colonialism (Sőderbaum, 2015a).
Initially, economic development was the critical motor of old regionalism in LA. Its
main goals were structural transformation, industrialisation, and fighting their unequal
position in world trade. The Latin America Free Trade Association (LAFTA) was created
with these goals in mind. Nonetheless, old LAC regionalism was ineffective in achieving
its objectives. Some reasons were ‘internal conflicts, a general failure among states to
cooperate, and the whole structure of dependence’ and the fact that ‘member countries of
the various partly overlapping regional schemes were politically and/or economically
unstable and not willing to or capable of pursuing cooperation’ (Sőderbaum, 2015a,
p. 14). Over time, regionalism(s) in LAC have undergone ideological shifts, leading to the
emergence of new iterations of regionalism (see Figure 1).
The intervention of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and other multilateral
donors during the severe economic crisis of the 1980s shaped the perspective of LA
countries regarding external aid and foreign investment, leading to the belief that
external aid was their only workable alternative in the face of bankruptcy and unemploy­
ment. New regionalism emerged in the mid-1980s as the global system suffered structural
transformations (Björn & Söderbaum, 2002) and impacted LA countries differently. This
comprehensive transformation was spurred by events such as the fall of the Berlin Wall
and the end of the Cold War, together with the 1985 White Paper on the internal market
and the Single European Act (European Commission, 1985).

Three forms of new regionalism in Latin America
In the LA context, new regionalism is associated with hegemonic regionalism, a category
grouped within a threefold classification alongside post-hegemonic and counterhegemonic regionalism. While all three regionalism(s) fall under the umbrella of new
regionalism, they vary in their approaches to enhancing member states’ competitiveness
globally. It is also crucial to recognise these categories’ dynamic nature and fluidity. This
means hegemonic regionalism may exhibit traits of post- and counter-hegemonic
regionalism(s), and conversely, post-hegemonic and counter-hegemonic regionalism(s)

THE ROUND TABLE

61

Figure 1. Heterogeneity of regimes in Latin America through the years – categorised in colours
according to the type of regionalism.
ACS – Association of Caribbean States (1994); ACTO – Amazon Corporation Treaty Organization (1978);
ALBA-TCP – Bolivarian Alliance for the People of Our America – People’s Trade Treaty (2004); Andean
Pact (1969). Replaced by CAN; CA-4 – Central America-4 Free Mobility Agreement (2006); CACM –
Central American Common Market (1960); CAN – Andean Nations Community (1996); CARICOM – The
Caribbean Community (1973); CELAC – Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (2010);
CSME – Caribbean Single Market Economy (1989); FPDSA – Forum for the Progress and Development
of South America (2019); FTAA – Free Trade Area of the Americas (1998). Failed in 2005; G-Rio – Rio
Grupo (1986). Replaced by CELAC; LAFTA – Latin American Free Trade Association (1960). Replaced by
LAIA; LAIA – Latin American Integration Association (1980); MERCOSUR – Southern Common Market
(1991); NAFTA – The North American Free Trade Agreement (1994); OAS – Organization of American
States (1948); ODECA – Organization of Central American States (1951). Replaced by SICA; OECS –
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (1981); PA – Pacific Alliance (2012); PetroCaribe (2005); Rio
Treaty – Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (1947); SELA – Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System (1975); SICA – Central American Integration System (1993); USAN – Union of South
American Nations (2008)

may display elements of hegemony. The impossibility of offering precise definitions is
heightened by the interconnectedness of regionalism types with their members’ political
and social inclinations. Across LA, ongoing struggles between opposing political parties,
from extreme right to extreme left, contribute to the area’s complex and ever-changing
landscape of regionalism(s).
The unique conceptualisation of hegemonic, post-hegemonic, and counterhegemonic regionalism(s) is mainly used to talk about regionalism in previously colo­
nised countries. Muhr (2011, 2018) and Perrotta (2016, 2018) are two examples of
scholars who have used this conceptualisation in the LA case. Hegemonic regionalism
is rooted in the new or open regionalism schemes developed in Latin America in the

62

T. INDRARAJAH ET AL.

1980s. Its main goal is to foster the international competitiveness of member states and
the region as a whole, with liberalisation as an end in itself (Perrotta, 2018). As Figure 1
shows, the North American Free Trade Agreement between the United States, Canada,
and Mexico and the newest Pacific Alliance (PA) between Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and
Peru are examples of this.
According to Perrotta (2018), ‘a post-hegemonic scheme erected after several political,
social and economic crises in several countries led to the emergence of renewed political
forces that reclaimed welfarist projects domestically and regionally, based upon the
principles of cooperation and solidarity’ (p. 229). One example, as Figure 1 shows, is
The Southern Common Market or MERCOSUR. Post-hegemonic regionalism is
a multidimensional regionalism that aims to go beyond the sole focus on economic
integration to comprise multiple objectives of integration, such as combating poverty and
exclusion, eradicating hunger, improving education and health, coordinating defence
and security, reducing inequalities, and many others (Comini & Frenkel, 2021).
The third category is counter-hegemonic regionalism, modelled by Venezuela and
enacted in ALBA-TCP (Bolivarian Alliance for the People of Our America – People’s
Trade Treaty). The Bolivarian project pretends to build up new international geopolitics
based on a real multipolar world – in contrast to the framework of unilateralism
expressed in the United States hegemony and power over the rest of the Americas.
With this goal in mind, the Bolivarian project aims to build a South American bloc
focused on South–South cooperation with Africa and Asia. This new South American
bloc, and its emphasis on South–South cooperation, is seen as the alternative that
transcends the neoliberal conception of integration, giving place to a commerce that is
based on the principles of cooperation, complementation, solidarity, reciprocity, and
respect of each state’s sovereignty (Perrotta, 2016, 2018; Sanahuja, 2009).
Post-hegemonic and counter-hegemonic regionalism(s) emerged after the crisis of
new or hegemonic regionalism during the early 1990s, representing a post-liberal form
that acquired a double shape. Some characteristics of these new regional integration
proposals include prioritising the political agenda and less attention to the economic and
commercial agendas (Sanahuja, 2009). We can see in these characteristics a clear rejec­
tion of the neoliberal policies delineated in the Washington Consensus. According to the
main narrative of leftist ideologies in LA, neoliberalism is synonymous with globalisa­
tion. Both processes weaken the state and its capacity to promote development. In
addition, neoliberalism and globalisation are enforced from outside through institutions
such as the World Bank and IMF. This negative conception of neoliberalism results in
efforts and strategies to reverse its influence and return to the idea of strong, representa­
tive states. Under this idea, regional integration should be at the service of the emergence
of the ‘developmental state’ and not an instrument for promoting globalisation
(Sanahuja, 2009).

ASEAN: from old to new regionalism
Southeast Asia has historically been a site for superpower dominance, with colonial
invaders like the British, Dutch, Portuguese, American, Spanish, Japanese, and Chinese
occupying various nations at different historical points. The Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) was officially founded in 1967 by the five founding states of

THE ROUND TABLE

63

Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Philippines, and Thailand, with the five other remaining
Southeast Asian nations joining at various points at the end of the 20th century (Flores &
Abad, n.d..).
ASEAN was conceptualised as an organisation that would step into the power vacuum
of post-decolonisation and formalise regional-led attempts to maintain peace and pro­
mote economic development. Despite sharing geographical proximity at the nexus of the
Indian Ocean and the South China Sea, the ten nations have different colonial histories,
linguistic and religious diversity, population sizes, and development rates. Despite these
differences, ASEAN has steadily created a culture of peace and collaboration in Southeast
Asia, with each nation taking turns yearly to helm the Chairmanship of the regional
organisation, representing shared leadership and governance.
ASEAN was born in the crucible of conflict, and its foundation coincided with old
regionalism. However, at its founding, the bloc aimed at security rather than economic
integration, given that the four largest ASEAN nations (Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand) had pursued import substitution policies (Bowles, 2019).
Thus, regional integration was seen as an avenue for preferential trading agreements
that supported domestic industries. By 1983, the bloc had formed the ASEAN Free Trade
Area (AFTA) to create a free trade area by 2023 that supports local trade and manufac­
turing by focusing on South–South cooperation. With the arrival of new regionalism in
the 1990s, ASEAN experimented with internal integration and eventually established
a free trade area, the ASEAN Economic Community, which ‘aims to achieve a well‐
integrated and connected regional economy within the global economic system’.
Moreover, despite the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation’s (APEC) non-binding nat­
ure, it and ASEAN have functioned as twin engines for Asian regionalism. Under the
current wave of new regionalism steeped in bilateralism and pluralism coupled with the
ASEAN Charter of 2008, ASEAN has focused on North–South cooperation in an era of
multiple regionalism(s) (Bowles, 2019; Oba, 2019). Today, the ASEAN-centred regional
architecture is based on ‘soft regionalism’ as opposed to the EU’s ‘hard regionalism’ since
‘Asian regionalism was characterised by dynamic developments in markets rather than
by formal political institutions’ (Katzenstein & Shiraishi, 1997, p. 7).

The principle of non-interference
ASEAN’s stance on its proposed manner of interacting within the region is crystallised in
its adoption of the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC), where fundamental prin­
ciples are outlined - (i) mutual respect for the independence, sovereignty, equality,
territorial integrity, and national identity of all nations; (ii) the right of every state to
lead its national existence free from external interference, subversion or coercion; (iii)
non-interference in the internal affairs of one another; (iv) settlement of differences or
disputes by peaceful means; (v) renunciation of threat or use of force; and (vi) effective
cooperation among themselves (Severino, 1999). These principles broadly ensure that
decision-making is grounded in the practice of consultation and consensus-seeking to
ensure the peaceful management of challenges (Yukawa, 2018).
A desired externality of ASEAN’s collective approach is prioritising peace in the
region, thus contributing to global safety and security. In 1995, ASEAN member nations
signed the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, which calls on states

64

T. INDRARAJAH ET AL.

to refrain from developing, acquiring, stationing, or testing nuclear weapons and to also
stop other states from engaging in nuclear weaponry within the region (ASEAN, 2012).
The presence of internal peace and collaboration has also allowed ASEAN to build key
external partnerships collectively. In November 2020, all ASEAN members joined
Australia, China, Japan, New Zealand, and South Korea in signing the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), a free trade agreement in the works
since 2012 and initiated by ASEAN (Shimizu, 2021). Although the RCEP does not cut
tariffs drastically, it covers more of the world’s population − 30% – than any other trade
agreement and promotes greater economic integration between Northeast and Southeast
Asia (Frank, 2023).
However, the non-interference approach also results in ASEAN standing by as con­
flicts and turmoil happen within member states. In February 2021, the military junta
coup in Myanmar precipitated a nationwide crackdown on protestors and accelerated the
genocide of Rohingyas, while ASEAN nations had differing reactions to the coup, with no
one actively stepping in to address the conflict (Ba, 2023). ASEAN did remove Myanmar
from the Chairmanship rotation scheduled for 2026, but aside from this administrative
restriction, ASEAN member states largely left Myanmar to take the lead on rectifying its
own issues (Dunst, 2021). Similarly, in 2016, ASEAN failed for the first time to adopt
a region-wide agreement on addressing Chinese aggression in the South China Sea
because Cambodia viewed the conflict as an individual issue between Vietnam and the
Philippines on one side and China on the other (Cheeppensook, 2020), and did not want
to get involved. During the COVID-19 pandemic, there were plans to coordinate
a region-wide response to the health and economic challenges of the pandemic, but the
successful implementation of ASEAN’s response relied mainly on the capacities of each
individual nation (Amul et al., 2022).

ASEAN centrality
A perennial challenge that has dogged the ASEAN since its expansion to a 10-member
regional organisation has been its inability to agree on a centralised geopolitical stance on
various matters affecting the region, especially when superpowers are involved. It is
helpful to outline that foreign policy ideals within ASEAN member states differ depend­
ing on whether a nation is part of the mainland or maritime bloc, with the former having
to contend more seriously with China as its close geographical neighbour. Thus, through
overt and covert means, China has actively worked towards ensuring that the ASEAN
nations closest to it by geography are aware of its power, like its 1979 invasion of Vietnam
and the creation of Chinese aid dependency in Cambodia (see Chheang, 2017; Fifield,
1979), and have to consider Chinese needs and priorities in their decision-making, which
does not bode well for a unified ASEAN stance towards its largest trading partner (Irshad
& Xin, 2014).
Recently, there has been a more significant push for ASEAN Centrality – the need for
regional cohesion and the creation of unified approaches towards Chinese and US
involvement in Southeast Asia (Petri & Plummer, 2013). ASEAN nations need to chart
their own way forward when confronted with geopolitical needs, economic constraints,
and social challenges without being too swayed one way or another – a balancing act that
requires deep cooperation built on trusting relationships between the leaders of the ten

THE ROUND TABLE

65

nations. An example of how ASEAN navigates this balancing act adeptly is by actively
building strategic partnerships with regional powers like India, Japan, Australia, and New
Zealand during the East-Asian Summit. Nabbs-Keller (2020) notes that by aligning
themselves in more extensive regional networks, ASEAN is able to remain in the centre
and have buffer support when confronted with superpower influence. Therefore, ASEAN
centrality is a principle that is constantly a work in progress with changing global and
regional power dynamics. However, the critical understanding of seeking a united front
to respond to threats to Southeast Asia still dominates the perspectives of ASEAN leaders,
especially concerning deglobalisation forces.

Tripartite connections and lessons in an era of multiple regionalism
With the rise of multiple regionalism(s), we have seen the advent of ‘policy transfer’,
‘policy borrowing’, ‘policy lending’, ‘policy learning’, and ‘policy diffusion’ (Portnoi,
2016, p. 149) across multiple sectors. For the purposes of this comparative study, we
focus on the concepts of policy borrowing and policy transfer only. Documentations of
policy borrowing date back to the 1800s. As Portnoi (2016) states, these first initiatives of
policy borrowing consisted of ‘government officials traveling to other countries with the
purpose of learning from foreign educational systems and importing structures or
practices back home’ (p. 147). ‘Policy transfer’ is usually used broadly to describe how
policies travel between countries, without distinguishing whether they are borrowed,
lent, or imposed. Alternatively, ‘policy borrowing’ refers to the explicit action of appro­
priating a policy from another country and adapting it to the local context, focusing more
on the receiving country.
Steiner-Khamsi (2014), following Kingdon (1995), mentions three different reasons
why countries open themselves to receive external policies: the recognition of a problem
or a crisis (problem stream), the availability of solutions to some of their problems (policy
stream), and political developments or changes (political stream). To Kingdon’s (1995)
three reasons, Steiner-Khamsi (2014) adds the phenomenon of transnational policy
borrowing that emerged with globalisation, stating that the policy stream is now con­
stantly affected by the presence of ‘best practices’ or ‘international standards’.
Best practices have become increasingly relevant in South–South cooperation (SSC)
since it entered a ‘Best Practices Phase’, as the Global Development Network promoted.
SSC is defined as ‘any cooperative initiative between two or more developing countries’,
and ‘it may be carried out by governmental institutions, non-governmental organisa­
tions, universities, independent professionals, scholars and researchers’ (Morais de Sá
e Silva, 2009, p. 2). Through the sharing of best practices in an SSC framework, under­
developed countries aimed at overcoming a period strongly defined by the Structural
Adjustment Programs as the way towards ‘improving international competitiveness,
adjusting countries’ economic structures, and restoring their balance of payments’
(Jules et al., 2023, p. 4). Instead, countries in the Global South have increasingly
continued to use South-South trade, investment, and cooperation in numerous fields
to increase their competitiveness in the world market. Regionalism(s) have played a vital
role in the development and relevance of SSC. Yet, the question beckons: What can
CARICOM learn from LA and ASEAN regionalism(s) that can strengthen its regional
project, which has been stalled yet again? Such a question has consequences for

66

T. INDRARAJAH ET AL.

CARICOM, given that it was one of ASEAN’s central pillars, functional cooperation,
which CARICOM borrowed and refined and has brought it successful progress in noneconomic areas. So, we might ask, how can CARICOM rebalance itself and what can it
learn from other regionalism(s)?

The view from Latin America
Latin American countries have fragmented into numerous regionalism(s) because of the
diverse social, economic, and political agendas across states. This fragmentation has been
driven by neoliberal globalisation; although not all nations in the region have adhered to
the tenets of economic globalisation, it still has caused a rift in LA regionalism. Across
LA, post-hegemonic and counter-hegemonic regionalism have emerged as post-liberal
responses to the expansion of neoliberal practices globally. The rise of deglobalisation
and the establishment of governance structures at the regional and national levels have
led many states to view regionalism as an alternative to the pressures of globalisation,
serving as a ‘mediator’ between state power and globalisation. Examining the deep
fragmentation within LA can serve as a cautionary lesson to CARICOM, which has
successfully navigated the threat of fragmentation in the past. Such an examination may
inspire considerations about the ongoing interactions among the region’s global, regio­
nal, and national governance.
The lesson’s relevance from LA fragmentation is heightened in this context because
many Caribbean states are members of both post-hegemonic and counter-hegemonic
forms of regionalism, alongside the neoliberal or hegemonic CARICOM. For instance,
Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Grenada,
Dominica, and Antigua and Barbuda are CARICOM and ALBA-TCP (counterhegemonic regionalism) members. In addition, Haiti and Trinidad and Tobago are
members of CARICOM and observer members of PA (hegemonic regionalism).
Finally, Guyana and Suriname are members of CARICOM and associate members of
MERCOSUR (post-hegemonic regionalism). The presence of diverse regional affiliations
poses a risk of fragmentation for CARICOM, given the contrasting goals of its members.
Although CARICOM managed to mitigate risks of ideological pluralism in the 1980s by
deepening integration, the region still faces potential challenges stemming from the
diverse regionalism(s) coexisting in Latin America and the Caribbean. While accession
to multiple regionalism(s) is common, CARICOM may want to ensure that its member’s
accession to these regional bodies does not interfere with its core missions as outlined in
the Revised Treaty. Or a collective affirmation to prioritise CARICOM’s needs first over
that of the other regional accords that some Caribbean nations are part of.

The view from ASEAN
The rebalancing of CARICOM’s regionalism principles cannot occur without an open
and honest conversation about the power dynamics that exist within the region.
Indonesia usually plays the role of crucial facilitator for ASEAN’s diplomatic relations
and Vietnam serves as the driver of economic growth in the region, with other nations
taking the lead on other policy matters. Further, the implementation of a revolving yearly
Chairmanship of ASEAN allows all nations to be more actively involved in decision-

THE ROUND TABLE

67

making, engendering buy-in, and developing consensus. Thus, a possible recommenda­
tion is that CARICOM strengthen its thematic portfolios and encourage support from
other nations to follow the example of these leaders. For instance, the Bahamas and
Barbados top tourist charts regularly, and it behoves the whole of the Caribbean to learn
how these two nations position themselves as tourist havens and apply similar principles
to developing each nation’s tourism sector.
Next, ASEAN leaders strive to continually emphasise the need for ASEAN centrality to
develop a strong buffer to superpower intervention. In ASEAN, Chinese and US influ­
ences permeate the different nations at varying levels, yet there is an overall expectation
that ASEAN will work as a collective of ten countries and not as proxies of superpowers.
A similar declaration of recognising superpower dynamics in the Caribbean and moving
to eschew superpower influence in exchange for collective advocacy would be a powerful
way to promote political stability, economic progress, and cultural exchange. How will
‘Caribbean Centrality’ interact with the needs of the US, UK, and the European Union?
Only through the appreciation of the power of regional unity can the more insidious
connections to colonised powers be broken, and CARICOM can adopt a more assertive
role within Latin and North America. However, as noted above, this process requires an
open declaration of needs and expectations by each nation and the subsequent establish­
ment of processes within CARICOM to address these needs together.
Lastly, ASEAN has successfully presented itself as a valuable partner to other regional
powers due to its sustained efforts to ensure peace and economic development. It has
created a variety of regional partnerships, the biggest of which is the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), for which ASEAN also initiated discus­
sions spanning nearly a decade. CARICOM needs to consider what binds it to other Latin
American and African nations and leverage that shared platform to create partnerships
that undermine existing power hierarchies. SSC has to be a response to deglobalisation,
especially with privileged Northern states like the UK seeking to become more insular
and parochial to restrict access to resources and opportunities to individuals from the
Global South. Thus, CARICOM should look at creating and deepening developmental
pathways that centre South-South cooperation and collaboration while continually
questioning what CARICOM can offer to secure these strategic regional partnerships.

Conclusion
CARICOM, LA, and ASEAN have all experienced the transition from old regionalism to
new regionalism in different ways and for differing reasons. The influences of global and
regional power dynamics through processes like colonialism, capitalism, and globalisa­
tion have created obstacles to the progress of these regional blocs, resulting in degloba­
lisation and the current retreat towards deeper regionalism. Leveraging our comparative
regionalism methodology, we have argued that there are lessons that CARICOM can
draw from the LA and ASEAN’s regionalistic processes. CARICOM is no stranger to
policy borrowing and in fact, its most successful non-economic pillar, functional coop­
eration, was borrowed from ASEAN and refined to suit the needs of the different
Caribbean states. Thus, as CARICOM looks forward to its next 50 years and conceptua­
lises progress under mature regionalism, it may want to consider what additional lessons
it could learn from these two regional entities. In essence, we argue that neoliberal

68

T. INDRARAJAH ET AL.

regionalism is driven by meta-governance. This neoliberal regionalism is undertaken
with member states and facilitated by governance structures and policies that reduce
restrictions on labour mobility to enhance the capacities (and ideally standing) of the
small nations that comprise CARICOM. More significant investment in deepening the
ties within CARICOM through the establishment of clear guiding principles (like
ASEAN centrality), the active interrogations of ‘best practices’ to prevent the perpetua­
tion of colonial and imperial influences, the appreciation of the histories of past frag­
mentations to understand better current national and regional governance models and
expectations (like in LA), the adoption of context-specific policies that inform economic
and social progress, and the construction of collaborative system and avenues for
consensus-building approaches by all CARICOM nations outline policy directions that
CARICOM should actively consider. Neoliberal forces worldwide will continue to exert
their influence on all three regional movements, but the knowledge and belief in the
importance of South–South cooperation and the continued borrowing and transferring
of progressive policies will denote a way forward for these regional projects amidst
pressures from the Global North. It is the fervent hope of this paper that CARICOM
recognises its value to global proceedings by being a unifying force in the Americas such
that the neoliberalistic trail of poverty, inequality, societal divisions, winners and losers,
and distortion of national identities does not find a home in the Caribbean. Instead of
moving away from competitive individualistic practices to one rooted in regional coop­
eration and collaboration, with continued and active learning from the lessons and
models of fellow Global South regionalism(s), is an approach that will stand
CARICOM in good stead for the next 50 years.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

ORCID
Tinesh Indrarajah
http://orcid.org/0009-0000-7206-2743
http://orcid.org/0009-0006-7194-5898
Victoria Desimoni
Tavis D. Jules
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2602-1665

References
Amul, G. G., Ang, M., Kraybill, D., Ong, S. E., & Yoong, J. (2022). Responses to COVID‐19 in
Southeast Asia: Diverse paths and ongoing challenges. Asian Economic Policy Review, 17(1),
90–110. https://doi.org/10.1111/aepr.12362
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. (2012, May 11). Treaty on the Southeast Asia nuclear
weapon-free zone. https://asean.org/treaty-on-the-southeast-asia-nuclear-weapon-free-zone/
Ba, A. D. (2023). Diversification’s legitimation challenges: ASEAN and its myanmar predicament.
International Affairs, 99(3), 1063–1085. https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiad061
Bergsten, C. F. (2002). Open regionalism. The World Economy, 20(5), 545–565. https://doi.org/10.
1111/1467-9701.00088
Björn, H., & Söderbaum, F. (2002). Theorising the rise of regionness. In S. Breslin, C. W. Hughes,
N. Phillips, & B. Rosamond (Eds.), New regionalism in the global political economy: Theories and
cases (pp. 33–47). Routledge.

THE ROUND TABLE

69

Bowles, P. (2019). ASEAN, AFTA, and the “New regionalism.” Pacific Affairs, 92(3), 499–513.
https://doi.org/10.5509/2019923499
CARICOM. (1989). Grand anse declaration. http://www.caricom.org/jsp/communications/meet
ings_statements/grand_anse_declaration.jsp?
CARICOM. (2003). The rose hall declaration on regional governance and integrated development.
http://www.caricom.org/jsp/communications/meetings_statements/rose_hall_declaration.jsp?
menu=communications
Cheeppensook, K. (2020). ASEAN in the South China sea conflict, 2012–2018: A lesson in conflict
transformation from normative power europe. International Economics & Economic Policy, 17(3),
747–764.
Chheang, V. (2017). The political economy of Chinese investment in cambodia.
Comini, N. M., & Frenkel, A. (2021). UNASUR on the edge. In D. Nolte & B. Weiffen (Eds.),
Regionalism under stress: Europe and Latin America in comparative perspective (pp. 133–149).
Routledge.
De Lombaerde, P., Söderbaum, F., Van Langenhove, L., & Baert, F. (2010). The problem of
comparison in comparative regionalism. Review of International Studies, 36(3), 731–753.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210510000707
Dunst, C. (2021). The Myanmar coup as an ASEAN inflection point. Journal of Indo-Pacific Affair,
4(6), 37–45.
European Commission. (1985). Completing the internal market. White paper from the commis­
sion to the European council. COM (85). Retrieved June 14, 1985, from https://op.europa.eu/en/
publication-detail/-/publication/4ff490f3-dbb6-4331-a2ea-a3ca59f974a8/language-en.
Fifield, R. H. (1979). ASEAN: Image and reality. Asian Survey, 19(12), 1199–1208. https://doi.org/
10.2307/2643965
Flores, J. M., & Abad, J. (n.d.). The founding of ASEAN. Association of Southeast Asian nations.
https://asean.org/the-founding-of-asean/
Frank, N. (2023). Power by proxy: Explaining innovation and imitation in the RCEP. Global
Governance: A Review of Multilateralism & International Organizations, 29(3), 322–345. https://
doi.org/10.1163/19426720-02903003
Haas, E. (1958). The uniting of europe: Political, social and economic forces, 1950–1957. Stanford
University Press.
Irshad, M. S., & Xin, Q. (2014). A new perspective of the China-ASEAN free trade area and the
story of top ten products. European Journal of Business and Management, 6(18), 1–8. https://
www.iiste.org/Journals/index.php/EJBM/article/download/13640/13861 .
James, H. (2018). Deglobalisation: The rise of disembedded unilateralism. Annual Review of
Financial Economics, 10(1), 219–237. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-financial-110217-022625
Jules, T. D. (2022). Educational framing and discursive educational opportunity structures in
comparative and international education. Globalisation, Societies & Education, 20(5), 705–717.
Jules, T. D., Arnold, R., & Desimoni, V. (2023). South-south cooperation in education. In J. Robert,
F. R. Tierney, & E. Kadriye (Eds.), International Encyclopedia of education (4th ed., pp. 317–
326). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818630-5.01071-X
Katzenstein, P. J., & Shiraishi, T. (1997). Network power: Japan and Asia. Cornell University Press.
Kingdon, J. W. (1995). Agendas, alternatives, and public policies (2nd ed.). The University of
Michigan.
Morais de Sá e Silva, M. (2009). South-south cooperation: Past and present conceptualisation and
practice. In L. Chisholm & G. Steiner-Khamsi (Eds.), South-south cooperation in education and
development (pp. 39–59). Teachers College Press and HSRC Press.
Moravcsik, A. (1993). Preferences and power in the European community: A liberal intergovern­
mentalist approach. Journal of Common Market Studies, 31, 473–524. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1468-5965.1993.tb00477.x
Muhr, T. (2011). Conceptualising the alba-TCP: Third generation regionalism and political
economy. International Journal of Cuban Studies, 3(2/2), 98–115.
Muhr, T. (2018). South-south development cooperation and the socio-spatial reconfiguration of
Latin America-Caribbean regionalism(s): University education in the Brazil-Venezuela ‘special

70

T. INDRARAJAH ET AL.

border regime’. In S. L. Robertson, K. Olds, R. Dale, & Q. A. Dang (Eds.), Global regionalism(s)
and higher education: Project, processes, politics (pp. 253–271). Edward Elgar Publishing.
Nabbs-Keller, G. (2020). ASEAN centrality and Indonesian leadership in a contested Indo-Pacific
order. Security Challenges, 16(3), 21–26.
Oba, M. (2019). Further development of Asian regionalism: Institutional hedging in an uncertain
era. Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies, 8(2), 125–140.
Odle, M. (2006). Production integration in the CSME: A business perspective. In D. Benn &
K. O. Hall (Eds.), Production integration in CARICOM: From theory to action (pp. 30–55). Ian
Randle Publications.
Paez Motalbán, R. (2016). Integración y regionalism en América Latina. Breve historia y perspec­
tivas presents. In L. Weinberg (Coord.), Historia comparada de las Américas: Perspectivas de la
integración cultural (pp. 115–132). México: CIALC (Centro de Investigaciones sobre América
Latina y el Caribe).
Perrotta, D. V. (2016). Regionalism and higher education in South America: A comparative
analysis for understanding internationalisation. Journal of Supranational Policies of Education,
4, 54–81. https://doi.org/10.15366/jospoe2016.4.003
Perrotta, D. V. (2018). MERCOSUR, regulatory regionalism and contesting projects of higher
education governance. In S. L. Robertson, K. Olds, R. Dale, & Q. A. Dang (Eds.), Global
regionalism(s) and higher education: Project, processes, politics (pp. 228–252). Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Petri, P. A., & Plummer, M. G. (2013). ASEAN centrality and the ASEAN-US economic relationship.
East-West Center Policy Studies, Forthcoming.
Portnoi, L. M. (2016). Policy borrowing and reform in education: Globalised processes and local
contexts. Palgrave Macmillan.
Sanahuja, J. A. (2009). Del ‘regionalism abierto’ al ‘regionalismo post-liberal’. Crisis y cambio en la
integración regional en Améric Latina. In L. M. Alfonso, L. Peña, & M. Vázquez (Eds.), Anuario
de la integración regional de América Larina y el Gran Caribe 2008–2009 (pp. 11–54).
Coordinadora Regional de Investigaciones Económicas y Sociales (CRIES).
Sbragia, A. (2008). Comparative regionalism: What might it be. Journal of Common Market
Studies, 46(s1), 29–49. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5965.2008.00809.x
Severino, R. C., Jr. (1999, August 1). ASEAN and the growth of regional cooperation in Southeast
Asia. Association of Southeast Asian Nations. https://asean.org/asean-and-the-growth-ofregional-cooperation-in-southeast-asia-by-rodolfo-c-severino-jr/
Sharma, R. (2016, July 28). Globalisation as we know it is over – and brexit is the biggest sign yet.
The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/era-globalisationbrexiteu-britain-economic-frustration
Shimizu, K. (2021). The ASEAN economic community and the RCEP in the world economy.
Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies, 10(1), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1080/24761028.2021.
1907881
Sőderbaum, F. (2013). Rethinking regions and regionalism. Journal of International Affairs, 14(2),
9–18.
Sőderbaum, F. (2015a). Early, old, new and comparative regionalism: The scholarly development
of the field. KFG Working Paper Series, 64, October 2015, Kolleg-Forschegruppe (KFG) “The
Transformative Power of Europe,” Freie Universität Berlin.
Sőderbaum, F. (2015b). Rethinking regionalism. Palgrave.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2014). Cross-national policy borrowing: Understanding reception and
translation. Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 34(2), 153–167. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02188791.2013.875649
Warleigh-Lack, A., & Van Langenhove, L. (2010). Introduction. Rethinking EU studies: The
contribution of comparative regionalism. Journal of European Integration, 32(6), 541–562.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07036337.2010.518715
Yukawa, T. (2018). The ASEAN way as a symbol: An analysis of discourses on the ASEAN norms.
The Pacific Review, 31(3), 298–314. https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2017.1371211

