doi: 10.20991/allazimuth.1455442

All Azimuth V13, N2, 2024, 166-192

Malaysia’s “Triadic Maritime Diplomacy” Strategy in the South China Sea
Bama Andika Putra
University of Bristol, UK
Universitas Hasanuddin, Indonesia

Abstract
The importance of safeguarding Malaysia’s Kasawari gas field in the South
China Sea has reoriented Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategies vis-à-vis
China’s growing assertiveness in this semi-enclosed sea. China’s increased sea
infringements through its coast guards and maritime constabulary forces have
led Malaysia to adopt what this article coins as “triadic maritime diplomacy,”
a combination of coercive, persuasive, and co-operative maritime diplomacy.
Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategies thus act more as a set of contradictory
policies rather than a decisive attempt to defend Malaysia’s sovereignty at sea. This
article engages in qualitative inquiry to address two central empirical questions:
Firstly, how has Malaysia managed the delicate balance between safeguarding
its sovereignty at sea and maintaining close economic ties with China? Secondly,
what accounts for Malaysia’s persistent “downplaying” stance despite the
escalating intrusions around the Luconia Shoals, particularly concerning the
Kasawari gas field? The findings of this study reveal three key aspects: Firstly,
Malaysia’s prioritization of developing the Kasawari gas field has necessitated
the adoption of seemingly contradictory policies, employing coercive maritime
measures utilizing its naval assets while simultaneously adopting rhetoric
that downplays crises. Secondly, Malaysia’s maritime diplomacy can be aptly
characterized as “triadic” strategies, encompassing the adoption of coercive,
persuasive, and co-operative approaches. Lastly, these seemingly inconsistent
policies are a strategic response aimed at accommodating both immediate and
prospective economic opportunities involving China, all while signaling its nonaligned stance to major global powers.

Keywords: Maritime diplomacy, South China Sea, Luconia Shoals, Kasawari gas field,
Malaysia
1. Introduction
The South China Sea disputes remain a flash point with the possibility of escalating into
bloody armed conflict, a dire situation that could undermine not only regional security and
stability but also the national security interests of claimant states. Malaysia’s sovereign rights
and territorial claims in this semi-enclosed sea have become increasingly threatened in recent
years. Such threats predominantly stem from the persistent and increasing encroachment and
harassment of Chinese maritime constabulary forces in the vicinity of the disputed maritime
features, i.e., submerged reefs, atolls, and shoals within Malaysia’s Exclusive Economic Zone

166

Bama Andika Putra, School of Sociology, Politics, and International Studies, University of Bristol, UK.
0000-0001-5952136X, Email: bama.putra@bristol.ac.uk, Department of International Relations, Universitas Hasanuddin, Indonesia. Email: bama@
unhas.ac.id
Recieved: 11.24.2023 • Accepted: 02.12.2024

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

(EEZ).1 Malaysia’s concerns and apprehension regarding China’s growing assertive actions
in these offshore contested waters are warranted, particularly within the latter’s declared
U-shaped nine-dash line. These vast and yet remote maritime areas are home to abundant
untapped oil and gas reserves with the potential to support Malaysia’s economic growth for
decades2 (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Malaysia’s Hydrocarbon Energy Exploration and Development in the South China Sea
Source: Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative3

Over the past 20 years, China has consistently exhibited belligerent behaviour in defending
its South China Sea claims. Clear evidence of this behaviour can be seen in its unilateral largescale land reclamation activities, including transforming previously submerged reefs, atolls,
and shoals in the Spratly Islands into fortified artificial island outposts.4 Beijing’s strategy
for boosting China’s territorial claims also involves militarizing these reclaimed maritime
features. This includes the establishment of military garrisons, the installation of missile
defence and advanced radar systems, as well as the construction of extended airstrips and
sheltered ports.5 Initially, most of these assertive actions, as reported in mainstream media,
1
Parameswaran Prashanth, Playing It Safe: Malaysia’s Approach to the South China Sea and Implications for the United
States, (Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security, 2015), accessed March 23, 2023. https://www.files.ethz.ch/
isn/189746/CNAS%20Maritime%206_Parameswaran_Final.pdf
2
Data from the U.S. Energy Information Agency (updated in 2019) concludes that the South China Sea consists of 190 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas and a potential of 11 billion barrels of oil.
3
“Rocks, Reefs, Submerged Shoals – Who Claims or Occupies Them?” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, accessed
March 25, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/scs-features-map/
4
Ketian Zhang, “Explaining China’s large-scale land reclamation in the South China Sea: Timing and Rationale,” Journal
of Strategic Studies 46, no. 6-7 (2023): 1-6; Hoo Tiang Boon, “Hardening the Hard, Softening the Soft: Assertiveness and China’s
Regional Strategy,” Journal of Strategic Studies 40, no. 5 (2016): 639-662.
5
James R. Holmes, “Strategic Features of the South China Sea: A Tough Neighborhood for Hegemons,” Naval War
College Review 67, no. 2 (2014): 1-23; Bama Andika Putra, “Gauging Contemporary Maritime Tensions in the North Natuna Seas:
Deciphering China’s Maritime Diplomatic Strategies,” The International Journal of Interdisciplinary Civic and Political Studies 17,
no. 2 (2022): 85-99.

167

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

focused on the EEZ waters claimed by the Philippines and Vietnam. For the Philippines,
decades-long intrusions and confrontations with the Chinese Coast Guard have escalated
with the use of military-grade lasers in the past year.6 Meanwhile, Vietnam is struggling to
respond to China’s continuous assertiveness at sea, which has escalated since the May 2014
drilling rig crisis, which occurred close to the Paracel Islands.7
Nevertheless, China’s belligerent behaviours have visibly expanded to other contested
areas within its nine-dash line, including a vast tract of Malaysia’s claimed EEZ.8 This
development has gained traction in the last decade, as demonstrated by recurrent intrusions
of Chinese maritime militia and Coast Guard vessels in the vicinity of Malaysia’s claimed
James Shoal and Luconia Shoals off the Sarawak coast of Borneo.9 China regards James
Shoal as its southernmost territory, prompting Beijing to project its maritime power just off
the coast of Sarawak. Consequently, China has been persistent in its claims on the Luconia
Shoals, seizing the shoal in 2013 and anchoring its ships consistently between 2013 and
2015.10 Furthermore, tensions heightened in 2014 when Chinese officials decided to conduct
a sovereignty oath-swearing ceremony with the presence of its three warships in Malaysia’s
James Shoal.11
A particular maritime area in the South China Sea that has recently seen a troubling surge
of China’s aggressive activities and posed an alarming concern for Malaysia is the Kasawari
Gas Development Project (see Figure 2). This remote offshore gas field, situated adjacent to
the disputed Luconia Shoals,12 was discovered in November 2011 by PETRONAS and has
currently undergone extensive development.13

168

6
Neil Jerome Morales, “Philippines rebukes Beijing for ‘dangerous manoeuvres’ in South China Sea,” Reuters, April 28,
2023, accessed November 20, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/philippines-reports-confrontation-with-chinesevessels-south-china-sea-2023-04-28/
7
James Pearson and Khanh Vu, “Vietnam mulls legal action over South China Sea dispute,” Reuters, November 6, 2019,
accessed November 20, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-vietnam-southchinasea-idUSKBN1XG1D6/
8
Mohammad Zaki Ahmad and Mohd Azizuddin Mohd Sani, “China’s Assertiveness Posture in Reinforcing its Territorial
and Sovereignty Claims in the South China Sea: An Insight into Malaysia’s Stance,” Japanese Journal of Political Science 18, no. 1
(2017): 67-105.
9
James Shoal (Gugusan Beting Serupai) is located 45 nautical miles off the coast of Sarawak, and the Luconia Shoals
(Gugusan Beting Patinggi Ali), positioned 62 nautical miles from Sarawak. See, Ahmad and Sani, “China Assertiveness Posture,”
67-69.
10
Vivian Louis Forbes, “Navigating Malaysia-China geopolitical relations,” Australian Naval Institute, September 10, 2017,
accessed November 25, 2023. https://navalinstitute.com.au/navigating-malaysia-china-geopolitical-relations/
11
Ibid.
12
Luconia Shoals is one of the largest reef complexes in the South China Sea. It is situated 62 miles off the Sarawak coast, and
located in the farthest southwestern end of Spratly Islands. See, J. Ashley Roach, Malaysia and Brunei: An Analysis of their Claims in
the South China Sea (Virginia: CAN, 2014), accessed November 21, 2023. https://www.cna.org/reports/2014/malaysia-and-bruneiclaims-in-scs
13
The Malaysian oil and gas company, PETRONAS, estimates that the Luconia Shoals consist of 3.2 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas reserves. The Kasawari gas field will start its production phase in 2023. See, “Kasawari Gas Development Project,
Sarawak, Malaysia,” Offshore Technology, February 10, 2023, accessed November 19, 2023. https://www.offshore-technology.com/
projects/kasawari-gas-development-project-sarawak/?cf-view

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

Figure 2. Location of the Kasawari and NC3 Gas Fields
Source: Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative14

In response to these activities, Beijing began to resort to direct and sizable use of nonmilitary force by dispatching its Chinese Coast Guard (CCG), civilian, and maritime militia
vessels to operate in the vicinity of the contested area and to deliberately harass Malaysian
gas drilling operations.15 The regular presence and harassment by these non-military assets
indicate Malaysia is now non-immune from the brunt of Beijing’s grey zone tactics,16 which
had been widely observed in the waters around the disputed maritime features in the EEZ of
the Philippines and Vietnam. Beijing’s preference for conducting grey zone operations in the
vicinity of the Kasawari gas field demonstrates the adoption of a new doctrine of maritime
coercion characterized by ambiguity and deception while avoiding the risk and cost of fullblown military conflict when pursuing the objectives.17 This tactic shows China’s willingness
to engage in aggression against Malaysia, even if such actions may lead to diplomatic
frictions and territorial standoffs.
Evidence of China’s grey zone tactics is fully displayed in the disputed waters, including
14
“Contest at Kasawari: Another Malaysian Gas Project Faces Pressure,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, July 7, 2021,
accessed November 23, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/contest-at-kasawari-another-malaysian-gas-project-faces-pressure/
15
Ani, “Chinese coast guard vessels harass Malaysian oil, gas development work off Sarawak: US think tank,” Economic
Times, July 11, 2021, accessed November 21, 2023. https://energy.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/oil-and-gas/chinese-coastguard-vessels-harass-malaysian-oil-gas-development-work-off-sarawak-us-think-tank/84309999; Amanda Battersby, “Chinese
“harassment” around Malaysian offshore assets stirs tensions,” Up Stream Online, July 15, 2021, accessed November 21, 2023.
https://www.upstreamonline.com/politics/chinese-harassment-around-malaysian-offshore-assets-stirs-tensions/2-1-1039115
16
Bonny Lion, et al., described China’s grey zone tactics as “…measures that powerful countries have employed both
historically and in recent decades that are beyond normal diplomacy and other traditional approaches to statecraft but short of direct
use of military force for escalation or a conflict.” For details, see Bonny Lion, et al., A New Framework for Understanding and
Countering Gray Zone Tactics (Santa Monica: RAND Corporations, 2022), accessed November 12, 2023. https://www.rand.org/
pubs/research_briefs/RBA594-1.html
17
Ibid.

169

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

the deployment of the CCG and Chinese-flagged government vessels and their engagement
in dangerous navigational maneuvers. In employing its grey zone tactics, Beijing takes
a number of approaches. It relies on a certain escalation of tensions at sea and resorts to
military tactics aimed at compelling adversaries in the maritime domain.18 Unauthorized
marine scientific surveys were also visibly conducted by the Chinese-registered research
vessels in the area. This was encountered by Vietnam in the Vanguard Bank in late 2019,
in which the Haiyang Dizhi 8, a Chinese Geological Survey Ship, was accompanied by
a number of CCG vessels to conduct seismic surveying.19 The following year, China’s
grey zone tactics also led to a standoff between Malaysian and Chinese officials due to a
confrontation faced by a PETRONAS-contacted exploration vessel, the West Capella.20
Overall, the underlying objectives behind China’s grey zone tactics are intended to disrupt
Malaysia’s Gas Development Project around the Kasawari gas field21 and deny the country’s
entitlement to continue exploring hydrocarbon resources in the area.22
One can argue that these two-pronged strategies are intended to deny Malaysia its rights
to access and develop hydrocarbon resources and safeguard China’s claims and interests
within the nine-dash line. Beijing steadfastly declared that these offshore areas historically
belong to the country and constitute an integral component of the country’s “indisputable
sovereignty.”23
In addition to the at-sea confrontations, China’s utilization of the grey zone tactics
extended to activities beyond the sea, including encounters with the Royal Malaysian Air
Force (RMAF). Tensions above the Malaysian airspace of the Luconia Shoals area escalated
in 2021 when RMAF detected and intercepted 16 Chinese military aircraft flying in a tactical
formation near the disputed waters of the shoals.24 This instance alone does not match
Malaysia’s assertiveness in the maritime domain. After the crisis, Chinese officials clarified
that it only maintained the rights of overflight within its airspace.25 However, Malaysia’s
responses were justified, as the accumulation of assertiveness it faced in both the maritime
and airspace domains led to a conclusion of China’s growing assertiveness vis-à-vis China’s
claims in the South China Sea.
In the face of escalating Chinese aggression and harassment in Malaysia’s Kasawari
gas field, it is perplexing that the Malaysian government appears to downplay its response

170

18
Rob McLaughlin, “The Law of the Sea and PRC Gray-Zone Operations in the South China Sea,” American Journal of
International Law 116, no. 4 (2022): 821-835.
19
Carl Thayer, “Chinese coercive activities persist in one of Asia’s hottest flashpoints,” The Diplomat, November 1, 2019,
accessed November 27, 2023. https://thediplomat.com/2019/10/a-difficult-summer-in-the-south-china-sea/
20
Rozanna Latiff and A. Ananthalakshmi, “Malaysian oil exploration vessel leaves South China Sea waters after standoff,”
Reuters, May 12, 2020, accessed November 27, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-security-malaysia/malaysian-oilexploration-vessel-leaves-south-china-sea-waters-after-standoff-idUSKBN22O1M9/
21
Ian Storey, “Malaysia and the South China Sea Dispute: Policy Continuity amid Domestic Political Change,” Singapore:
ISEAS Perspective, March 20, 2020, accessed March 31, 2023. https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/ISEAS_
Perspective_2020_18.pdf
22
China has been persistent to defend its stance of claiming the nine-dash line, including rights over exploring oil and gas
reserves within those waters. Instances of Malaysia’s intentions to explore and extract those reserves have been met with fury. See,
Amy Chew, “Malaysia’s energy needs face Chinese pushback in South China Sea,” Al Jazeera, April 25, 2023, accessed November
20, 2023. https://www.aljazeera.com/economy/2023/4/25/malaysian-energy-needs-clash-with-china-claims-in-south-china-sea
23
Leszek Buszynski, “Introduction: The Development of South China Sea Dispute,” in The South China Sea Maritime
Dispute: Political, Legal and Regional Perspectives, eds. Leszek Buszynski and Do Thanh Hai (New York: Routledge, 2014), 1-10.
24
Joseph Sipalan, “Malaysia to summon Chinese envoy over ‘suspicious’ air force activity,” Reuters, June 2, 2021, accessed
November 11, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysia-says-chinese-military-planes-came-close-violatingairspace-2021-06-01/
25
Sulhi Khalid, “China denies Malaysia’s intrusion charge, says military aircraft were engaged in routine training,” The Edge
Malaysia, June 2, 2021, accessed November 11, 2023. https://theedgemalaysia.com/article/china-denies-malaysias-intrusion-chargesays-military-aircraft-were-engaged-routine-training

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

to Beijing’s maritime power projections at sea. Instead of deploying its naval warships,
Malaysia has preferred using its coast guard, the Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency
(MMEA), to respond to the aggressions committed by Chinese civilian maritime vessels.
As with any other Southeast Asian claimant state, the rationale behind Malaysia’s choice to
rely on maritime constabulary forces when dealing with CCG intrusions is rooted in strategic
considerations.26 Maritime constabulary forces are civilian fleets, and thus, the likelihood
of escalation to a full-blown crisis from their deployment is arguably lower than the use of
military forces.27
Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategies are arguably a contradictory policy rather than
displaying a firm commitment to assert and defend its sovereignty in the maritime domain
at any cost. Despite China’s increased sea intrusions through its coast guards and maritime
constabulary forces, Malaysia has adopted what this article terms “triadic maritime diplomacy,”
involving a combination of coercive, persuasive, and co-operative maritime strategies. This
qualitative inquiry addresses two central empirical questions: How has Malaysia managed the
delicate balance between safeguarding its sovereignty at sea and maintaining close economic
ties with China? Second, what explains Malaysia’s persistent “downplaying” stance despite
the escalating intrusions around the Luconia Shoals, particularly concerning the Kasawari
gas field?
In answering both those inquiries, this research adopts qualitative research utilizing
primary data obtained from government reports, documents, and official speeches issued by
relevant Malaysian ministries and bodies between 2011 and 2023. In an attempt to triangulate
the findings, this study further utilizes secondary data from the Asia Maritime Transparency
Initiative (AMTI), media publications, and research reports related to Malaysia’s policies visà-vis the South China Sea between 2011 and 2023. This article specifically utilizes data from
AMTI as the initiative’s access to automatic identification systems (AIS) allows this study to
capture instances of Chinese intrusions into Malaysia’s waters, including the responses made
by Malaysia vis-à-vis those acts of belligerence. This research is an interpretive attempt to
better decipher Malaysia’s South China Sea strategies against China’s growing aggressions in
its EEZ areas, with its analytical framework informed by Le Mière’s conception of maritime
diplomacy. According to Le Mière, policymakers and academics can better understand
the maritime diplomatic intentions of states by categorizing their policies into three parts:
coercive, co-operative, and persuasive maritime diplomacy. Through this categorization, this
study can provide an alternative interpretation of contemporary Malaysian diplomatic actions
in the maritime domain.
2. Maritime Diplomatic Strategies in Grey-Zone Jurisdictions: A Literature Review
Extensive literature exists on understanding Malaysia’s South China Sea policy and strategy.
An opinion that unites the different traits in comprehending Malaysia’s responses to the
disputes within its sovereign waters is that Malaysia is, without a doubt, attempting to secure
26
Prashanth, Managing the Rise of Southeast Asia’s Coast Guards (Washington, DC: Wilson Center, 2019), accessed 21
February 2023. https://www.wilsoncenter.org/publication/managing-the-rise-southeast-asias-coast-guards
27
There is a growing number of studies focusing on the maritime diplomatic use of maritime constabulary forces in grey zone
areas. The scope of analysis is currently focused within the context of Southeast Asian states. See, Putra, “The Golden Age of White
Hulls: Deciphering the Philippines’ Maritime Diplomatic Strategies in the South China Sea,” Social Sciences 12, no. 6 (2023): 1-14;
Putra “The rise of paragunboat diplomacy as a maritime diplomatic instrument: Indonesia’s constabulary forces and tensions in the
North Natuna Seas,” Asian Journal of Political Sciences 31, no. 2 (2023): 106-124; Putra, “Rise of Constabulary Maritime Agencies
in Southeast Asia: Vietnam’s Paragunboat Diplomacy in the North Natuna Seas,” Social Sciences 12, no. 4 (2023): 1-15.

171

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

its rightful resources within its borders. Nevertheless, the distinction among studies relates
to what driving factors influence Malaysia’s South China Sea policies and how Malaysia has
responded to the emerging crisis.
Part of the literature discusses systemic and domestic factors influencing Malaysia’s foreign
policy decisions in the South China Sea. Lai and Kuik, for example, contend that Malaysia’s
hedging policies, which show a certain level of defiance and open accommodation, could
be understood by structural factors underpinning their decision.28 Similar to the conclusions
reached by Lai and Kuik, Noor and Qistina further inquired into the role of structural factors
and found that Malaysia’s traditional independent stance in response to the great power
rivalries in the Asia-Pacific is a primary contributor to Malaysia’s mixed engagement with
the U.S. and China.29 Contrary to most studies evaluating structural factors, Ngeow argues
that Malaysia’s South China Sea policy could be better comprehended by understanding the
domestic policy decision-making process and examining the dynamics at play.30
An equally important inquiry into Malaysia’s South China Sea policies is how
Malaysia responds to any crises within its maritime domain. Generally, there is a consensus
that Malaysia adopts a conservative stance in its sea confrontations.31 However, some have
argued that Malaysia has gradually signaled assertiveness toward China’s aggressions.32
Noor concluded that the Malaysian government is beginning to respond strongly to China’s
claims within Malaysia’s EEZ, primarily due to the untapped energy resources falling under
Malaysia’s maritime jurisdictions.33 Despite the tensions Malaysian policymakers face vis-àvis China’s uncertain rise in the region, studies have not been able to conclude that Malaysia
perceives China as a source of threat. Syailendra’s recent article argues that Malaysia does
not adopt a threat perception towards itself, with the intention of deterring possibilities of
a crisis.34 In making sense of this, consultation with Milner’s studies on Malaysian foreign
policy indicates that Malaysian foreign policymakers perceive the world from a non-Western
international relations perspective, which leads it to not take decisive action in the face of
what may be a clear threat for Western policymakers.35
Existing studies suggest Malaysia takes its South China Sea claims seriously. Despite
taking a relatively reserved approach compared to other claimant states, such as the
Philippines and Vietnam, Malaysia is wary about the untapped gas resources below the

172

28
Yew Meng Lai and Cheng-Chwee Kuik, “Structural sources of Malaysia’s South China Sea policy: power uncertainties and
small-state hedging,” Australian Journal of International Affairs 75, no. 3 (2020): 672-693.
29
Elina Noor and T. N. Qistina, “Great Power Rivalries, Domestic Politics and Malaysian Foreign Policy,” Asian Security 13,
no. 3 (2017): 200-219.
30
Chow-Bing Ngeow, “Malaysia’s China Policy and the South China Sea Dispute Under the Najib Administration (20092018): A Domestic Policy Process Approach,” Asian Politics & Policy 11, no. 4 (2019): 586-605.
31
Storey, “Malaysia and the South China Sea Dispute”; Chew, “Malaysia’s energy needs face Chinese pushback”; Emirza Adi
Syailendra, “The Sense and Sensibility of Malaysia’s Approach to its Maritime Boundary Disputes,” Asia Maritime Transparency
Initiative, November 21, 2022. https://amti.csis.org/the-sense-and-sensibility-of-malaysias-approach-to-its-maritime-boundarydisputes/
32
Ahmad and Sani, “China’s Assertiveness Posture”; Parameswaran, Playing It Safe; Adam Leong Kok Wey, “A small state’s
foreign affairs strategy: Making sense of Malaysia’s strategic response to the South China Sea debacle,” Comparative Strategy 36,
no. 5 (2017): 392-399.
33
Elina Noor, “The South China Sea Dispute: Options for Malaysia,” in The South China Sea Dispute: Navigating Diplomatic
and Strategic Tensions, ed., Ian Storey and Cheng-Yi Lin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 205-227.
34
Syailendra, “Why Don’t Malaysian Policymakers View China as a Threat?” The Diplomat, February 24, 2023, accessed
November 29, 2023, https://thediplomat.com/2023/02/why-dont-malaysian-policymakers-view-china-as-a-threat/
35
Anthony Milner and Siti Munirah Kasim, “Beyond Sovereignty: Non-Western International Relations in Malaysia’s Foreign
Relations,” Contemporary Southeast Asia 40, no. 3 (2018): 371-396; Anthony Milner, “‘Sovereignty’ and Normative Integration in
the South China Sea: Some Malaysian and Malay Perspectives,” in Southeast Asia and China, eds. Lowell Dittmer and Ngeow Chow
Bing (Singapore: World Scientific, 2017): 229-246.

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

disputed waters. Nevertheless, three significant gaps exist in the discourse of Malaysia’s
policies in the South China Sea. Firstly, there is currently no study that evaluates Malaysia’s
diplomatic strategies vis-à-vis the growing assertive maneuvers of China in the overlapping
EEZ between Malaysia and China, particularly in the Kasawari gas field. Secondly, existing
studies have overlooked the possible nexus between the vast gas reserves that Malaysia could
exploit and the changes in its approach to maritime diplomatic strategies. Thirdly, there is a
lack of empirical studies that examine how tensions in grey jurisdictional zones are addressed
through maritime diplomatic strategies.
This article argues that the deficiencies in the existing literature can be covered by an
inquiry into Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategies in the South China Sea disputes. By
adopting Le Mière’s conception of maritime diplomacy, this article will classify maritime
diplomatic actions into coercive, persuasive, and co-operative maritime diplomacy. Through
this classification, we can better understand Malaysia’s implemented maritime diplomatic
strategies and why the country adopts contradictory policies to manage tensions arising from
the South China Sea crisis, particularly in response to China’s aggressive behaviour in the
Kasawari gas field. In simple terms, maritime diplomacy involves managing international
relations through the maritime domain.36
Traditionally, the dominant discourse of maritime diplomacy focused on the use of hard
power assets, primary state navies, to compel and deter adversaries.37 While the literature has
evolved to include maritime constabulary forces such as coast guards and maritime security
agencies, navies remain paramount stakeholders when compared to other maritime agencies.
As argued by past scholars such as Mahan and Cable, navies have the capacity to conduct
gunboat diplomacy,38 enabling them to exert influence and uphold a state’s sovereignty at sea.
Navies indeed have well-defined diplomatic roles that can help their own state achieve
various goals. Luttwak, for example, argues that navies could serve crucial maritime
diplomatic functions, particularly for executing operations related to political goals.39 The
idea forms the basis of Le Mière’s approach in 2014, conceptualizing maritime diplomacy
into three distinct categories: coercive, persuasive, and co-operative.40 The discussions of
employing hard power assets for diplomatic purposes fall under Le Mière’s categorization of
“coercive maritime diplomacy.” He argues that states choose different maritime diplomatic
strategies based on their specific diplomatic objectives.41
In the following sections, this article argues that Malaysia employs a combination
of Le Mière’s maritime diplomacy categories. In the context of Malaysia’s claims in the
South China Sea, this blend of coercive, persuasive, and co-operative maritime diplomacy
is termed “triadic maritime diplomacy” in this article. This study is the first to propose the
existence of this trilateral form of maritime diplomacy, and it will provide explanations for
why states employ diplomatic strategies and, hence, their adoption of contradictory policies.
Moreover, this article explores how these diplomatic approaches are implemented in greyzone jurisdictional areas, such as the waters surrounding the Luconia Shoals.
Christian Le Mière, Maritime Diplomacy in the 21st Century: Drivers and Challenges (New York: Routledge, 2014): 7.
Geoffrey Till, Seapower: A Guide for the Twenty-First Century (New York: Routledge, 2018); Bob Davidson, “Modern
Naval Diplomacy: A Practitioner’s View,” Journal of Military and Strategic Studies 11, no. 1-2 (2009): 1-47.
38
James Cable, Gunboat Diplomacy 1919-1991: Political Applications of Limited Naval Force (London: Palgrave Macmillan,
1994); Alfred Thayer Mahan, The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1660-1783 (Boston: Little Brown and Company, 1898).
39
Edward Luttwak, The Political Uses of Sea Power (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1974).
40
Le Mière, Maritime Diplomacy.
41
Le Mière, “The Return of Gunboat Diplomacy,” Survival 53, no. 5 (2011): 53-68.
36

37

173

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

3. Kasawari Gas Explorations and the Amplification of Malaysia’s South China Sea
Dilemma
The focal point of contention between Malaysia and China in the South China Sea in recent
years undeniably revolves around Malaysia’s controlled Kasawari gas field near the Luconia
Shoals. It was not until 2014 that diplomatic tensions and at-sea standoffs between the
two countries escalated significantly in that area. This coincides with the intensification of
PETRONAS-operated exploration and drilling activities for natural gas.42 For Malaysia and
China, the South China Sea consists of abundant natural gas reserves, which are critical in
a time of energy scarcity. AMTI estimates that the South China Sea consists of 190 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas and 10-11 billion gas reserves.43 Consequently, for Malaysia, as
reported by the Malaysian Foreign Minister in 2021, the three trillion cubic feet of natural gas
are within Malaysia’s sea borders and have resulted in exploration by Malaysia’s state-owned
company, PETRONAS, since 2011.44
As claimed by PETRONAS, the Kasawari Gas Development Project is one of the world’s
largest offshore carbon capture and storage (CCS) projects.45 Through the exploration of
the wells of Kasawari-1 and NC8SW-1, PETRONAS discovered gas reserves offshore
of Sarawak in 2011.46 The following year, PETRONAS was determined to further the
exploration by drilling an additional 30 exploration wells, with prospects of finding oil and
gas reserves that the Malaysian people well needed.47 A decade later, the Kasawari gas field
has secured the interest of Malaysian policymakers, as it is currently in the construction
stage. In January 2020, PETRONAS conducted its first steel cut ceremony, marking the start
of its construction.48 It is expected to start commercially producing in 2023, reaching its peak
production in 2026, which is forecasted to continue until the fields reach their economic limit
in 2052.49
The development of Malaysia’s Kasawari gas field fulfills a domestic demand for gas
and oil scarcity. As seen in the past two years and reported by the Malaysian Institute of
Economic Research, fuel prices have not been manageable domestically due to the RussiaUkraine conflict.50 With Malaysia’s economy continually rising each year, demand for energy
will rise, and the Kasawari gas field will help alleviate the energy crisis. However, this does
go against Malaysia’s intentions to transition to cleaner energy. As Malaysia’s Ministry
of Economy has stated, “Malaysia is committed to low carbon development aimed at
restructuring the economic landscape to a more sustainable one.”51 This is expected through

174

42
Bing, “Malaysia-China Defence Ties: Managing Feud in the South China Sea,” RSIS Commentary, May 26, 2022. https://
www.rsis.edu.sg/rsis-publication/rsis/malaysia-china-defence-ties-managing-feud-in-the-south-china-sea/?doing_wp_cron=170116
7417.2169001102447509765625
43
“Rocks, Reefs, Submerged Shoals.”
44
Chew, “Malaysia’s energy needs.”
45
Amanda Battersby, Nishant Ugal, and Russell Searancke, “Petronas awards dual FEED contracts for world’s largest offshore
CCS project,” Upstream, February 16, 2022. https://www.upstreamonline.com/exclusive/petronas-awards-dual-feed-contracts-forworlds-largest-offshore-ccs-project/2-1-1167988
46
Alex Procyk, “Petronas discovers gas offshore Sarawak,” The Borneo Post, December 7, 2023, accessed November 28,
2023. https://www.theborneopost.com/2012/02/14/petronas-discovers-gas-offshore-sarawak-2/
47
Ibid.
48
“Kasawari Gas Development Project.”
49
“Oil & gas field profile: Kasawari Conventional Gas Field, Malaysia,” Offshore Technology, updated February 17, 2024,
accessed 28 November 2023, https://www.offshore-technology.com/data-insights/oil-gas-field-profile-kasawari-conventional-gasfield-malaysia/?cf-view
50
“Analyst Cautions Malaysians to Brace Against Energy Crisis,” Malaysian Institute of Economic Research, June 13, 2022,
accessed November 15, 2023, https://mier.org.my/analyst-cautions-malaysians-to-brace-against-energy-crisis-energy-watch/
51
Malaysian Ministry of Economy, National Energy Transition Roadmap: Energising the Nation, Powering Our Future

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

an energy transition to renewable energy, bioenergy, hydrogen, and other forms supporting
Malaysia’s energy transition intentions. Nevertheless, Malaysia is seen to defend the current
construction taking place in the Luconia Shoals, indicating the importance of conventional
energy sources.
As mentioned earlier, the intensification of oil and gas explorations within Malaysia’s
Kasawari gas field has triggered aggressive responses from China. Beijing perceives this gas
field as an integral part of its southernmost territory within the nine-dash line.52 Hence, it was
inevitable that the rapid development of this gas field prompted Beijing to dispatch its coast
guard and maritime militia vessels to the vicinity to harass and interrupt the operations there.
Table 1 shows the activities and years of incidents related to China’s assertive actions around
the vicinity of the Kasawari gas field, which comprises the China Coast Guard patrols around
the Luconia Shoals.
Table 1: China Coast Guard Patrols in the Luconia Shoals, the South China Sea (2022)

Source: Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative 202253
(Putrajaya: Ministry of Economy, 2023), accessed 26 November 2023. https://www.ekonomi.gov.my/sites/default/files/202309/
National%20Energy%20Transition%20Roadmap_0.pdf
52
Chew, “Malaysia energy needs.”
53
“Flooding the Zone: China Coast Guard Patrols in 2022,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, January 30, 2023, accessed
November 27, 2023, https://amti.csis.org/flooding-the-zone-china-coast-guard-patrols-in-2022/

175

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

An alarming trend that demands attention by the Malaysian authorities pertains to China’s
increased adoption of a grey zone strategy, including the deployment of maritime constabulary
forces encroaching into Malaysia’s EEZ areas in the South China Sea. The Malaysian
authorities reported 89 instances of Chinese intrusions into Malaysian waters between 2016
and 2019, all of which involved naval and coast guard vessels.54 These strategic moves have
raised concerns among Malaysian officials, as these Chinese vessels would prolong their
operation within Malaysia’s EEZ waters until Malaysian navy vessels arrived at the scene.55 It
is imperative to recognize that China’s assertive actions should not be regarded as an isolated
incident. Numerous Southeast Asian countries, whether claimants or not, have encountered
a similar surge of incidents involving Chinese naval and coast guard vessels operating in the
disputed waters without authorization.56 As China intensified its assertive activities involving
large-scale land reclamation and militarization on its occupied maritime features in the South
China Sea, instances of Chinese vessels establishing a presence using both civilian and
military maritime constabulary forces witnessed a notable increase, particularly within its
declared nine-dash line.57
Since the beginning of Malaysia’s Kasawari gas exploration and development, CCG
and maritime militia vessels were ordered by Beijing to navigate around Malaysia’s gas
exploration and drilling site, deliberately choosing sea routes to emphasize China’s active
presence and provoke Malaysian officials.58 As shown in Figure 3 below, in July 2021, CCG
vessel 5403 traveled in close proximity to Malaysia’s Sapura 2000 and Sapura 3000 dredgers
in the Kasawari gas field. An interesting observation during this crisis was the presence of
Malaysia’s navy vessel, Bunga Mas Lima, near these maneuvers.

176

54
Imam Muttaqin Yusof and Nisha David, “Malaysian, Japanese coast guard hold South China Sea security drill,”
Radio Free Asia, January 13, 2023, accessed November 10, 2023. https://www.rfa.org/english/news/southchinasea/
malaysiajapandrills-01132023133204.html
55
In multiple cases of China Coast Guard patrols in the Luconia Shoals between 2019 and 2023, the CCG would maintain a
prolonged position in Malaysian waters. Due to its close proximity to Malaysia’s territorial sea, the RMN has been deployed to tail
CCGs in those instances, as China’s operations have disrupted the work taking place in the Kasawari gas field. See, “Still on the
Beat: China Coast Guard Patrols in 2020,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, December 4, 2020, accessed November 10, 2023.
https://amti.csis.org/still-on-the-beat-china-coast-guard-patrols-in-2020/; “Flooding the Zone.”
56
See Putra, “The Golden Age of White Hulls,” 1-14; Putra, “The rise of paragunboat diplomacy” 106-124; Putra, “Rise of
Constabulary Maritime Agencies,” 1-15.
57
Yang Fang, “Coast guard competition could cause conflict in the South China Sea,” East Asia Forum, October 27, 2018,
accessed November 28, 2023. https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2018/10/27/coast-guard-competition-could-cause-conflict-in-thesouth-china-sea/
58
See, “Contest at Kasawari”; “Perilous Prospects: Tensions Flare at Malaysian, Vietnamese Oil and Gas Fields,” Asia
Maritime Transparency Initiative, March 30, 2023, accessed March 30 2023. https://amti.csis.org/perilous-prospects-tensions-flareat-malaysian-vietnamese-oil-and-gas-fields/; “China and Malaysia in Another Staredown Over Offshore Drilling,” Asia Maritime
Transparency Initiative, November 25, 2020, accessed March 30, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/china-and-malaysia-in-anotherstaredown-over-offshore-drilling/

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

Figure 3. CCG 5303 Maneuvers July 5, 2021
Source: Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative59

It is noteworthy that both Malaysia and China have occasionally found themselves in
maritime standoffs, albeit short of direct military skirmishes. These at-sea confrontations
have frequently involved the CCG and the Royal Malaysian Navy (RMN) as both parties
vie to exercise control over the disputed areas. Take, for example, a year prior to the crisis
involving the Sapura 2000 and Sapura 3000 Malaysian dredgers, which was the standoff
between Malaysian and Chinese vessels involving the West Capella, a drillship contracted by
PETRONAS. The West Capella, having operated in the ND4 (see Figure 4), faced high-risk
intimidation due to the near-constant presence of the CCG 5203 and 5305, which aimed to
disrupt the oil and gas operations in the Luconia Shoals.60 Consequently, similar to Malaysia’s
past stance in responding to crises at sea, Malaysian officials deployed the KD Jebat to guard
the West Capella and other supply ships at sea.

See, “Contest at Kasawari.”
“Malaysia Picks a Three-Way Fight in the South China Sea,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, February 21, 2020,
accessed November 29, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/malaysia-picks-a-three-way-fight-in-the-south-china-sea/
59
60

177

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

Figure 4. Tensions involving the West Capella in 2020
Source: Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative61

More recently, AIS data in 2023 revealed that China assigned its CCG 5901 vessel to
operate closer to Kasawari, starting from a distance of 7 nautical miles in the second week of
February and decreasing to 1.5 nautical miles the following week.62 (AMTI 2023c). Because
CCG 5901 had been operating in the vicinity of Malaysia’s Kasawari Gas Development
Project for an extended period, the RMN once again had to intervene until the CCG abandoned
its position.63
Malaysia’s responses have been consistent in the face of the crisis caused by China’s
assertive maneuvers at sea. Through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA), the Malaysian
government publicly and consistently emphasizes its commitment to defending the nation’s
sovereignty in the South China Sea, even amidst the evolving tensions with China.64 The
defence of the country’s sovereign rights in these disputed waters has been entrusted to its
primary forces, which include the Royal Malaysian Air Force (RMAF), the Royal Malaysian
Navy (RMN), and the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency (MMEA). Collectively,
these entities play a pivotal role in the conduct of surveillance and patrols within Malaysia’s
vast EEZ areas. This includes tailing and responding to CCG patrols that have oftentimes
included the deliberate positioning of vessels within Malaysia’s sovereign borders.
Although both Chinese coast guards and maritime militia vessels, in addition to the
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Navy, have increasingly encroached upon Malaysia’s EEZ
in recent years, the Malaysian government is more inclined to mitigate any arising tensions,
restraining itself from openly condemning China’s actions. As observed by Storey, Malaysia’s
deliberate diplomatic approach was particularly evident during Najib Razak’s tenure from
2009 to 2018, when Malaysia’s participation in the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) led to the
tendency to downplay Chinese intrusions into Malaysian waters.65 During this time, Malaysia
also adopted the position that intrusions by CCG vessels were not a serious concern as long
Ibid.
See, “Perilous Prospects.”
Ibid.
64
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Malasia, “Malaysia’s Position on the South China Sea,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs Malaysia,
April 8, 2023, accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.kln.gov.my/web/guest/-/malaysia-s-position-on-the-south-china-sea
65
Storey, “Malaysia and the South China Sea.”
61
62
63

178

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

as they did not involve the PLA Navy.66
Nevertheless, the prevailing perception of Malaysia’s seemingly measured and
subdued position in response to China’s assertiveness in the South China Sea disputes can
be challenged. A notable transformation in Malaysia’s foreign policy orientation has taken
shape in recent years, driven by the substantial socio-economic significance of the Kasawari
Gas Development Project to Malaysia and the escalating aggression of China in the vicinity.
Recent tensions in these areas have intensified Malaysia’s dilemma in the South China Sea.
Traditionally, the country has been willing to defend its sovereignty at sea but has refrained
from taking decisive action due to the importance of China as Malaysia’s leading trading
partner.67 Malaysia’s active development over Kasawari and its determination to safeguard
development projects through its naval forces present an empirical puzzle. As Malaysia
naturally downplays the South China Sea issue and avoids coercive measures to defend its
claims, the significance of gas explorations for the country’s socio-economic growth has
shifted its South China Sea stance.
A surprising development transpired during Anwar Ibrahim’s first official visit to China
in March 2023. Notwithstanding the strong economic relations between Malaysia and China,
Chinese officials expressed their concerns about PETRONAS’ gas development operations
within China’s alleged nine-dash line.68 Anwar Ibrahim had to reassure China that the
operations were conducted well within Malaysia’s EEZ69 but still expressed a willingness
to negotiate with China.70 From the outset, Malaysia’s current position is that while it is
willing to downplay its claims in the South China Sea, the country is unwilling to downplay
the importance of the Kasawari gas field for Malaysia. The oil and gas industry contributes
significantly, accounting for 20% of Malaysia’s GDP.71
The following section will further attempt to expound on this emerging empirical puzzle
in Malaysia’s contemporary South China Sea claims and postures. It employs Le Mière’s
conception of coercive, persuasive, and co-operative maritime diplomacy and the emergence
of paragunboat diplomacy to better understand Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategies. As
stated earlier, this strategy is termed “triadic maritime diplomacy.”
4. Malaysia’s Practices of “Triadic Maritime Diplomacy”
Malaysia’s distinctive approach to maritime diplomacy engagements in addressing China’s
growing assertiveness within its maritime jurisdictional waters, the South China Sea, is termed
66
A. Ananthalakshmi, “Malaysia says it will protect its rights in the South China Sea,” Reuters, April 8, 2023, accessed March
10, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysia-says-it-will-protect-its-rights-south-china-sea-2023-04-08/
67
The Chinese Ambassador to Malaysia, Ouyang Yujing, stated that China has been Malaysia’s largest trading partner for
14 consecutive years. See, “Malaysia-China bilateral trade hit record US$203.6b in 2022, says Chinese ambassador,” Malaysian
Investment Development Authority, February 17, 2023, accessed November 30, 2023, https://www.mida.gov.my/mida-news/
malaysia-china-bilateral-trade-hit-record-us203-6b-in-2022-says-chinese-ambassador/
68
Chew, “Malaysia’s energy needs.”
69
Rao Aimin, “Malaysia ready to negotiate with China on South China Sea: Anwar,” The Jakarta Post, April 3, 2023, accessed
November 30, 2023. https://www.thejakartapost.com/world/2023/04/03/malaysia-ready-to-negotiate-with-china-on-south-chinasea-anwar.html
70
Anwar’s statement was interpreted by Malaysia’s main opposition party as recognizing the presence of China’s sovereignty
in the South China Sea. The Bersatu Party, which head the Perikatan coalition, expressed their concerns, claiming that Anwar’s
statement was irresponsible and undermines Malaysia’s sovereignty. See, Ili Shazwani, “Malaysian opposition slams PM for
‘reckless’ South China Sea statement to Beijing,” Benar News, April 7, 2023, accessed November 28, 2023. https://www.benarnews.
org/english/news/malaysian/muhyiddin-slams-anwar-south-china-sea-04072023133207.html
71
Amy Chew, “Malaysia must shift from ‘jungle warfare’ to keep eye on Chinese boats in South China Sea, militants, as
maritime threats rise,” South China Morning Post, January 24, 2022, accessed February 12, 2023. https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/
politics/article/3164457/malaysia-must-shift-jungle-warfare-keep-eye-chinese-boats

179

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

in this article as “triadic maritime diplomacy.” Le Mière argued that maritime diplomacy is
defined simply as the utilization of the maritime domain to manage international relations,
which can take the three following distinct forms: coercive maritime diplomacy entails the
use of force or threat to compel adversaries; persuasive maritime diplomacy includes an act
of “showing the flag,” an attempt to showcase a state’s maritime power and capability;72 and
lastly, co-operative maritime diplomacy employs maritime assets as a form of soft power
to manage international relations peacefully. This article argues that Malaysia’s maritime
diplomatic strategy combines elements of coercion, persuasion, and cooperation.
Within Malaysia’s maritime diplomacy framework, the paramount emphasis is
directed to the multiple facets of maritime affairs, intertwining elements of commerce and
the military within Malaysia’s territorial waters.73 Particularly relevant to the South China
Sea disputes is the expanding spectre of state-driven threats embraced by the claimants and
non-claimants, exerting influence that could destabilize Malaysia’s maritime initiatives and
practices of security at sea. In operationalizing this maritime security framework, the main
entity responsible is the RMN, one of the military branches tasked to safeguard Malaysia’s
sovereignty in the South China Sea. Meanwhile, since 2004, the MMEA has been legislatively
designated as the principal federal agency responsible for ensuring the safety and security of
the country’s maritime jurisdictional zones.74
Consequently, delving into the nuances of Malaysia’s international interactions in the
context of the maritime domain necessitates a rigorous examination of the actions and
policies practiced by the RMN and MMEA. Both of these law enforcement organizations,
in conjunction with state-owned vessels, collectively play a pivotal role in ensuring the
uninterrupted progress of the Kasawari gas development initiatives. The deployment and
operation of state navies, recognized as an essential component of a state’s diplomatic arsenal
in maritime affairs, constitute fundamental aspects of Malaysia’s maritime diplomacy.
Moreover, it is worthwhile to recognize the importance of the paramilitary functions of
MMEA, with its civilian orientation and its primary focus as a maritime constabulary force
in this semi-enclosed sea.
The Malaysian navy has consistently played a paramount role in Malaysia’s responses
to Chinese intrusions. Previous literature has referred to the use of navies to coerce and
compel adversaries as “gunboat diplomacy,” which is now more commonly termed “coercive
diplomacy” to encompass non-state actors within the scope of analysis.75 Malaysia’s coercive
diplomacy is predominantly driven by political objectives. Instead of manifesting into actual
statements, this diplomacy is generally assessed through actions at sea. As evidenced by the
cases observed in Figures 2, 3, and 4, Malaysian naval forces have emerged as the primary
tool for showcasing Malaysia’s unwavering commitment to the non-negotiable sovereignty
of its territory.76 Moreover, the navy serves as a means to compel CCG vessels to vacate the
Le Mière, Maritime Diplomacy.
Tharishini Krishnan, “Malaysia’s Conceptualization of Maritime Security,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative,
November 22, 2021, accessed January 21, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/malaysias-conceptualization-of-maritime-security/
74
The MMEA was established in 2004 under the Maritime Enforcement Agency Act of 2004 (Act 663), initially placed under
the Prime Minister’s Department. The MMEA is mandated with contemporary coast guarding roles, which include maintaining law
and order at sea, marine border protection, and the conduct of search and rescue functions. See, Malaysia Maritime Enforcement
Agency, “Latar Belakang,” Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency, February 1, 2021, accessed November 28, 2023. https://www.
mmea.gov.my/eng/index.php/en/mengenai-kami-2/latar-belakang
75
Le Mière, Maritime Diplomacy.
76
S. Adie Zul, Nisha David, Dizhwar Bukhari, and Muzliza Mustafa, “Analysts: Malaysia’s Navy Drill Sends Strong Message
to South China Sea Claimants,” Radio Free Asia, August 20, 2021, accessed January 30, 2023. https://www.rfa.org/english/news/
72
73

180

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

surrounding waters of both the Luconia Shoals and the Kasawari Gas Development Project.
Le Mière argues that maritime diplomacy aims to convey messages and signals to opponents.
The Malaysian navy has been deliberately deployed to convey signals of the country’s
discontent with China’s assertive actions. Scholarly works suggest that both gunboat
diplomacy and coercive maritime diplomacy serve as foreign policy doctrines, deliberately
employing assertiveness at sea as a constructed strategy with specific political goals.77 As
demonstrated in a naval exercise in 2021,78 Malaysia signaled its assertive intent in the South
China Sea by conducting a naval drill to showcase its capabilities, particularly in response
to escalating tensions within Malaysia’s EEZ.79 The utilization of Malaysian naval forces in
response to incidents involving CCG intrusions may seem coincidental at first glance. It is
essential, however, to avoid prematurely concluding that Malaysia is pursuing a coercive
shift in its South China Sea strategies. Determining the coerciveness of maritime diplomatic
strategies is inherently linked to the geographical context in which they unfold.
These dynamics suggest that the use of Malaysian naval forces may not necessarily imply
a deliberate strategy of coercive maritime diplomacy. Instead, it could be a result of the
close proximity of the locations of James Shoal and the Luconia Shoals to the mainland of
Sarawak, necessitating the operation of naval vessels by Malaysian authorities.80 In addition,
the patrolling and surveillance capabilities of the MMEA are still limited, possibly due to its
lack of facilities, human resources, and assets.81 In essence, while it is evident that Malaysia
employs elements of coercive maritime diplomacy, deciphering the precise nature of its
political intentions is a complex challenge.
Other Southeast Asian countries tend to deploy their maritime constabulary forces rather
than navies in response to CCG intrusions and harassment in their territorial waters. Notable
instances of this approach can be observed in the context of Indonesia, which typically relies
on the Indonesian Maritime Security Agency (BAKAMLA),82 and Vietnam, which conducts
its maritime power projections through its Vietnam Fisheries Resources Surveillance (VFRS)
fleets.83 In contrast, the Philippines has a distinct pattern of employing its coast guard to
achieve maritime diplomatic objectives, as its leadership refrains from adopting a coercive
maritime diplomatic strategy in order to secure economic benefits from submitting to China’s
lucrative economic opportunities.84
Malaysia’s persuasive maritime diplomatic efforts in the South China Sea complement
its triadic maritime diplomacy. Unlike coercive diplomacy, persuasive diplomacy’s primary
aim is to demonstrate the presence and effectiveness of its maritime capabilities—a form of
the “showing the flag” policy.85 Consequently, its implementation does not intend to coerce
or deter adversaries. The jurisdictional areas where Malaysia’s navy operates cover all of
china/malaysia-drill-08202021155721.html
77
See, Till, Seapower; Davidson, “Modern Naval Diplomacy”; Cable, Gunboat Diplomacy.
78
The naval exercise “Taming Sari” lasted six days, consisted of a live launch of an anti-ship missile (through Malaysia’s navy
submarine KD Tun Razak), and the launch of guided missiles by the RMN’s KD Lekiu and KD Lekir.
79
“Analysts: Malaysia’s Navy Drill.”
80
The closest RMN port is the Kuching patrol vessel base located in Sarawak.
81
Parameswaran, “Assessing Malaysia’s Coast Guard in ASEAN Perspective,” The Diplomat, May 2, 2017, accessed February
29, 2023. https://thediplomat.com/2017/05/assessing-malaysias-coast-guard-in-asean-perspective/; Jim Dolbow, “Malaysia Coast
Guard Is One to Watch,” U.S. Naval Institute, April 2018, https://www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings/2018/april/malaysia-coastguard-one-watch
82
Putra, “The rise of paragunboat diplomacy,” 106-124.
83
Putra, “Rise of Constabulary Maritime Agencies,” 1-15.
84
Putra, “The Golden Age of White Hulls,” 1-14.
85
Le Mière, Maritime Diplomacy.

181

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

Malaysia’s maritime zones, including the territorial sea, EEZ, and the continental shelf.86
Therefore, given that most of the tensions that ensued from the CCG intrusions have occurred
in the Luconia Shoals, which is within 100 nautical miles of Malaysia’s baseline, it is expected
that Malaysia’s navy will operate and assert its presence in those surrounding waters.
Great powers frequently employ persuasive diplomacy to assert their ongoing maritime
dominance.87 However, for secondary states such as Malaysia, the strong presence of naval
forces in Malaysia’s EEZ waters poses a challenge when considering it as a mere display
of maritime capabilities. This challenge becomes particularly apparent in the context of
Malaysia’s stance towards the South China Sea, where it has embraced the tendency to
downplay many past crises and shunned interpretations of CCG intrusions as threats.88
Nevertheless, as persuasive maritime diplomacy does not require explicit deterring and
compelling intentions, Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategy incorporates elements of
persuasive maritime diplomacy, albeit with unique considerations in the context of the South
China Sea.
In an effort to balance the perceived assertive gestures at sea, Malaysia also employs
co-operative maritime diplomacy. Events falling under this category involve states sharing
political goals to achieve common goals.89 Co-operative diplomacy harnesses soft power by
utilizing hard power assets such as navies or maritime constabulary forces, taking the form
of goodwill visits, humanitarian assistance, training and joint exercises, and joint maritime
security operations.90 In the case of Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategy, a key element
has been the cultivation of influence and coalitions through joint navy exercises and drills, a
role primarily managed by the RMN and supported by the MMEA.
In 2017 and 2021, Malaysia held the Malaysia-Thailand-Indonesia (MTA) joint naval
exercise with the U.S., aiming to foster a conducive maritime diplomatic environment in
the Indo-Pacific region.91 Malaysia’s navy also collaborated with the U.S. in the ASEANU.S. Maritime Exercise in 2019, which consisted of maritime drills in the South China Sea
flashpoints.92 Additionally, Malaysia sought partnerships with neighboring nations, including
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Singapore, conducting joint naval exercises on three occasions
in 2022.93 Through these joint exercises, Malaysia’s co-operative maritime diplomacy signifies
its willingness to cooperate with other stakeholders in managing international relations at
sea. However, the ongoing regional engagement that the Malaysian navy maintains with its
See, Krishnan, “Malaysia’s Conceptualization.”
In the past, Theodore Roosevelt’s “Great White Fleet” that navigated globally between 1907 and 1909 is a clear of example
of a state’s intent in showcasing a state’s maritime-based hard power assets.
88
Storey, “Malaysia and the South China Sea Dispute.”
89
Le Mière, Maritime Diplomacy.
90
Ibid.
91
“US and RMN navies conduct bilateral exercise MTA Malaysia 2017,” Naval Technology, September 20, 2017, accessed
March 30, 2023. https://www.naval-technology.com/news/newsus-and-malaysian-navies-begin-bilateral-mta-exercise-thisyear-5929965/; “US and Malaysian navies conduct bilateral exercise ‘MTA Malaysia 2021’,” Naval Technology, November 24,
2021, accessed March 30, 2023, https://www.naval-technology.com/news/us-malaysia-exercise-mta-malaysia-2021/?cf-view
92
“First ASEAN-US Maritime Exercise Successfully Concludes,” Commander U.S 7th Fleet, September 6, 2019, accessed
February 25, 2023. https://www.c7f.navy.mil/Media/News/Display/Article/1954403/first-asean-us-maritime-exercise-successfullyconcludes/
93
“Singapore and Malaysia Navies Conclude 30th Edition of Bilateral Naval Exercise Malapura,” MINDEF Singapore,
November 14, 2022, accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.mindef.gov.sg/web/portal/mindef/news-and-events/latest-releases/
article-detail/2022/November/14nov22_nr; Kukuh S. Wibowo, “Indonesia, Malaysia Conduct Joint Military Exercise in Java Sea,”
Tempo, August 29, 2022, accessed March 30, 2023. https://en.tempo.co/read/1628179/indonesia-malaysia-conduct-joint-militaryexercise-in-java-sea; Durie Rainer Fong, “Bintulu naval base a must for Malaysia’s security in South China Sea, says Bongowan
rep.,” The Star, March 21, 2023, accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2023/03/21/bintulu-naval-basea-must-for-malaysia039s-security-in-south-china-sea-says-bongowan-rep
86
87

182

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

Southeast Asian counterparts and with the U.S. underscores Malaysia’s strong preferences
for co-operative maritime diplomatic strategies in addressing tensions in the South China
Sea.
Nonetheless, the MMEA has also actively engaged in co-operative maritime diplomatic
activities. In 2013, the Japan Coast Guard conducted maritime security drills in collaboration
with the MMEA. The joint drills held significant importance for Malaysia’s coast guard, as
it marked their first time training with long-range acoustic devices as part of a drill scenario
designed to respond to intrusion in the South China Sea.94 The MMEA serves as Malaysia’s
principal maritime law enforcer.95 However, it faces significant resource constraints,96
particularly when compared to the fleets of CCG. Consequently, Malaysia’s navy has assumed
the frontline responsibility for asserting sovereign dominance. These resource shortages
are surprising, considering that the MMEA’s vision is “to be among the best maritime law
enforcement agencies in the world.”97
There are high expectations that the MMEA will step up its role in Malaysia’s maritime
diplomacy. As seen in the case of Indonesia, maritime security agencies are taking on more
active roles in both coercive and co-operative maritime diplomacy. Indonesia’s BAKAMLA,
for instance, serves as Indonesia’s primary agency with the assigned role of deterring
CCG intrusions, offering a less escalatory alternative to using naval forces.98 The MMEA
can contribute strategically to Malaysia’s overall maritime diplomatic strategy. Maritime
constabulary forces possess greater flexibility and, being civilian and non-military in nature,
can undertake limited coercive actions to deter and compel adversaries at sea.99 Unlike navies,
whose operations can easily be perceived as escalating conflicts, maritime security agencies
are often considered acceptable actors for peacefully managing tensions.
Recent developments in Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategies reflect a preference for
a triadic approach to counter China’s assertiveness at sea, particularly in the vicinity of the
Kasawari gas field and the Luconia Shoals. Malaysia’s traditional stance in the South China
Sea involves balancing domestic demand to protect its sovereign waters while maintaining
a measured response to crises due to the importance of China in Malaysia’s development.
The seemingly contradictory stance is achieved by employing a combination of coercive,
persuasive, and co-operative maritime diplomacy to yield maximal benefits.
5. Making Sense of Malaysia’s Triadic Maritime Diplomacy Strategy in the South
China Sea
Malaysia’s approach to South China Sea-related crises differs from that of its ASEAN
counterparts. There has been a clear pattern since 2015 showing that Southeast Asian states
have increasingly invested in and emphasized the role of maritime constabulary forces and
coast guards in defending their sovereignty at sea.100 All claimant states of the South China
Yusof and David, “Malaysian, Japanese coast guard.”
Dolbow, “Malaysia Coast Guard.”
96
Chew, “Malaysia must shift.”
97
Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency, “Visi dan Misi,” Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency, accessed February 20,
2023. https://www.mmea.gov.my/eng/index.php/ms/mengenai-kami-2/visi-misi
98
Putra, “Rise of Constabulary Maritime Agencies,” 1-15.
99
Le Mière, Maritime Diplomacy.
94
95

Darwis and Bama Andika Putra, “Construing Indonesia’s Maritime Diplomatic
Strategies against Vietnam’s Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing in the North
Natuna Sea,” Asian Affairs: An American Review 49, no. 4 (2022): 172-192.
100

183

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

Sea disputes have expressed their unwavering commitment to defending their respective
claims in the disputed waters. The Philippines has taken a distinctly legal stance to its
claims.101 Meanwhile, Vietnam has adopted a strategy similar to China’s, utilizing maritime
constabulary forces to assert effective control at sea.102 In contrast, Malaysia’s maritime
diplomatic strategies aim to demonstrate moderate decisiveness while retaining the flexibility
to negotiate terms for a peaceful resolution. Nevertheless, it has been pivotal for Malaysia to
stay consistent towards its issued Defence White Paper 2019, categorizing the uncertainties of
the great power rivalry of the U.S. and China in the region and the intrusions into Malaysia’s
territory in the South China Sea as a major concern for the administration.103
To understand the trends displayed by Malaysian policymakers, we first examine China’s
economic significance as Malaysia’s leading trading partner. In this context, it is important
to consider Malaysia’s deep economic connections with the world’s most robust economy.
Statistics reveal China has remained Malaysia’s major trading partner for 14 consecutive
years, with the two-way trade reaching 203.6 billion USD in 2022.104 Chew (2021) provides
an intriguing perspective, suggesting that Malaysia views its relationship with China as
multifaceted due to its importance for Malaysia’s future socio-economic development.105 This
stance challenges the notion that the South China Sea conflict solely determines MalaysiaChina bilateral relations. For instance, the ASEAN-China Free Trade Agreement (ACFTA),
signed in 2002, played a major role in establishing stronger trade ties due to eliminating
tariffs on goods and service trades.106
In the context of investment, a similar trend is observed in China’s economic importance
to Malaysia. China has held the position of Malaysia’s leading investor since 2016. This
aligns with Malaysia’s goal of advancing infrastructural development, complemented by
opportunities generated from BRI investments. Notable Chinese investments in Malaysia
include projects like the East Coast Rail Link (ECRL), connecting the East and West Coasts of
Peninsular Malaysia,107 and the 2021 construction of the Batang Saribas Bridge.108 Prominent
Chinese companies, including LONGi Solar Technology, Huawei Technologies, and Alibaba
Group Holding, have chosen to invest in Malaysia, attracted by favorable service tariffs
facilitated by the ACFTA There is a distinct connection between Malaysia’s understated
approach to the South China Sea crisis and the investment and trade opportunities generated
by China.109
Malaysia’s adoption of triadic maritime diplomacy in the South China Sea stems from
the necessity to secure and bolster economic ties with China. Malaysia’s primary political
interest focuses on ensuring China’s continued role as Malaysia’s top trading and investment

184

101
Jay Batongbacal, “The Philippines’ Conceptualization of Maritime Security,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative,
November 4, 2021, accessed January 10, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/philippine-conceptualization-of-maritime-security/
102
“Flooding the Zone.”
103
Malaysia Ministry of Defence, “Defence White Paper 2019,” Malaysia Ministry of Defence, December 2, 2019, accessed
November 29, 2019. https://www.mod.gov.my/images/mindef/article/kpp/DWP-3rd-Edition-02112020.pdf
104
Ananthalakshmi, “Malaysia says it will protect its rights.”
105
Amy Chew, “South China Sea: why Malaysia and Indonesia differ in countering Beijing’s maritime claims,” South China
Morning Post, October 28, 2021, accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/politics/article/3153932/south-chinasea-why-malaysia-and-indonesia-differ-countering
106
“ASEAN, China announce ACFTA upgrade,” Association of Southeast Asian Nations, November 13, 2022, accessed
November 29, 2023, https://asean.org/asean-china-announce-acfta-upgrade/
107
The East Coast Rail Link commenced its construction in 2017 and is predicted to be completed in 2026. It is part of China’s
Belt Road Initiative-related funding, which would connect the West and East Coast peninsulas of Malaysia.
108
Chris Devonshire-Ellis, “2023 Investment Opportunities in Malaysia,” ASEAN Briefing, August 1, 2022, accessed January
10, 2023. https://www.aseanbriefing.com/news/2023-investment-opportunities-in-malaysia/
109
Syailendra, “The Sense and Sensibility of Malaysia’s Approach.”

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

partner, especially amidst ongoing security concerns in the South China Sea.110 Malaysia
recognizes that the crisis unfolding in the South China Sea remains under the grey zone
area, making it challenging to address it through a legal or international law-based approach.
Given the situation’s complexity, Malaysia is taking a cautious stance, avoiding action that
could provoke China.111 Instead, it adopts a minimalist approach to demonstrate flexibility in
open negotiation and capacity-building measures. By adopting coercive maritime diplomatic
tactics, Malaysia accentuates the significance of the South China Sea claims to domestic
constituencies and assures the public of its steadfastness in safeguarding the country’s
sovereignty at sea.112 Through persuasive and co-operative maritime diplomacy, Malaysia
aligns its policies with regional allies, seeking sustainable maritime security. It also signals
its commitment to defend its maritime jurisdictional waters in accordance with established
international laws. As stated by Anwar Ibrahim during a keynote address at the 36th AsiaPacific Roundtable in 2023, “…Malaysia has always advocated for peaceful and constructive
settlement of all disputes, in line with international laws’ recognized norms and principles,
including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.”113 Through these
seemingly contradictory stances, Malaysia both advances its Kasawari Gas Development
Project and conveys its friendly intentions to Beijing.
Malaysia’s maritime diplomatic strategies in the South China Sea can also be understood
through the lens of its hedging policies in its foreign policy alignment. Scholars have
extensively discussed the foreign policy alignment strategies of Malaysia and other Southeast
Asian states, commonly identifying hedging as a prevalent approach.114 Hedging involves
pursuing a non-aligned stance while exhibiting alignment-ambiguous policies to offset
the risks associated with great power alignment and maximize the potential benefits.115 In
Malaysia’s case, the U.S. has consistently held a pivotal role as its primary defence partner,
even in light of Malaysia’s robust trade and investment relations with China. For instance,
Malaysia maintains a close defence partnership with these nations despite initial concerns
about the trilateral security pact between the US, Australia, and the UK (AUKUS). This is
exemplified in the joint exercises conducted between Malaysia and the U.S., highlighting
the potential for stronger cooperation between Malaysia and the U.S. and its allies.
Simultaneously, Malaysia’s defensive bilateral relations with China have remained steadfast
since 2014. Despite differences at sea, China’s and Malaysia’s armed forces have consistently
engaged in annual bilateral exercises from 2014 to 2018.116
The foundations of this hedging policy by Malaysia are illustrated by the country’s
refusal to acknowledge the existence of a dispute with China, as evidenced by Malaysia’s

Ibid.
Cheng-Chwee Kuik, “Shades of grey: riskification and hedging in the Indo-Pacific,” The Pacific Review 36, no. 6 (2022):
1181-1214.
112
Ananthalakshmi, “Malaysia says it will protect its rights.”
113
Qistina Sallehuddin and Nuqman Adam, “PM: Malaysia stays firm in protecting sovereignty in South China Sea,” New
Strait Times, August 10, 2023, accessed November 29, 2023. https://www.nst.com.my/news/nation/2023/08/941086/pm-malaysiastays-firm-protecting-sovereignty-south-china-sea
114
David Martin Jones and Nicole Jenne, “Hedging and grand strategy in Southeast Asian foreign policy,” International
Relations of the Asia Pacific 22, no. 2 (2022): 205-235; Evelyn Goh, “Southeast Asian Strategies toward the Great Powers: Still
Hedging after All These Years?” The ASAN Forum, February 22, 2016, accessed March 30, 2023. https://theasanforum.org/southeastasian-strategies-toward-the-great-powers-still-hedging-after-all-these-years/; Kuik, “Shades of grey,” 1181-1214.
115
Jurgen Haacke, “The concept of hedging and its application to Southeast Asia: a critique for a modified conceptual and
methodological framework,” International Relations of the Asia-Pacific 19, no. 3 (2019): 375-417.
116
Bing, “Malaysia-China Defence Ties.”
110
111

185

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

note verbale exchanges between 2019 and 2020.117 This position provides Malaysia with the
flexibility it needs, as it refrains from adopting a decisive South China Sea policy that would
bind its action. Malaysia’s triadic maritime diplomacy, coupled with the non-confrontational
signals, projects an image of non-opposition to China, thereby paving the way for continued
productive bilateral relations within their multifaceted bilateral relationship.
Malaysia can push forward conflict resolution mechanisms and tension management
under ASEAN by downplaying the South China Sea disputes. Part of Malaysia’s strategy
involves maintaining a non-decisive and flexible stance for Malaysia. This can be achieved
by echoing the crucial role of ASEAN in managing tensions and potentially assisting in
conflict resolution in the South China Sea. As outlined by the Malaysian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Malaysia is committed to peaceful measures to resolve the tensions, with reference
to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).118 By advocating
for an ASEAN-based resolution, Malaysia could achieve its goal of avoiding a decisive
and assertive maritime diplomatic strategy regarding the South China Sea. ASEAN-based
solutions prioritize amity, cooperation, consensus, and co-operative values, all of which
align with Malaysia’s interests in maintaining cordial relations with China while maintaining
distinct boundaries.
Malaysia has repeatedly referred to the ASEAN’s long-negotiated Code of Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea (COC).119 Malaysia still believes there is potential to finalize
the COC as the principal legal instrument for managing tensions in the disputed waters. Its
commitment to concluding a COC and temporarily adhering to the existing Code of Conduct
Declaration showcases Malaysia’s genuine intent to downplay the South China Sea issue.
This is because the COC negotiations have remained in stalemate for two decades, making
it unlikely for a resolution to be reached in the coming years.120 By consistently endorsing
the COC and ASEAN-based resolution approaches to address the crisis, Malaysia actively
promotes diplomatic efforts to resolve tensions that threaten its sovereignty while also
recognizing that there may be no need to adopt a decisive South China Sea policy for several
years to come.
6. Conclusion
What arguably sets Malaysia apart from its Southeast Asian claimants is its distinctive foreign
policy approach when countering China’s aggression within its national jurisdictional waters.
Malaysia has chosen a strategy that aims to de-escalate emerging crises by avoiding tensions
and confrontations at sea. Even in the face of frequent intrusions by the CCG and maritime
militia vessels, Malaysia has generally downplayed the incidents. It does not perceive them
as overt provocations as long as they do not disrupt the country’s ongoing exploration and
drilling operations of hydrocarbon resources.
Nonetheless, this foreign policy orientation has shifted in recent years due to Malaysia’s
Kasawari Gas Development Project. It appears that securing hydrocarbon resources in the oil
and gas fields in the South China Sea holds paramount importance for Malaysia, regardless
of its potential to cause irritants in the country’s relations with China. This foreign policy
Syailendra, “The Sense and Sensibility of Malaysia’s Approach.”
“Malaysia’s Position on the South China Sea.”
Ibid.
120
Rahul Mishra, “Code of Conduct in the South China Sea: More Discord than Accord,” Maritime Affairs: Journal of the
National Maritime Foundation of India 13, no. 2 (2017): 62-75.
117
118
119

186

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...

priority has garnered strong support from local political elites and government officials, with
many of them perceiving this as the way forward for ensuring the country’s energy security
for decades ahead.
Despite the fact that the Malaysian government has often maintained a low-key rhetoric in
dealing with China’s aggressions, incidents of intrusions and assertive actions in Malaysia’s
EEZ areas by China’s coast guard, government agencies, and maritime militia ships have
increasingly become the norm. These situations have compelled Malaysian policymakers
to adopt an assertive stance in response to these incidents. Consequently, Malaysia has
introduced a more proactive naval presence within its EEZ waters to safeguard its sovereign
rights while still pursuing a diplomatic path, seeking negotiation, and refraining from
escalating tensions. This article investigates this intriguing development by probing how
Malaysia manages these seemingly contradictory policies, thereby shedding light on the
country’s current stance regarding the South China Sea, especially after the first discovery of
the lucrative gas reserves in the Kasawari gas field in 2011.
First, this article contends that the dynamics of Malaysia’s response to the South China
Sea conflict have undergone a significant transformation. This shift is primarily attributed to
Malaysia’s accelerated efforts in advancing the Kasawari Gas Development Project, which
has drawn Beijing’s attention and retaliation. Consequently, China’s assertive responses via
CCG and maritime militia vessels have escalated in recent years. Several cases reported by
the AMTI provide evidence of a steady rise of Chinese aggression at sea, particularly near the
contested Luconia Shoals. China’s confrontational approach has also influenced Malaysia’s
perspective on geopolitical tensions, leading to a modified approach and strategy for adapting
to emerging crises.
Consequently, this article identifies a contradictory policy in Malaysia’s response to
the South China Sea crisis. On the one hand, it seeks to appease its domestic constituents
and uphold traditional maritime security principles in its South China Sea claims by
deploying hard-power maritime assets, like the navy, for patrolling functions. On the other
hand, Malaysia continues to downplay the crisis, demonstrating a willingness to engage in
negotiations and deny the existence of a territorial dispute between Malaysia and China.
Second, this study draws on Le Mière’s concept of maritime diplomacy to argue that
Malaysia employs a combination of coercive, persuasive, and co-operative maritime
diplomatic strategies, which are collectively termed “triadic maritime diplomacy.” Coercive
maritime diplomatic strategies are exemplified by Malaysia’s ongoing use of its hard-power
assets, such as the navy, to compel and deter adversaries at sea. Malaysia’s persuasive maritime
diplomatic strategy is evident through its naval forces’ active and compelling presence in the
contiguous zones. Lastly, its co-operative maritime diplomacy signals Malaysia’s willingness
to collaborate and align interests to enhance maritime security, as demonstrated through joint
naval exercises and maritime security agency drills with partner nations. Malaysia’s maritime
diplomatic strategies empowered them to selectively downplay the South China Sea dispute
in certain scenarios while adopting a resolute posture in others.
Thirdly, this article posits that this seemingly contradictory policy serves a dual purpose of
accommodating future economic opportunities involving China and signalling non-alignment
with major global powers. China stands as Malaysia’s foremost trading partner and leading
investor. By employing diverse maritime diplomatic strategies, Malaysia avoids the need
for hasty conflict resolution, thereby enabling the continuation of trade relations between

187

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

the two countries. Additionally, Malaysia’s non-aligned stance is maintained when engaging
with Western nations in most of its defence relations, while also balancing its economic and
relatively limited defence relations with China. Ultimately, Malaysia’s consistent rhetoric
in support of ASEAN-based mechanisms, i.e. the Code of Conduct, allows it to sustain a
contradictory policy vis-à-vis China in the South China Sea dispute.
This article supports those assumptions in connection to existing studies that interpret
Malaysia’s foreign policies vis-à-vis China as hedging. Hedging can take many different
forms, and this article shows that certain maritime diplomatic policies, such as those engaged
by Malaysia in the Kasawari gas fields, are also forms of hedging. The main argument held
by hedging scholars is that states adopt contradictory policies to offset the risks of alignment.
The triadic maritime diplomacy of Malaysia also consists of a decisive policy to counter seabased intrusions into Malaysian territory, coupled with actions and rhetoric that downplay the
crisis due to the need of Kuala Lumpur to secure China’s lucrative economic opportunities.
Bibliography
Ahmad, Mohammad Zaki, and Mohd Azizuddin Mohd Sani. “China’s Assertiveness Posture in Reinforcing its
Territorial and Sovereignty Claims in the South China Sea: An Insight into Malaysia’s Stance.” Japanese
Journal of Political Science 18, no. 1 (2017): 67-105.
Aimin, Rao. “Malaysia ready to negotiate with China on South China Sea: Anwar.” The Jakarta Post. April 3, 2023.
Accessed November 30, 2023. https://www.thejakartapost.com/world/2023/04/03/malaysia-ready-to-negotiatewith-china-on-south-china-sea-anwar.html
“Analyst Cautions Malaysians to Brace Against Energy Crisis.” Malaysian Institute of Economic Research. June 13,
2022. Accessed November 15, 2023. https://mier.org.my/analyst-cautions-malaysians-to-brace-against-energycrisis-energy-watch/
Ananthalakshmi, A. “Malaysia says it will protect its rights in the South China Sea.” Reuters. April 8, 2023.
Accessed March 10, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysia-says-it-will-protect-its-rightssouth-china-sea-2023-04-08/
Ani. “Chinese coast guard vessels harass Malaysian oil, gas development work off Sarawak: US think tank.”
Economic Times. July 11, 2021. Accessed November 21, 2023. https://energy.economictimes.indiatimes.com/
news/oil-and-gas/chinese-coast-guard-vessels-harass-malaysian-oil-gas-development-work-off-sarawak-usthink-tank/84309999
“ASEAN, China announce ACFTA upgrade.” Association of Southeast Asian Nations. November 13, 2022. Accessed
November 29, 2023, https://asean.org/asean-china-announce-acfta-upgrade/
Batongbacal, Jay. “The Philippines’ Conceptualization of Maritime Security.” Asia Maritime Transparency
Initiative. November 4, 2021. Accessed January 10, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/philippine-conceptualizationof-maritime-security/
Battersby, Amanda, Nishant Ugal, and Russell Searancke. “Petronas awards dual FEED contracts for world’s
largest offshore CCS project.” Upstream. February 16, 2022. Accessed date March 30, 2023. https://www.
upstreamonline.com/exclusive/petronas-awards-dual-feed-contracts-for-worlds-largest-offshore-ccsproject/2-1-1167988
Battersby, Amanda. “Chinese “harassment” around Malaysian offshore assets stirs tensions.” Up Stream Online.
July 15, 2021. accessed November 21, 2023. https://www.upstreamonline.com/politics/chinese-harassmentaround-malaysian-offshore-assets-stirs-tensions/2-1-1039115
Bing, Ngeow Chow. “Malaysia-China Defense Ties: Managing Feud in the South China Sea.” RSIS Commentary,
May 26, 2022. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.rsis.edu.sg/rsis-publication/rsis/malaysia-china-defenceties-managing-feud-in-the-south-china-sea/?doing_wp_cron=1701167417.2169001102447509765625
Boon, Hoo Tiang. “Hardening the Hard, Softening the Soft: Assertiveness and China’s Regional Strategy.” Journal
of Strategic Studies 40, no. 5 (2016): 639-662.
Buszynski, Leszek. “Introduction: The Development of South China Sea Dispute.” In The South China Sea Maritime
Dispute: Political, Legal and Regional Perspectives, edited by Leszek Buszynski and Do Thanh Hai, 1-10. New
York: Routledge, 2014.
Cable, James. Gunboat Diplomacy 1919-1991: Political Applications of Limited Naval Force. London: Palgrave
Macmillan, 1994.
Chew, Amy. “Malaysia must shift from ‘jungle warfare’ to keep eye on Chinese boats in South China Sea, militants,

188

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...
as maritime threats rise.” South China Morning Post. January 24, 2022. Accessed February 12, 2023. https://
www.scmp.com/week-asia/politics/article/3164457/malaysia-must-shift-jungle-warfare-keep-eye-chineseboats
——. “Malaysia’s energy needs face Chinese pushback in South China Sea.” Al Jazeera. April 25, 2023. Accessed
November 20, 2023. https://www.aljazeera.com/economy/2023/4/25/malaysian-energy-needs-clash-withchina-claims-in-south-china-sea
——. “South China Sea: why Malaysia and Indonesia differ in countering Beijing’s maritime claims.” South
China Morning Post. October 28, 2021. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/politics/
article/3153932/south-china-sea-why-malaysia-and-indonesia-differ-countering
“China and Malaysia in Another Staredown Over Offshore Drilling.” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative.
November 25, 2020. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/china-and-malaysia-in-another-staredownover-offshore-drilling/
“Contest at Kasawari: Another Malaysian Gas Project Faces Pressure.” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative.
July 7, 2021. Accessed November 23, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/contest-at-kasawari-another-malaysian-gasproject-faces-pressure/
Darwis, and Bama Andika Putra. “Construing Indonesia’s Maritime Diplomatic Strategies against Vietnam’s Illegal,
Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing in the North Natuna Sea.” Asian Affairs: An American Review 49, no. 4
(2022): 172-92.
Davidson, Bob. “Modern Naval Diplomacy: A Practitioner’s View.” Journal of Military and Strategic Studies 11,
no. 1-2 (2009): 1-47.
Devonshire-Ellis, Chris. “2023 Investment Opportunities in Malaysia.” ASEAN Briefing. August 1, 2022. Accessed
January 10, 2023. https://www.aseanbriefing.com/news/2023-investment-opportunities-in-malaysia/
Dolbow, Jim. “Malaysia Coast Guard Is One to Watch.” U.S. Naval Institute. April 2018, https://www.usni.org/
magazines/proceedings/2018/april/malaysia-coast-guard-one-watch
Fang, Yang. “Coast guard competition could cause conflict in the South China Sea.” East Asia Forum. October
27, 2018. Accessed November 28, 2023. https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2018/10/27/coast-guard-competitioncould-cause-conflict-in-the-south-china-sea/
“First ASEAN-US Maritime Exercise Successfully Concludes.” Commander U.S 7th Fleet. September 6, 2019.
Accessed February 25, 2023. https://www.c7f.navy.mil/Media/News/Display/Article/1954403/first-asean-usmaritime-exercise-successfully-concludes/
“Flooding the Zone: China Coast Guard Patrols in 2022.” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. January 30, 2023.
Accessed November 27, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/flooding-the-zone-china-coast-guard-patrols-in-2022/
Fong, Durie Rainer. “Bintulu naval base a must for Malaysia’s security in South China Sea, says Bongowan rep.”
The Star. March 21, 2023. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2023/03/21/
bintulu-naval-base-a-must-for-malaysia039s-security-in-south-china-sea-says-bongowan-rep
Forbes, Vivian Louis. “Navigating Malaysia-China geopolitical relations.” Australian Naval Institute. September
10, 2017. Accessed November 25, 2023. https://navalinstitute.com.au/navigating-malaysia-china-geopoliticalrelations/
Goh, Evelyn. “Southeast Asian Strategies toward the Great Powers: Still Hedging after All These Years?” The ASAN
Forum. February 22, 2016. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://theasanforum.org/southeast-asian-strategiestoward-the-great-powers-still-hedging-after-all-these-years/
Haacke, Jurgen. “The concept of hedging and its application to Southeast Asia: a critique for a modified conceptual
and methodological framework.” International Relations of the Asia-Pacific 19, no. 3 (2019): 375-417.
Holmes, James R. “Strategic Features of the South China Sea: A Tough Neighborhood for Hegemons.” Naval War
College Review 67, no. 2 (2014): 1-23.
Jones, David Martin, and Nicole Jenne. “Hedging and grand strategy in Southeast Asian foreign policy.” International
Relations of the Asia Pacific 22, no. 2 (2022): 205-235.
“Kasawari Gas Development Project, Sarawak, Malaysia.” Offshore Technology. February 10, 2023. Accessed
November 19, 2023. https://www.offshore-technology.com/projects/kasawari-gas-development-projectsarawak/?cf-view
Khalid, Sulhi. “China denies Malaysia’s intrusion charge, says military aircraft were engaged in routine training.”
The Edge Malaysia. June 2, 2021. Accessed November 11, 2023. https://theedgemalaysia.com/article/chinadenies-malaysias-intrusion-charge-says-military-aircraft-were-engaged-routine-training
Krishnan, Tharishini. “Malaysia’s Conceptualization of Maritime Security.” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative.
November 22, 2021. Accessed January 21, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/malaysias-conceptualization-of-maritimesecurity/
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. “Shades of grey: riskification and hedging in the Indo-Pacific.” The Pacific Review 36, no. 6
(2022): 1181-1214.

189

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

Lai, Yew Meng, and Cheng-Chwee Kuik. “Structural sources of Malaysia’s South China Sea policy: power
uncertainties and small-state hedging.” Australian Journal of International Affairs 75, no. 3 (2020): 672-693.
Latiff, Rozanna, and A. Ananthalakshmi. “Malaysian oil exploration vessel leaves South China Sea waters
after standoff.” Reuters. May 12, 2020. Accessed November 27, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-china-security-malaysia/malaysian-oil-exploration-vessel-leaves-south-china-sea-waters-after-standoffidUSKBN22O1M9/
Le Mière, Christian. “The Return of Gunboat Diplomacy.” Survival 53, no. 5 (2011): 53-68.
——. Maritime Diplomacy in the 21st Century: Drivers and Challenges. New York: Routledge, 2014.
Lion, Bonny, et al. A New Framework for Understanding and Countering Gray Zone Tactics. Santa Monica: RAND
Corporations, 2022. Accessed November 12, 2023. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/RBA594-1.html
Luttwak, Edward. The Political Uses of Sea Power. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1974.
Mahan, Alfred Thayer. The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1660-1783. Boston: Little Brown and Company,
1898.
Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency. “Latar Belakang.” Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency. February
1, 2021. Accessed November 28, 2023. https://www.mmea.gov.my/eng/index.php/en/mengenai-kami-2/latarbelakang
——. “Visi dan Misi.” Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency. Accessed February 20, 2023. https://www.mmea.
gov.my/eng/index.php/ms/mengenai-kami-2/visi-misi
Malaysia Ministry of Defence. “Defence White Paper 2019.” Malaysia Ministry of Defence. December 2,
2019. Accessed November 29, 2019. https://www.mod.gov.my/images/mindef/article/kpp/DWP-3rdEdition-02112020.pdf
“Malaysia Picks a Three-Way Fight in the South China Sea.” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. February 21,
2020. Accessed November 29, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/malaysia-picks-a-three-way-fight-in-the-south-chinasea/
“Malaysia-China bilateral trade hit record US$203.6b in 2022, says Chinese ambassador.” Malaysian Investment
Development Authority. February 17, 2023. Accessed November 30, 2023, https://www.mida.gov.my/midanews/malaysia-china-bilateral-trade-hit-record-us203-6b-in-2022-says-chinese-ambassador/
“Malaysian Ministry of Economy.” National Energy Transition Roadmap: Energizing the Nation, Powering Our
Future. Putrajaya: Ministry of Economy, 2023. Accessed 26 November 2023. https://www.ekonomi.gov.my/
sites/default/files/202309/National%20Energy%20Transition%20Roadmap_0.pdf
McLaughlin, Rob. “The Law of the Sea and PRC Gray-Zone Operations in the South China Sea.” American Journal
of International Law 116, no. 4 (2022): 821-835.
Milner, Anthony, and Siti Munirah Kasim. “Beyond Sovereignty: Non-Western International Relations in Malaysia’s
Foreign Relations.” Contemporary Southeast Asia 40, no. 3 (2018): 371-396.
Milner, Anthony. “‘Sovereignty’ and Normative Integration in the South China Sea: Some Malaysian and Malay
Perspectives.” In Southeast Asia and China, edited by Lowell Dittmer and Ngeow Chow Bing, 229-246.
Singapore: World Scientific, 2017.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Malaysia. “Malaysia’s Position on the South China Sea” Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Malaysia. April 8, 2023. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.kln.gov.my/web/guest/-/malaysia-s-positionon-the-south-china-sea
Mishra, Rahul. “Code of Conduct in the South China Sea: More Discord than Accord.” Maritime Affairs: Journal of
the National Maritime Foundation of India 13, no. 2 (2017): 62-75.
Morales, Neil Jerome. “Philippines rebukes Beijing for ‘dangerous manoeuvres’ in South China Sea.” Reuters,
April 28, 2023. Accessed November 20, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/philippines-reportsconfrontation-with-chinese-vessels-south-china-sea-2023-04-28/
Ngeow, Chow-Bing. “Malaysia’s China Policy and the South China Sea Dispute Under the Najib Administration
(2009-2018): A Domestic Policy Process Approach.” Asian Politics & Policy 11, no. 4 (2019): 586-605.
Noor, Elina, and T. N. Qistina. “Great Power Rivalries, Domestic Politics and Malaysian Foreign Policy.” Asian
Security 13, no. 3 (2017): 200-219.
Noor, Elina. “The South China Sea Dispute: Options for Malaysia.” In The South China Sea Dispute: Navigating
Diplomatic and Strategic Tensions, edited by Ian Storey and Cheng-Yi Lin, 205-227. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2017.
“Oil & gas field profile: Kasawari Conventional Gas Field, Malaysia.” Offshore Technology. Updated February 17,
2024. Accessed 28 November 2023. https://www.offshore-technology.com/data-insights/oil-gas-field-profilekasawari-conventional-gas-field-malaysia/?cf-view
Pearson, James, and Khanh Vu. “Vietnam mulls legal action over South China Sea dispute.” Reuters. November
6, 2019. Accessed November 20, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-vietnam-southchinaseaidUSKBN1XG1D6/

190

Triadic Maritime Diplomacy...
“Perilous Prospects: Tensions Flare at Malaysian, Vietnamese Oil and Gas Fields.” Asia Maritime Transparency
Initiative. March 30, 2023. Accessed March 30 2023. https://amti.csis.org/perilous-prospects-tensions-flare-atmalaysian-vietnamese-oil-and-gas-fields/
Prashanth, Parameswaran. “Assessing Malaysia’s Coast Guard in ASEAN Perspective.” The Diplomat. May 2,
2017. Accessed February 29, 2023. https://thediplomat.com/2017/05/assessing-malaysias-coast-guard-inasean-perspective/
——. Managing the Rise of Southeast Asia’s Coast Guards. Washington, DC: Wilson Center, 2019. Accessed 21
February 2023. https://www.wilsoncenter.org/publication/managing-the-rise-southeast-asias-coast-guards
——. Playing It Safe: Malaysia’s Approach to the South China Sea and Implications for the United States.
Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security, 2015. Accessed March 23, 2023. https://www.files.ethz.
ch/isn/189746/CNAS%20Maritime%206_Parameswaran_Final.pdf
Procyk, Alex. “Petronas discovers gas offshore Sarawak.” The Borneo Post. December 7, 2023. Accessed November
28, 2023. https://www.theborneopost.com/2012/02/14/petronas-discovers-gas-offshore-sarawak-2/
Putra, Bama Andika. “Gauging Contemporary Maritime Tensions in the North Natuna Seas: Deciphering China’s
Maritime Diplomatic Strategies.” The International Journal of Interdisciplinary Civic and Political Studies 17,
no. 2 (2022): 85-99.
——. “Rise of Constabulary Maritime Agencies in Southeast Asia: Vietnam’s Paragunboat Diplomacy in the North
Natuna Seas.” Social Sciences 12, no. 4 (2023): 1-15.
——. “The Golden Age of White Hulls: Deciphering the Philippines’ Maritime Diplomatic Strategies in the South
China Sea.” Social Sciences 12, no. 6 (2023): 1-14.
——. “The rise of paragunboat diplomacy as a maritime diplomatic instrument: Indonesia’s constabulary forces and
tensions in the North Natuna Seas.” Asian Journal of Political Sciences 31, no. 2 (2023): 106-124.
Roach, J. Ashley. Malaysia and Brunei: An Analysis of their Claims in the South China Sea. Virginia: CAN, 2014.
Accessed November 21, 2023. https://www.cna.org/reports/2014/malaysia-and-brunei-claims-in-scs
“Rocks, Reefs, Submerged Shoals – Who Claims or Occupies Them?” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative.
Accessed March 25, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/scs-features-map/
Sallehuddin, Qistina, and Nuqman Adam. “PM: Malaysia stays firm in protecting sovereignty in South China
Sea.” New Strait Times. August 10, 2023. Accessed November 29, 2023. https://www.nst.com.my/news/
nation/2023/08/941086/pm-malaysia-stays-firm-protecting-sovereignty-south-china-sea
Shazwani, Ili. “Malaysian opposition slams PM for ‘reckless’ South China Sea statement to Beijing.” Benar News.
April 7, 2023. Accessed November 28, 2023. https://www.benarnews.org/english/news/malaysian/muhyiddinslams-anwar-south-china-sea-04072023133207.html
“Singapore and Malaysia Navies Conclude 30th Edition of Bilateral Naval Exercise Malapura.” MINDEF Singapore.
November 14, 2022. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.mindef.gov.sg/web/portal/mindef/news-andevents/latest-releases/article-detail/2022/November/14nov22_nr
Sipalan, Joseph. “Malaysia to summon Chinese envoy over ‘suspicious’ air force activity.” Reuters. June 2, 2021.
Accessed November 11, 2023. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysia-says-chinese-militaryplanes-came-close-violating-airspace-2021-06-01/
“Still on the Beat: China Coast Guard Patrols in 2020.” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. December 4, 2020.
Accessed November 10, 2023. https://amti.csis.org/still-on-the-beat-china-coast-guard-patrols-in-2020/
Storey, Ian. “Malaysia and the South China Sea Dispute: Policy Continuity amid Domestic Political Change.”
Singapore: ISEAS Perspective. March 20, 2020. Accessed March 31, 2023. https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wpcontent/uploads/2020/02/ISEAS_Perspective_2020_18.pdf
Syailendra, Emirza Adi. “The Sense and Sensibility of Malaysia’s Approach to its Maritime Boundary Disputes.”
Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. November 21, 2022. Accessed date March 30, 2023. https://amti.csis.
org/the-sense-and-sensibility-of-malaysias-approach-to-its-maritime-boundary-disputes/
——. “Why Don’t Malaysian Policymakers View China as a Threat?” The Diplomat. February 24, 2023. accessed
November 29, 2023. https://thediplomat.com/2023/02/why-dont-malaysian-policymakers-view-china-as-athreat/
Thayer, Carl. “Chinese coercive activities persist in one of Asia’s hottest flashpoints.” The Diplomat. November 1,
2019. Accessed November 27, 2023. https://thediplomat.com/2019/10/a-difficult-summer-in-the-south-chinasea/
Till, Geoffrey. Seapower: A Guide for the Twenty-First Century. New York: Routledge, 2018.
“US and Malaysian navies conduct bilateral exercise ‘MTA Malaysia 2021’.” Naval Technology. November 24,
2021. Accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.naval-technology.com/news/us-malaysia-exercise-mta-malaysia2021/?cf-view
“US and RMN navies conduct bilateral exercise MTA Malaysia 2017.” Naval Technology. September 20, 2017.
Accessed March 30, 2023. https://www.naval-technology.com/news/newsus-and-malaysian-navies-begin-

191

All Azimuth

B. A. Putra

bilateral-mta-exercise-this-year-5929965/
Wey, Leong Kok. “A small state’s foreign affairs strategy: Making sense of Malaysia’s strategic response to the
South China Sea debacle.” Comparative Strategy 36, no. 5 (2017): 392-399.
Wibowo, Kukuh S. “Indonesia, Malaysia Conduct Joint Military Exercise in Java Sea.” Tempo. August 29, 2022.
Accessed March 30, 2023. https://en.tempo.co/read/1628179/indonesia-malaysia-conduct-joint-militaryexercise-in-java-sea
Yusof, Imam Muttaqin, and Nisha David. “Malaysian, Japanese coast guard hold South China Sea security
drill.” Radio Free Asia. January 13, 2023. Accessed November 10, 2023. https://www.rfa.org/english/news/
southchinasea/malaysiajapandrills-01132023133204.html
Zhang, Ketian. “Explaining China’s large-scale land reclamation in the South China Sea: Timing and Rationale.”
Journal of Strategic Studies 46, no. 6-7 (2023): 1-6.
Zul, S. Adie, Nisha David, Dizhwar Bukhari, and Muzliza Mustafa. “Analysts: Malaysia’s Navy Drill Sends Strong
Message to South China Sea Claimants.” Radio Free Asia. August 20, 2021. Accessed January 30, 2023. https://
www.rfa.org/english/news/china/malaysia-drill-08202021155721.html

192

