The Chinese Economy

ISSN: 1097-1475 (Print) 1558-0954 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/mces20

China’s Marine Political Economy in the South
China Sea and Its Development Strategy under
the Belt and Road Initiative: Opportunities,
Challenges, and Trends on the 14th Five-Year Plan
Pei-Shan Kao & Jenn-Jaw Soong
To cite this article: Pei-Shan Kao & Jenn-Jaw Soong (2025) China’s Marine Political Economy
in the South China Sea and Its Development Strategy under the Belt and Road Initiative:
Opportunities, Challenges, and Trends on the 14th Five-Year Plan, The Chinese Economy, 58:2,
189-201, DOI: 10.1080/10971475.2024.2384170
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10971475.2024.2384170

Published online: 31 Jul 2024.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 198

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=mces20

THE CHINESE ECONOMY
2025, VOL. 58, NO. 2, 189–201
https://doi.org/10.1080/10971475.2024.2384170

China’s Marine Political Economy in the South China Sea and
Its Development Strategy under the Belt and Road Initiative:
Opportunities, Challenges, and Trends on the 14th Five-Year
Plan
Pei-Shan Kaoa and Jenn-Jaw Soongb
a

Department and Graduate Institute of Border Police, Central Police University, Taiwan, Taoyuan City, Guishan
Dist, Taiwan; bDepartment of Political Science, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan

ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

To assure a brilliant and prosperous future of China, the Chinese govern­
ment has been deliberately and continuously designing and promulgating
a series of national plans and grand strategies. The implementation of the
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and every Five-Year National Plans become
absolutely important momentum to lift up China’s economy, which is seen
as “Xiconomics.” To better realize the goals of these grand projects and
national plans; the Chinese government also has smartly invented different
institutions and regimes such as the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
(AIIB), the Silk Road Fund, forums, dialogues, or the establishment of stra­
tegic partnerships. As on China’s power expansion, the South China Sea
definitely is one of the most important regions and areas for searching
marine energy and resources. As on the BRI, that is to say, the “twenty first
Century Maritime Silk Road,” the South China Sea is a critical route for
ships from China’s coastal ports to the Indian Ocean, and then to
European States. It is also a strategic route for ships to the South Pacific
from China. Beijing firmly claims that the South China Sea is one of its
national core interests without suspension and incredulity. Coincidentally,
as on China’s National 14th Five-Year Plan (14th FYP), building a “Beautiful
China” by 2035 is one of its goals of sustainable development and
enhancement of people’s wellbeing. Thus, the South China Sea has occu­
pied a very important position and national development for future sus­
tainable development and marine economy. This paper aims to examine
China’s marine political economy in the South China Sea as well as to scru­
tinize its strategic considerations and layout since 2021.

South China Sea; Belt and
Road Initiative; National
14th Five-Year Plan; Marine
Development; Sea Power
Xiconomics

1. Introduction: South China Sea as core interest of China’s politics and economy?
To avoid the opposition of the United States and to decrease the economic impact of the pan­
demic, China has attempted to diverse risks by exploring different markets and transportation
routes. The South China Sea therefore has occupied a very critical important position in China’s
grand strategy. Due to its strategic importance of economy, energy, marine, transportation and
geopolitics, Beijing strongly claims that the South China Sea is one of its national core interests,
regardless of Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and Indonesia’s sovereignty claims in this
region. As on the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), the South China Sea is a critical route to the
CONTACT Pei-Shan Kao
pkao@mail.cpu.edu.tw
Department and Graduate Institute of Border Police, Central Police
University, Taiwan, No.56, Shuren Rd., Guishan Dist., Taoyuan City 333322, Taiwan
� 2024 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

190

P.-S. KAO AND J.-J. SOONG

Indian Ocean and Europe, and to the South Pacific from Chinese coastal ports. On the other
hand, in October 2020, on the “Fifth Plenary Session of the Nineteenth Central Committee of the
Communist Party of China” held in Beijing, the Party Central Committee proposed to build
“China Standards 2035” and a “Beautiful China” by 2035. From the strategic plans of “Made in
China 2025” to “China Standards 2035,” the Chinese government has been cautiously and steadily
designing and making its national development plans. In addition to economic and commercial
interests, it is interesting to find that on the “14th Five-Year Plan (14th FYP),” the issue of eco­
logical environment protection and marine economy was suggested and confirmed for the first
time.
For a long time, China’s stance on the South China Sea has been biased toward politics and
military, while insisting that the integrity of national sovereignty is its basic core national interest.
It has rarely faced the issue of economic development of marine resources and energy, or even
research on the protection of marine resources and species. However, facing with China’s eco­
nomic rise, how to establish a peaceful rising power role, and even pursue sustainable energy sup­
ply, there is no doubt that the importance of the South China Sea to China’s political and
economic development is highly valued.
There are four main vital objectives for China in South China Sea: Firstly, by developing the
South China Sea economy, China’s influence in the South China Sea can be enhanced. Secondly,
mastering the energy supply in the South China Sea will contribute to China’s sustainable eco­
nomic development. Thirdly, to maintain the safety of maritime trade and transportation in the
South China Sea will help the development of China’s trade and shipping, and even solve the
security concerns of “Malacca dilemma.” Fourthly, more importantly, through the research and
economic development of the South China Sea Ocean, the sovereignty of China’s nine-dash line
can be ensured.1
Overall, based on this, in the face of the promotion of China’s 14th FYP, it is also Xi Jinping’s
leadership toward the third term. Whether there will be a new development strategy toward the
South China Sea for maximizing political and economic interests, and also how to cooperate with
the development of the Belt-and-Road Initiative in the Ocean, it is worth paying attention to.
In the past, the South China Sea only presented fisheries and ocean economy and political and
strategic interests, it is the first time that the Chinese government proposed to build a “Beautiful
Bay” on its five-year plan (FYP). For Chinese President Xi Jinping, the premise of being a great
power must be building a maritime power. In other words, how to make China from a continen­
tal empire to a maritime power that is crucial for China’s development strategy. However, on the
“14th Five-Year Plan,” the protection of the marine ecological environment is an important part
as well. Does this mean that China is considering being a responsible stakeholder in international
society or is just a political propaganda and slogan to booster its so-called “salami slicing strat­
egy” to turn South China Sea as inland sea?
Therefore, this paper wants to use the South China Sea as the case study to explore its stra­
tegic importance in China’s national development plans such as the Belt-and-Road Initiative. It
will also discuss the trends on the National 14th Five-Year Plan and how to boost an emerging
new development strategy in South China Sea. To the last, it makes some conclusions and sugges­
tions on development opportunity and challenges eventually.

2. Literature Review on South China Sea, Marine BRI, and 14th FYP
Many scholars in the field of International Relations have published papers and books to discuss
the South China Sea, the Belt-and-Road Initiative, and China’s National 14th Five-Year Plan. The
South China Sea is part of the Western Pacific Ocean and also a major sea transportation route,
connecting Pacific and India Oceans. The South China Sea covers an area of 3.5 million square
kilometers, with more than 200 islands and rocks, not inhabited by aborigines. With a width of

THE CHINESE ECONOMY

191

about 1,500 kilometers from east to west and a length of about 2,700 kilometers from north to
south, it is a semi-enclosed sea area and making it the largest marginal sea in the world.
The South China Sea is also rich in oil and natural gas energy, which not only is necessary for
industrial development, especially the fishery resources also supporting hundreds of millions of
people, but also involves the interests of many neighboring countries (Cordesman & Burke,
2019). According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s analysis, most fields containing
discovered oil and natural gas are clustered in uncontested parts of the South China Sea, close to
shorelines of the costal countries, and not near the contested islands. The South China Sea has
about 11 billion barrels of oil and 190 trillion cubic feet of natural gas as provided or probably
reserves (EIA, 2012).
Besides, the “South China Sea-Strait of Malacca-Indian Ocean” route connects the eastern and
western hemispheres as well as an important hub for global maritime trade. Undoubtedly, the
important position of South China Sea has become a battleground for the military of the sur­
rounding countries. Moreover, China’s great power potential, combined with its latent expansion­
ist ambitions and increasingly assertive foreign policy stance, could be a threat to regional and
global security and order (Kim, 2015). Surely, it is obvious that maritime and territorial disputes
over the contested waters of the South China Sea have become the biggest potential flashpoints
amid Beijing’s military modernization in conjunction with Washington’s “pivot” and glory
greatness.
Promisingly, China is one of the world largest consumers of oil and gas and is the world’s
largest petroleum importer. It presently is critically and highly dependent on petroleum imports.
It estimates that this dependence will increase steadily through 2040. Most such imports flow
through the Strait of Malacca to the South China Sea –which is in itself a major potential source
of undersea oil and gas (Cordesman et al., 2019, p. 364). That is why China sees securing the
South China Sea as a key strategic interest, and why it is seeking to develop higher levels of
energy efficiency, other sources of energy, and imports through pipelines that bypass the Strait of
Malacca and South China Sea. For every country, energy security is national security.
In October 2013, Xi Jinping put forward the “twenty first Century Maritime Silk Road” stra­
tegic initiative and with a great emphasis on maritime space, especially in the South China Sea.
Xi has repeatedly declared that China will “build a maritime power.” China cultivates its oceangoing capability by safeguarding national maritime rights and interests, ensuring maritime security,
and combating piracy. The idea of the “Maritime Silk Road” reflects the Chinese government’s
specific maritime power strategy and also decreases Chinese anxiety about U.S. containment
(Glaser, 2012).
Indeed, China’s raw materials, energy imports, and exports of manufactured products all rely
on maritime transportation, total trade value of marine transportation accounting for 60% of
China’s overall value, of which the route into the Indian Ocean via the Malacca Strait is the most
important. In addition, this is the main route for oil and gas energy imports of China. Along the
Maritime Silk Road, the ports and other facilities promoted by China have spread to Myanmar,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Tanzania and other places in order to ensure trade security and certainty.
Although there is a sovereignty dispute in the South China Sea, the frequent economic and trade
exchanges between Southeast Asian countries and China have always coupled with the influence
and military deployment of the United States in the local area, which is a suitable breakthrough
point for sea power. China has a relatively assertive approach in the South China Sea, with fre­
quent actions around this area, including land reclamation, construction of infrastructure, military
exercises, and cruises.
In literature, Song (2018) has attempted to examine if China’s BRI projects can propel and
deepen not only regional economic integration between China and ASEAN, but also can defuse
their political disputes on the South China Sea. For Soong’s observation, the BRI can also support
a “new era of diamond decade development” between China and its ASEAN neighbors and will

192

P.-S. KAO AND J.-J. SOONG

continuously serve to bridge these two economies (Soong, 2018). By means of the establishment
of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and the Silk Road Fund (SRF), China has
attempted to improve infrastructure and strengthen economic integration with ASEAN countries.
Furthermore, it considers that by “building the China–ASEAN community of common destiny,”
the two can mutually benefit from common development.
Besides, a discussion on the political economy of China’s strategic layout in Europe, it has
been introduced the historical background of the BRI proposed by Chinese President Xi Jinping
in 2013 when he visited Kazakhstan and Indonesia, the two countries who represent landlocked
and maritime countries. It has been analyzed that from China’s strategic considerations, the BRI
initiative not only can promote its trade and economic growth with countries along the routes,
but also can disseminate and expand China’s values and soft power (Kao, 2022). This therefore
can deeply connect China with the world and greatly strengthen China’s role as a great power
although not every country welcomes China’s grand strategy and its well-designed layout in the
regions. Although it did not analyze the issue of the South China Sea, it still provided this study
with a clear introduction of the origin and historical background of the BRI and China’s relations
with European countries. Moreover, currently, the South China Sea has been paid much attention
by EU and USA for its rich marine resources and the importance of maintaining regional marine
security.
From the viewpoints of Pakistan scholars, Iram Khalid and Muhammad Iqabl Chawla (2020),
China’s BRI that can bring impacts to regional and world politics has emerged as one of the
most important factors in global politics. Its repercussions for global politics are multidimensional
and multifaceted. It tried to describe not just the details of the BRI and its micro-plans, but also
to enlist the possible economic and political benefits that China and regional countries such as
Pakistan can obtain from this project. In addition, it also highlights the possible difficulties and
challenges that China might face when realizing this plan. By means of examining BRI’s trajectory
and analyzing all the possible global and regional repercussions for the emerging international
politics, it argued that no matter how beneficial this plan can be for China’s world economic
position, there are still many challenges ahead that China has to tackle. Otherwise, the plan can
lose its potential benefits in the region and in world politics.
On the risks of the BRI, Morris (2020) argued that although by means of the BRI, economic­
ally, China could easily connect regional economies and develop new trade routes and production
chains for Chinese market and developing countries. Politically, this kind of economic connectiv­
ity could also decrease and disrupt power relativities. However, many problems such as debt serv­
icing, corruption, and political risks all have appeared in some partner countries of BRI and in
some projects. Due to power struggle and competition between the United States and China since
Donald Trump took office, the problems or potential risks of the BRI have been negatively
enlarged and emphasized.
As China has been considered as “strategic competitor” by the United States, many scholars in
the field of International Relations argued that “the BRI will generate zero sum benefits to China
and costs to others” (Morris, 2020). Morris claimed that any enterprises and countries who want
to join the BRI need to evaluate first political risks that may affect business results. By means of
examining political risk from the geopolitics, project, and state level, Morris has analyzed and dis­
cussed how risks are constructed. However, he still pointed out that the BRI does not necessarily
have to be a debt trap if projects and plans can be well designed and realized. In addition, devel­
oping countries can also avert poverty traps by utilizing capital and infrastructure investment
from the BRI.
Some further evidences on China’s BRI impacts on host countries’ qualities of institution
also being examined, some researches presented a more positive relationship between China’s
BRI investments and host countries by using data and materials (Yeung & Huber, 2024).
Although many countries, politicians, and scholars criticized the BRI as China’s “debt diplomacy,”

THE CHINESE ECONOMY

193

Yeung and Huber (2024) considered that it was more “a lending trap for China.” According to
their research, the BRI investments did have significant positive impacts on hosting countries
without significant negative effects.
From literature reviews, one can easily perceive that some scholars propose the benefits of
joining the BRI, some remind the political and economic risks of participation, and others claim
the negative impacts caused by the BRI and China’s ambition. Though people have proposed dif­
ferent viewpoints of the BRI, 148 countries already have joined the plan by signing a
Memorandum of Understanding with China in March 2022 (Nedopil, 2023). Yet, as of June
2023, China has signed more than 200 cooperation documents with 152 countries and 32 inter­
national organizations to jointly build the BRI (Belt & Road Portal, 2023).
The last is about the implementation of 14th FYP in the period of 2021–2015. On March 13,
2021, China’s National People’s Congress (NPC) approved the outline of the country’s 14th FYP.
The five-year plan is the centerpiece of the Chinese system of industrial planning and economic
policy. Reflecting the transformation of the country over the past 70 years, the content and pur­
pose of the five-year plan has changed substantially since the first plan was promulgated in Mao
Zedong’s China in 1953. Early plans had set production targets while modern plans are a mixture
of principles, guidelines, and targets designed to steer the country’s development. Ultimately, the
five-year plan’s purpose is to set strategic goals, focus government work, and guide the activities
of market and non-market entities in China. Obviously, FYP has been taken as a new pattern of
moving forward strategy for China’s development.
In developing the 14th FYP, China’s leaders set an ambitious agenda: one is to promote highquality development in all aspects, including economy, environment, and people’s livelihood and
wellbeing. The other is to realize the rise of China’s economy in global value chains. The 14th
FYP totally consists of 19 chapters and 65 sub-chapters; sets out 20 main indicators for economic
and social development; and describes several measures and initiatives, including 102 major
engineering projects scheduled for the coming five-year period.

3. The South China Sea in China’s power expansion and the Belt-and-road Initiative:
not only for sovereignty but also for economic security
How to avoid Thucydides’ Trap and US-China rivalry for hegemony has become a global core
issue, especially their conflict and confrontation in the South China Seas. As China’s ascendancy,
its policy toward territorial disputes in the South China Sea and the greater security implications
of the issue for Sino-US relations turns South China Sea to be a regional military and economic
arena (Kim 2015). It seems that China’s eventual dominance of the South China Sea through its
military and economic power expansion will be inevitable. But at the same time, Beijing will
likely curb its territorial ambitions and refrain from militaristic expansion in order to prevent
regional conflicts that would damage its economic interests and undermine its assertion of
“peaceful rise.” At both circumstances, the United States will keep strengthening its involvement
in Asian affairs and further legitimize Washington’s rebalance power in the South China Sea.
Over the past two decades, the South China Sea has emerged as an arena of U.S.-China stra­
tegic competition. China’s actions in the South China Sea including extensive island-building and
base construction activities at sites that it occupies in the Spratly Islands. China’s maritime forces
assert its sovereignty claims against competing claims by regional neighbors such as the
Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam and have heightened concerns by the United
States. China is gaining effective control of the South China Sea, an area of strategic, political,
and economic importance, compared with the United States and its allies. Likewise, Chinese
domination in China’s near-seas region could substantially affect U.S. strategic, political, and eco­
nomic interests in the Indo-Pacific region and elsewhere.

194

P.-S. KAO AND J.-J. SOONG

China maintains and defends that foreign militaries are not able to conduct intelligence-gath­
ering activities under international law, such as reconnaissance flights, in its exclusive economic
zone (EEZ). Yet, under the UN Convention of the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), U.S. and claimant
countries should have freedom of navigation through EEZs in the sea and are not required to
notify claimants of military activities. In July 2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The
Hague issued its ruling on a claim brought against China by the Philippines under UNCLOS, rul­
ing in favor of the Philippines on almost every count. Although as a signatory state of the
UNCLOS, which established the tribunal, China firmly refuses to accept the court’s authority
(O’Rourke, 2023). Suddenly, the South China Sea region has fallen into the trap of hegemonic
confrontation without international rules. It also shows that the South China Sea are China’s core
interests.
In recent years, China has increased efforts to reclaim land in the South China Sea by physic­
ally extending or creating the size of islands as well as piling sand onto existing reefs. China has
constructed ports, military installations, and airstrips, particularly in the Paracel and Spratly
Islands, where it has 20 and 7 outposts, respectively. China now has permanent presences of sur­
face-to-air missiles in both the disputed South China Sea archipelagos. Especially, China has mili­
tarized Woody Island, the largest island in the Paracel, by deploying fighter jets, cruise missiles,
and a radar system. At the same time, the United States also maintains its naval presence in the
region, including the so-called Freedom of Navigation Operations (FONOPs) in order to ensure
free and open access to the South China Sea. Since May 2017, the United States has conducted
countless FONOPs in the region till present and has caused many military confrontations with
China as well as escalation of the situation in the South China Sea.
Indeed, China is radically changing the status quo in the South China Sea in its favor. But
Glaser and Poling (2021) indicated that since 2016, the Southeast Asian states whose legal rights
are being trampled have been reluctant to push back firmly against Beijing. China has adopted
overtures of “favor” and “weakness” diplomacy and maximized concessions to attract economic
support and dependence from Southeast Asian countries and eventually reduce conflicts over sov­
ereignty or security issues. China tries to search a new pattern of peaceful and win-win strategic
cooperation and development in the South China Sea without American military intervention
and provocation. One is to win the political support, marine security, and transportation stability
in this region. The other is to guarantee China’s energy demand, resource exploration, and eco­
nomic security for its sustainable economic development.
China’s grand strategy of BRI for its state development was proposed in 2013. Among them,
the twenty first Century maritime Silk Road begins in the South China Sea, which not only con­
nects the East China Sea, but is an important key area for China’s southward maritime develop­
ment. If the development of the Maritime Silk Road fails hence cannot help to establish a winwin relationship with Southeast Asian countries around the South China Sea, then China’s dream
of a maritime power will inevitably be hindered. Furthermore, China’s assertive sovereignty insist­
ence is bound to attract more assertive claims around the sea, and will also likely lose the safety
of maritime transportation in the South China Sea and the interests of energy extraction in the
South China Sea. Much worse, this circumstance will allow the U.S. to take advantage of it to
win over Southeast Asian countries. In contrast, China will lose its geopolitical and geo-economic
advantages.
In the face of this dilemma in the South China Sea and the guarantee of energy required for
China’s economic development, China is urged to take a crucial strategic consideration. The
logical strategy will be followed like: (1) as long as China sticks to the U-shaped territory of
China’s traditional nine-dash line without challenge, it can put aside the diplomatic posture of
“wolf warriors.” (2) China shall actively develop energy resource in the South China Sea together
with the countries around the sea, building a win-win cooperation model. (3) In order to ensure
the economic interests in the South China Sea, China shall have a new model strategy for the

THE CHINESE ECONOMY

195

development of China’s Maritime Silk Road in the South China Sea, which is the strategy of geoeconomic consideration more over than geopolitics.
Kao (2022) considers that the strategic consideration for China to initiate the B&R project can
be explained and understood from different perspectives. First, by means of close trade and eco­
nomic cooperation with the BRI partner countries, China can break through diplomatically and
geopolitically the U.S.’ opposition and containment in these regions. Second, economically, the
BRI is helpful to maintain and sustain China’s economic growth by exploring and developing
new markets. It can also balance the development of China’s eastern and western regions by
exporting its production capacity. Third, diplomatically, the BRI can help to mitigate and alleviate
discrepancies and disputes of sovereignty of the South China Sea between China and ASEAN
states. Finally, culturally, it can also greatly expand China’s soft power and global influence in
world politics by exporting its values, culture and techniques. To be a great maritime power, the
region of the South China Sea is strategically important for China from both perspectives of geo­
politics and geo-economics.
Due to the presence and involvement of the U.S. in this region and China’s sovereignty dis­
putes with some ASEAN countries, China is very carefully dealing with South East Asian coun­
tries. Similarly, ASEAN countries are smartly to cooperate economically with China while
politically relying greatly on the U.S. In 2022, trade between ASEAN and the U.S. was US$ 452.2
billion while ASEAN-China trade reached to US$ 975.3 billion (Yan, 2023). The trade amount of
ASEAN-China is almost double of ASEAN-US. It is very unlikely for ASEAN countries to
decouple economically with China, no matter explained from the Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership (RCEP), the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific
Partnership (CPTPP) or the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF). Indeed, the
U.S. and China are both of economic importance for the development of ASEAN members.
Regardless of the sovereignty of the South China Sea, ASEAN countries still actively have partici­
pated with the BRI under the warning of the U.S. It somehow implies that the ASEAN countries
toward China’s development strategy in the South China Sea would like to take more considera­
tions on geo-economic interests than geopolitical conflicts.
The BRI is comprised of a “Silk Road Economic Belt” that links China with Southeast and
South Asia, Central Asia, Russia and Europe by land and a “twenty first century Maritime Silk
Road” connecting China by sea with Southeast and South Asia, the South Pacific, the Middle East
and Eastern Africa until reaching Europe (European Bank, 2020). The BRI also has viewed as the
export of China’s soft power and influence. On the Maritime Silk Road of the BRI, the South
China Sea has occupied a very critical position. Harvard International Review (2020) commented
that the South China Sea and the BRI are two highly contentious topics at the heart of US-China
affairs. Since the region of the South China Sea is a vital route for China’s trade with the world
and is also its energy and military supply route, the Chinese government has claimed that the
South China Sea is its core interest (Yoshihara & Holmes, 2011). Therefore, although many coun­
tries criticized its actions for building artificial islands in the region, China has never given up.2
However, to decrease the occurrence of military conflicts with ASEAN members, China signed
very early in November 2002 the “Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea”
(DOC) with the ASEAN (Thao, 2010). To smooth the realization of the BRI, Beijing has greatly
promoted negotiation on the “Code of Conduct in the South China Sea”(COC) with ASEAN
countries. China and ASEAN then reached agreement on guidelines to accelerate their consulta­
tions on the COC (MOFA of the Republic of Indonesia, 2023). As a result, it can be expecting
that this is a possible constructive way to reduce the tensions of the South China Sea between
China and ASEAN.
As tensions and competition across the South China Sea increase, ASEAN countries will
expand military and energy programs over the region, so does China. Also, if there is an increase
in military conflicts, US forces and allies will strongly continue operations in the area (Mann,

196

P.-S. KAO AND J.-J. SOONG

2023). It will easily fall in the depressive traps of “lose-lose-lose” situation. Obviously, establish­
ment of policy strengthening security and economic cooperation will have a significant impact in
the development of stability in the South China Sea region. Nevertheless, there also could be
movement on a stalled “code of conduct” (COC) agreement between ASEAN and China, which
has been in the works for about two decades. China does not want to let all the achievements go
wrong and eventually let Southeast Asian countries favor the United States. Moreover, China has
its own reasons for not failing in the face of ASEAN countries’ promotion of the BRI. First,
because Southeast Asia is the first stop of the experimental zone for the implementation and
development of the BRI, especially in the South China Sea. Second, because Southeast Asia bor­
ders China, their bilateral diplomatic relations have always been maintaining friendly. The last,
development of their economic, trade, and investment relations are so close and significant.
In addition, China recently has launched the Global Development Initiative (GDI) in 2021,
Global Security Initiative (GSI) in 2022, and Global Civilization Initiative (GCI) in 2023 (Wagle,
2023), which are seen as three opportunity pillars of the China model, in order to construct and
pursue “Chinese path to modernization” for global South (NDRC, 2023). In other words, China
tries to make efforts for reducing deficits of development, security, governance, and peace as well
as for creating capitals of modernization. More specifically, China’s development strategy in the
South China Sea tends to be bright and positive with an emphasis on achieving geo-economic
interests rather than geopolitical confrontations, which can contribute “China trust” and eliminate
“China threat” (Xu & Chen, 2023; Gong, 2023). Eventually, it can keep President Xi Jinping and
Chinese government on a good China image and avoid the “Tacitus trap,”3 which is an existential
legitimacy crisis caused by losing the confidence of the people (Curtis, 2021).
Under these three initiatives, i.e. GDI, GSI, and GCI, China will ask countries including those
in the immediate neighborhood in the South China Sea to join. China is likely to invest and
cooperate more on building South China Sea economic corridor to reduce political conflicts and
military confrontation. Just like China have significantly invested about US$ 50 billion for ChinaPakistan Economic Corridor and about US$ 25 billion for China-Myanmar Economic Corridor
under the BRI and accelerated economic engagements in Bangladesh, Afghanistan, and Nepal. It
clearly indicates, in nutshell, even with USA-China-ASEAN triangular competition or conflict in
the South China Sea, the rational strategy is still considered of the core interests of geo-economics
over geopolitics, which means economic interests will prevail over crude geopolitics. As a result,
even more competition and tension, or potential for more incidents will occur in the South
China Sea, rationally thinking, China will slightly shift its “wolf warrior diplomacy” into a softer
and gentler façade foreign policy toward ASEAN countries. How to bring a better development
strategy of diplomatic operation in the South China Sea on building economic corridor under the
strategic guides of 14th FYP will provide a new era of China opportunity in the BRI.

4. South China Sea in the National 14th five-year plan: occurring new marine
strategy and new development pattern
As mentioned earlier, the so-called “Five-Year Plan” is the national grand plan of the People’s
Republic of China, it provides a comprehensive framework for China to develop its society and
economy at five yearly intervals. The first five-year plan of the PRC can be traced back to 1953
(CNA, 2020); in the past 70 years, each of the FYP is formulated and promulgated uniquely under
different internal and external circumstances China faced at that time. By means of examining
every Five-Year Plan, one can easily perceive not just China’s economic layout for the next five
years but also its viewpoints and interpretation on global economic situation. The 14th FYP
(2021–2025) was officially passed and endorsed by the National People’s Congress (NPC) on 11
March, 2021 (UNDP, 2021) with 175 sub-sections and 19 Sections in 65 Chapters, compared to

THE CHINESE ECONOMY

197

20 Sections and 80 Chapters in the 13th FYP. In addition to listing the next five-year plan for
China’s development, it expresses China’s 2035 vision in the 1st section, chapter 3 as well.4
China has now entered a new stage of development on a stronger foundation under 14th FYP.
In summary, the 14th FYP comprehensively covers six strategic areas encompassing: such as
innovation-led growth, dual circulation, rural revitalization, enhancement of people’s livelihood,
sustainable development, and development of marine economy through international cooperation.
These six development strategies will bring new opportunities and challenges for China.
The 14th FYP also has listed China’s future major development strategies and direction.
Several important aspects and aims can be attributed as followings: First, it is to build deep sea,
deep space, and solar exploration. Second, it is to find new energy as well as to ensure marine
environmental protection. Third, it is to implement infrastructure modernization. Fourthly, it is
to carry out dual circulation strategy, i.e. internal circulation and external circulation. Fifthly, it is
to build a digital China, with seven core industries at the fore, such as cloud computing, big data,
artificial intelligence (AI), and internet of things (IoT), industrial internet, block chain, and vir­
tual and augmented reality. Sixthly, it is to acquire smart transportation, smart energy, smart
manufacturing, smart medicine, and smart government. All these aspects and focuses in the
development can be treated a new development framework for building a “new development pat­
tern and strategy”.
If one checks the outline of the 14th FYP and compared it with that of the 13th FYP (see
Table 1), he will find that the 14th FYP spent much more pages on people’s wellbeing than green
ecology. This is very unusual. Besides, the 14th FYP listed two main targets on “security” and
“safety” that did not appear in the 13th FYP.5 Since the 14th FYP is the first Plan that builds on
China’s first centenary goal, namely, to achieve a “Xiaokang Society” (moderately prosperous
society) in all respects and on the elimination of absolute rural poverty, it therefore is strategically
critical. It shows not only China’s plans to transfer from an industrial economy to a digital econ­
omy, but also its ambition and commitment on energy transition and climate change.
By means of the 14th FYP, Beijing has attempted to set its goals for the second centenary, that
is to say, to build a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally
advanced and harmonious by 2049. Hence, China can successfully realize its socialist moderniza­
tion by 2035. On his speech on the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee,
President Xi Jinping expressed that “a balance should be struck between building on past achieve­
ments and seeking innovations to ensure the smooth connection of the two centenary goals”
(China Daily, 2020).
Xi emphasized “balance” many times in his speech from different perspectives, especially under
severe and difficult domestic and global situation. For instance, the “balance” between govern­
ment and market relationship, China’s opening-up and self-reliance, development and security,
strategy and tactics, necessity and feasibility, etc.6 Since many uncertain factors appeared, Xi
claimed that security and development are both of equally importance. Perhaps this is the reason
when the two new targets of security and safety were included for the first time in the 14th FYP.
Under a rocky circumstance of post-pandemic period and US-China strategic competition, Xi
Table 1. Number of Different Theme Objectives in the 13th and 14th FYPs.
Economic development
Innovation
People’s wellbeing
Green ecology
Security/safety
Total

14th FYP

13th FYP

3
3
7
5
2
20

4
4
7
10
–
25

Source: UNDP. (2021). China’s 14th FYP, spotlighting climate and environment. China’s Issue Brief. https://www.cn.undp.org/
content/china/en/home/library/environment_energy/issue-brief–-china-s-14th-5-year–-plan-spotlighting-climate–-e.html, accessed
on June 19, 2023.

198

P.-S. KAO AND J.-J. SOONG

repeatedly pointed out that China’s development pattern should transfer from the world’s factory
to a closed “domestic loop” and “an open dual circulation involving both domestic and foreign
markets” (China Daily, 2020).
The Mercator Institute for China Studies (2021) have identified 12 policy areas from the 14th
FYP by counting the chapters on each.7 The FYP spend the largest pages on innovation and
industrial modernization (14%), and economic system and market reforms (also 14%). The
second key points focus on welfare, public services and social mobility (12%), and governance
and public sector (also 12%). Urbanization, infrastructure, and regional coordination are the third
main theme (10%). In addition, the MERICS also compared the percentage of chapters of the pol­
icy areas from the 12th to the 14th FYP. In order to compare with the 12th and the 13th FYP,
the percentages of sustainability and urbanization are decreasing while the importance of culture,
education and ideology are rising. The proposal of the 14th FYP also signified that China’s ambi­
tion to transfer its strategic plans from “Made in China 2025” to “China Standards 2035,” so that
China can compete with developed countries and obtain the discourse power.
To compare with previous national five-year plans, some characteristics are found in this FYP.
For example, from the Outline of the 14th FYP, it is interesting to find that it is the first time the
plan did not list any economic growth target. It only mentions that GDP growth should be main­
tained “within a reasonable interval” on different years. This indicated that Beijing has presented
a negative view on future economic development and global situation that is full of uncertainty
after the pandemic. Secondly, security and safety have been included this time in state’s national
plan to enhance and strengthen national security system. The third characteristic is that the eco­
logical environment protection issue is suggested for the first time.
In the past, the South China Sea only presented fisheries and ocean economic interests for the
Chinese government. It is also China’s core political and strategic interests involving sovereignty
disputes with the other six countries. For President Xi Jinping, the premise of being a great power
is being a maritime power. However, in the 14th FYP, it is interesting to find that it is the first
time that the Chinese government proposed to build a “Beautiful Bay” and emphasized the
importance of the protection of the marine ecological environment. That is to say, the South
China Sea now has been given another role in China’s development blueprint. Building a beauti­
ful bay area therefore is not just a government slogan but also signifies the rise of a new
approach to deal with sensitive and complicated territorial issues. Ecological civilization can be a
useful and great approach for city construction polices of provincial governments and inter­
national marine cooperation. Internally, the project of Beautiful Bay has accelerated China’s eco­
logical construction of 1,467 bays to be in line with its goal of 2035 Beautiful China (Science and
Technology Daily, 2022). Externally, the FYP revealed that China will make efforts to implement
global maritime governance mechanism to build a maritime community, that is to say, “blue
partnerships” with coastal countries. This kind of approach somehow decrease its assertive stance
and discourse on the issue of sovereignty.
The last point is on the description of Cross-Strait relations. Cross-Strait relations are first
time proposed specifically in a chapter since the 12th FYP. Compared with the 13th FYP stating
in Chapter 55 “Promote peaceful cross-straits development and national reunification process”
(NDRC, 2016), the 14th FYP titled the Chapter 62 “Peaceful Development of Cross-Straits
Relations and National Reunification”. According to the 14th FYP, the Chinese government will
“stay committed to the one-China principle and the 1992 Consensus, and peaceful and integrated
development of cross-Straits relations with the wellbeing of the people on both sides of the
Straits” (Fujian Provincial People’s Government, 2021). It suggested integrating cross-Straits
development and people-to-people exchanges across the Straits while in the 13th FYP economic
integration and cultural and social exchange were the main points. This signified that China’s
Taiwan policy has moved forward to the next steps.

THE CHINESE ECONOMY

199

It is strikingly clear that the 14th FYP can be implied and practiced as so-called “new
Xiconomics” which is strategically used to accelerate China’s domestic and foreign development.
Based on and followed by the 14th FYP assertion, the development strategy is likely applied via
Marine Silk Road in the South China Sea with great emphases on the aims of promoting eco­
nomic integration, enhancing security and safety, encouraging technology innovation, exploring
green energy, and governing digital development. The application of tools of science and technol­
ogy therefore has been highlighted.
The economic circle that practices maritime silk in the South China Sea region is basically
guided by the 14th FYP. China would like to jointly develop maritime resources, share economy
and trade, maintain stability and security in the South China Sea, build a South China Sea eco­
nomic corridor, and an inclusive maritime development model, so as to establish a new image of
China as providing or establishing Chinese path to modernization. If China remains anxious
about being surrounded by the U.S., paranoids about defending its sovereignty in the South
China Sea, insists on owning resources in the Sea alone, and strengthens the militarization of the
South China Sea, China will be in trouble and challenged. Therefore, the Chinese government’s
strategic thinking of the South China Sea is very clear, that is to say, making geo-economic inter­
ests above geopolitical competition so to allow the practice of Xiconomics and make the South
China Sea a peaceful ocean.

5. Conclusion: opportunities and challenges
Since the objectives of the 14th FYP is to make China as a “Manufacturing Power”, “Quality
Power”, “Network Power” and “Digital Power”, to fulfill these aims, it is of importance for the
government to launch the so-called “dual circulation” strategy. The dual circulation model
emphasizes the domestic cycle as the main body and the development pattern of mutual promo­
tion of international and domestic dual cycles. Under the shadow of the US-China trade war and
the impact of the pandemic on global economy, “dual circulation” can help China to recover
gradually from the economic downturn. The promotion of the BRI therefore is critical for the
realization of the dual circulation policy. Whether explained from the 14th FYP or the BRI,
the South China Sea has occupied an important position to promote trade and investment with
the ASEAN and partner countries although some countries still have doubts on the participation
of the BRI and also face pressure from the United States. Any change of China’s policies and atti­
tudes to international politics and economy and its strategy and response perhaps can be exam­
ined and understood from the next 5-year plan, namely, the 15th FYP.

Notes
1. The Chinese government has released a new version of its national map for 2023 to incorporate Taiwan
and most of West Philippine Sea in August, 2023. Therefore, the nine-dash line now has become a tendash line.
2. On the discussion of China’s action in the South China Sea, see Southerland (2016). China’s Island
Building in the South China Sea: Damage to the Marine Environment, Implications, and International
Law. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission. https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/
Research/China%27s%20Island%20Building%20in%20the%20South%20China%20Sea_0.pdf, accessed on July
19, 2023.
3. The Tacitus Trap means a situation where no matter what the government says or does, people will just
consider it a lie or a bad deed. See Huang Yanzhong. (2017). The Four Traps China May Fall Into.
Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/blog/four-traps-china-may-fall, accessed on July 19,
2023.
4. About the content of the 14th FYP, can see Asian Development Bank. (2021). The 14th Five-Year Plan of
the People’s Republic of China. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/705886/14th-five-yearplan-high-quality-development-prc.pdf, accessed on July 19, 2023.

200

P.-S. KAO AND J.-J. SOONG

5. The 13th FYP was comprised of 20 Parts and 80 Chapters. Regarding the outline of the 13th FYP can check
the State Council of the RPC. (2016). The Outline of the 13th FYP. https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2016-03/17/
content_5054992.htm, accessed on July 17, 2023.
6. On the content of Xi’s speech can see China Daily. (2020). Xi’s Explanatory Speech on CPC Proposals for
14th Five-Year Plan, Targets through 2035 Released. https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202011/03/
WS5fa12f0ca31024ad0ba82d9e.html, accessed on June 20, 2023.
7. The Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS) is the largest European and German think tank that
was established in 2013 by Stiftung Mercator to strengthen knowledge and debate about China. On the
introduction of the institute can see its official website, MERICS, https://merics.org/en.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

References
Asian Development Bank. (2021). The 14th Five-Year Plan of the People’s Republic of China. Retrieved July 19,
2023, from https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/705886/14th-five-year-plan-high-quality-develop­
ment-prc.pdf.
Belt and Road Portal. (2023). Retrieved July 20, 2023, from https://www.yidaiyilu.gov.cn/p/77298.html.
Cordesman, A. H., Burke, A. A., & Molot, M. (2019). Chinese Energy Transit and Resource Potential in the South
China Sea, Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), 244–267. Retrieved December 4, 2023, from
https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep22586.31.
Cordesman, A. H., & Burke, A. A. (2019). “The Critical Role of Chinese Trade in the South China Sea,” China
and the U.S.: Cooperation, Competition and/or Conflict an Experimental Assessment, Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS). Retrieved December 4, 2023, from https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep22586.
Curtis, J. S. (2021). Springing the ‘Tacitus Trap’: Countering Chinese state-sponsored disinformation. Small Wars
& Insurgencies, 32(2), 229–265. https://doi.org/10.1080/09592318.2021.1870429
EIA. (2012). Contested areas of South China Sea likely have few conventional oil and gas resources. Retrieved July
20, 2023, from https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=10651.
European Bank. (2020). Belt and Road Initiative. Retrieved July 21, 2020, from https://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/
belt-and-road/overview.html.
Fujian Provincial People’s Government. (2021). Outline of the 14th Five-Year Plan (2021–2025) for National
Economic and Social Development and Vision 2035 of the People’s Republic of China. Retrieved June 29, 2023,
from https://www.fujian.gov.cn/english/news/202108/t20210809_5665713.htm.
Glaser, B. S. (2012). Pivot to Asia: Prepare for unintended consequences. CSIS Global Forecast, 13 April, 2012, 22–24.
Glaser, B. S., & Poling, G. (2021). China’s Power Grab in the South China Sea: How to Build a Coalition to
Confront Beijing. Foreign Affairs, August 20, 2021. Retrieved July 19, 2023, from https://www.foreignaffairs.
com/articles/china/2021-08-20/chinas-power-grab-south-china-sea.
Gong, Y. (2023). The Chinese Path to Modernization and Its Implications for the World: A historical perspective.
International Critical Thought, 13(2), 166–176. https://doi.org/10.1080/21598282.2023.2222994
Harvard International Review. (2020). Belt and Road and Sea: Chinese Expansion in the Modern Era. Retrieved
July 19, 2023, from https://hir.harvard.edu/belt-and-road-and-sea/.
Huang Yanzhong. (2017). The Four Traps China May Fall Into. Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved July 19,
2019, from https://www.cfr.org/blog/four-traps-china-may-fall.
Kao, P.-S. (2022). The Political Economy of China’s Strategic Layout in Europe: A case study of the belt and road
initiative. The Chinese Economy, 55(4), 303–316. https://doi.org/10.1080/10971475.2021.1972549
Khalid, I., & Chawla, M. I. (2021). China’s BRI: Regional prospects and implications. Psychology and Education,
58(1), 4229–4235. http://psychologyandeducation.net/pae/index.php/pae/article/view/1488
Kim, J. (2015). Territorial Disputes in the South China Sea: Implications for Security in Asia and Beyond. Strategic
Studies Quarterly, 9(2), 107–141. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26271078
Mann, T. (2023). What has been happening in the South China Sea and what do experts predict for 2023?
ABCNEWS. Retrieved June 17, 2023, from https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-02-03/south-china-sea-beijingchina-taiwan-gas-fishing-military/101843870.
MOFA of the Republic of Indonesia. (2023). ASEAN-China agree on guidelines to accelerate negotiations for the
code of conduct in the South China Sea. Retrieved June 17, 2023, from https://kemlu.go.id/portal/en/read/4956/
berita/asean-china-agree-on-guidelines-to-accelerate-negotiations-for-the-code-of-conduct-in-the-south-china-sea.

THE CHINESE ECONOMY

201

Morris, D. (2020). Political risk on the Belt and Road. In A. Horobet, P. Polychronidou, & A. Karasavvoglou
(Eds.), Business performance and financial institutions in Europe (pp. 145–163). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3030-57517-5_10
Nedopil, C. (2023). Countries of the Belt and Road Initiative. Green Finance & Development Center, FISF Fudan
University. Retrieved June 29, 2023, from https://greenfdc.org/countries-of-the-belt-and-road-initiative-bri/.
National Development and Reform Commission. (2016). The 13th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social
Development of the People’s Republic of China. Retrieved July 19, 2023, from https://en.ndrc.gov.cn/policies/
202105/P020210527785800103339.pdf.
National Development and Reform Commission. (2023). Chinese Path to Modernization: The Way Forward.
Retrieved July 21, 2023, from https://en.ndrc.gov.cn/news/mediarusources/202304/t20230428_1355489.html.
O’Rourke, R. (2023). Territorial Disputes in the South China Sea. The center for preventive action. Retrieved June
17, 2023, from https://www.cfr.org/global-conflict-tracker/conflict/territorial-disputes-south-china-sea.
Soong, J.-J. (2018). China’s one belt and one road initiative meets ASEAN economic community: Propelling and
deepening regional economic integration? The Chinese Economy, 51(4), 291–297. https://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/epdf/10.1080/10971475.2018.1457335?needAccess=true&role=button, accessed on June 17, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10971475.2018.1457335
Southerland, M. (2016). China’s Island Building in the South China Sea: Damage to the marine environment, impli­
cations, and international Law. U.S.-China economic and security review commission. Retrieved October 4, 2019,
from https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/China%27s%20Island%20Building%20in%20the%20South%20
China%20Sea_0.pdf.
Thao, N. H. (2010). The 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea: A note. Ocean
Development & International Law, 34(3-4), 279–285. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00908320390221849
The State Council of the RPC. (2016). The Outline of the 13th FYP. Retrieved July 17, 2023, fromhttps://www.gov.
cn/xinwen/2016-03/17/content_5054992.htm.
UNDP. (2021). China’s 14th FYP, spotlighting climate and environment. China’s Issue Brief. Retrieved June 19,
2023, from https://www.cn.undp.org/content/china/en/home/library/environment_energy/issue-brief–-china-s14th-5-year-plan– spotlighting-climate–e.html.
Wagle, A. (2023). Geoeconomics over geopolitics, The Kathmandu Post, 16 June, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023,
from https://kathmandupost.com/columns/2023/06/19/geoeconomics-over-geopolitics.
Xu, Z., & Chen, D. (2023). Will the ‘Chinese Path to Modernization’ Lead to Global Divergence? The Diplomat:
China Power, May 23, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023, from https://thediplomat.com/2023/05/will-the-chinesepath-to-modernization-lead-to-global-divergence/.
Yan, I. L. (2023). ASEAN Between the US and China. Jakarta Globe. Retrieved July 12, 2023, from https://jakarta­
globe.id/opinion/asean-between-the-us-and-china.
Yeung, HAK., & Huber, J. (2024). Has China’s belt and road initiative positively impacted the economic complex­
ity of host countries? Empirical evidence. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 69, 246–258. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.strueco.2023.12.012
Yoshihara, T., & Holmes, J. (2011). Can China Defend a “Core Interest” in the South China Sea? The Washington
Quarterly, 34(2), 45–59. https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/
twq11spring yoshiharaholmes.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1080/0163660X.2011.562082

