See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/262439468

Vietnam's strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union
and Russia (2012)
Article in Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional · December 2012
DOI: 10.1590/S0034-73292013000100009

CITATIONS

READS

22

263

3 authors:
Tran Phuc

Alena Vysotskaya Guedes Vieira

Dalat University

University of Minho

110 PUBLICATIONS 841 CITATIONS

50 PUBLICATIONS 440 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Laura C Ferreira-Pereira
University of Minho
62 PUBLICATIONS 522 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Alena Vysotskaya Guedes Vieira on 31 March 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Artigo

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China:
the roles of the European Union and Russia
O hedging estratégico do Vietnam face à ascensão da China:
o papel da União Europeia e da Rússia
Phuc Thi Tran*
Alena Vysotskaya G. Vieira**
Laura C. Ferreira-Pereira***
Rev. Bras. Polít. Int. 56 (1): 163-182 [2013]

Introduction1
Since the end of the Cold War, Vietnamese foreign policy has been
oriented towards safeguarding the country’s interests in the Southeast Asia (SEA),
particularly in the South China Sea (SCS). In line with the view of authorities
in Hanoi, these areas are critical for regional and ultimately global security. The
importance ascribed to the region has been closely connected to China’s aspiration
to strengthen both its economic security (including food and energy security) and
military defense as a means to assert itself as a global power. The SCS important
resources include oil and gas reserves as well as fish stocks, and the waters of the
SCS represent the second most used sea lane in the world. Against this backdrop,
Vietnam’s strategy towards the SEA and the SCS rests on a combination of
economic and geostrategic calculations.
Indeed, the SEA, especially the SCS, has consistently been defined as an
integral part of Vietnam’s core national interest at both socioeconomic and
geostrategic levels. The economic importance of the SCS is confirmed by forecasts
that estimate that by 2020, “the maritime economy will contribute up to 55%
of Vietnam’s GDP and will account for 55–60% of its exports.”2 On the other
* Master of International Relations, University of Minho, Portugal (hanhquan@gmail.com).
** Researcher at Núcleo de Investigação em Ciência Política e Relações Internacionais (NICPRI), Universidade
do Minho (vysotskayaa@gmail.com).
*** Associate Professor at the Instituto Superior de Ciências Sociais e Políticas (ISCSP), Universidade Técnica
de Lisboa (lferreira-pereira@iscsp.utl.pt).
1 Alena Vysotskaya Guedes Vieira and Laura C. Ferreira-Pereira would like to acknowledge the financing under
the Collaborative Research Project “The Partnerships of the European Union as an Instrument of Global Action:
Rationale and Implications,” PTDC/CPJ-CPO/113251/2009, financed by Fundação Ciência e Tecnologia.
2 Thayer, C. A. (2008). Vietnam’s Defence Policy and its Impact on Foreign Relations. Paper presented at the
Sixth Euroviet Conference, Asien-Afrika-Institute, Hamburg, (June 6–8), p. 31.

163

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

hand, the geostrategic position of the SCS boosts the country’s relevance in the
foreign policy front, since it offers Vietnam critical strategic weight in dealing with
external powers involved in the region.
Thus, not surprisingly, the development of the maritime economy is viewed in
Hanoi as a precondition to strengthen the country’s national security and defense,
which should be promoted in the spirit of international cooperation. On June
21, 2012, the Vietnamese National Assembly passed the Vietnamese Maritime
Law, which, according to Pham Binh Minh, Vietnam’s Foreign Affairs Minister,
represents “the inevitable requirement for Vietnam’s economic development
cause” while also asserting “Vietnam’s sovereignty” over the SCS, namely over
the contested Paracel and Spratly islands.3
Given the great power predisposition exhibited by Chinese foreign policy in
the new millennium, a disposition which has been supported by its strong economic
weight and political leverage, relations with China represent a fundamental factor
in Hanoi’s strategic calculations. That being said, the increase in tension due to
territorial disputes over the SCS has triggered a dilemma that has thus far hindered
a positive evolution in the bilateral relations between the two countries. These
tensions exacerbated in 2007, when a number of incidents occurred against the
backdrop of the renewed assertion of sovereignty by the People’s Republic of China
(PRC) State Council. This was especially reflected in the declaration on Sansha
as an integral part of the province of Hainan; as well as the political emphasis
placed upon the country’s territorial rights and, consequently, China’s sovereign
power to use force to protect national territories.4 In the spring of 2007, China
opposed to Vietnam’s deal with the British Petroleum (BP),5 and as a result, the
BP had to shelve its initial plans to develop an oil and gas field off the Southern
Vietnamese coast. In early summer of 2007, China has requested further oil and
gas firms to stop their exploration-oriented activities with the Vietnamese partners
in the SCS, while threatening these companies with unspecified consequences
for their business dealings with China (in case they failed to meet the request).6
In July 2007, Chinese naval patrol boats have opened fire against a Vietnamese
fishing boat in the Spratlys, leading up to the sinking of this boat and the death
of one of its crew members. In addition, the imposition of unilateral fishing bans
in the SCS in 2009 was also one of the causes behind the rising political tension.7
Furthermore, China has protested against Vietnam’s application to the United
3 Vietnam da chuyen thong diep quan trong qua Luat Bien [Vietnam sends an important message via Vietnam’s
maritime Law], VNexpress, June 25, 2012.
4 Storey, I. (2008). Trouble and Strife in the South China Sea: Vietnam and China. China Brief, 8(8) (April 16).
5 Storey, I. (2008). Conflict in the South China Sea: China’s Relations with Vietnam and the Philippines.
The Asia-Pacific Journal: Japan Focus.
6 Folkmanis, J. (2009). China Warns Some Oil Companies on Work with Vietnam, U.S. Says. Bloomberg, (July 6).
7 Reinforced Patrol Sails from Hainan. Chinadaily.com.ch, May 19, 2009; Controversial Chinese Ban Affects
More Vietnamese Fishing Vessels. ThanhNien News, June 5, 2009.

164

Nations Commission on Limits to Continental Shelves (UNCLCS) in May
2009, to extend the country’s continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles into
the SCS from its coastline. Furthermore, the day after Vietnam’s application at
UNCLCS, on May 7, 2009, the Chinese government submitted its own request
to the UNCLCS, with a map referring to Chinese claims in the SCS, delineated
by a U-shaped line composed of a number of separate dashes. If these dashes were
connected, the resulting line would allocate up to 90% of the SCS to China,
including the Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands and Macclesfield Bank. In July 2012,
China established the Sansha administrative district (covering all the Paracels and
Spratlys Islands) in Hainan Island.8
The new and more forceful posture of the Chinese leadership has been
challenging the idea of Beijing’s foreign policy as one being built on the “peaceful
rise” formula. In fact, it seems that the achievement of “China’s Dream,” i.e. the
transformation of the country into the world’s leading power, will be accompanied
by the country’s military projection into, and mounting tension in, the SCS region.9
Nevertheless, it should be stressed that the Sino-Vietnamese disputes also
have a distinct economic dimension due to the prospects of further exploitation
of hydrocarbon resources in the SCS. From this perspective, China’s assertiveness
vis-à-vis Vietnam could be interpreted as a pressure on ExxonMobile, British
Petroleum and other international companies, which have been assisting Vietnam
with hydrocarbon exploitation in the region.
From a security perspective, the potential militarization of the SCS disputes
that threaten the stability and prosperity of the SEA states, including Vietnam,
represents the principal concern of the countries in the region. There is a general
apprehension that one or more of these disputes might lead to an armed conflict
between China and some states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). Vietnam is a case in point since it has been involved in intensive and
escalating tensions linked to territorial disputes with China in the SCS. In addition,
the actions, measures, and policies adopted by China towards enhancing its
8 Storey, I. (2008). Trouble and Strife in the South China Sea: Vietnam and China. Jamestown Foundation
China Brief, 8(8) (April 16).
9 The concept of “China’s Dream,” understood as an aspiration to become the world’s leading power, is a
centerpiece of a book entitled China’s Dream: Major Power Thinking and Strategic Posture in a Post-American Era,
written by Senior Colonel Liu, a professor at the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) National Defense University.
The strategy focuses on China’s military and economic rise, which, along with the country’s cultural and racial
superiority, should secure China’s world leadership, to the detriment of the United States that would lose its
dominant position in international politics. The fact that the book received its approval to be published by the
Chinese Communist Party is symptomatic of the fact that the “peaceful rise” doctrine is by no means the only
one underpinning modern Chinese foreign policy. See Liu Mingfu, Zhongguo Meng: Hou Meiguo Shidai de DaGuo
Siwei yu Zhanlüe Dingwei [China’s Dream: Major Power Thinking and Strategic Posture in a Post-American Era],
(Beijing: Zhongguo Youyi Chuban Gongsi [China Friendship Publishing Company], 2010). Scholars seem to
agree that while Liu’s argument “does not represent the official view of the Chinese Government or the PLA,” it
is nevertheless situated “within the bounds of acceptable discourse and probably reflects the views of a significant
number of PLA officers.” Saunders, P. C. (2010). Will China’s Dream turn into America’s Nightmare? China
Brief 10, No. 7, (April 1).

165

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

influence in the region might generate negative effects upon the process of regional
integration via undermining the consolidation of an intra-ASEAN unity. A unified
and strong ASEAN’s position towards China has the potential to mitigate Chinese
leverage in the region as a whole since ASEAN institutions and activities are given
special attention by authorities in Beijing, as platforms where the dialogue over
critical regional issues is taking place.
While most of the literature devoted to the rise of China examines its origins
and implications for the balance of power in the region and in world politics,
this study aims at investigating how Vietnam has been coping with the complex
challenge represented by the “rise of China.” The Vietnamese strategy has been
informed by the hedging strategy. Many works that have explored hedging strategies
in SEA focus on those undertaken by US, Japan, and India. This article, on the
contrary, points that other major actors have been emerging as a part of SEA states
hedging strategies. The article thus explores the role which the EU and Russia
have been playing in Vietnam’s hedging approach, while highlighting particular
features of the Vietnamese strategy, which has acquired a specific nuance that calls
for the use of the notion of strategic hedging.
The fact that Vietnam is overlooked by mainstream literature focusing on
the SEA is intriguing for a variety of different reasons. The country represents
a case of a middle power10 which, due to its geostrategic position, is expected to
play an increasingly relevant role in shaping SEA’s security environment. As an
important strategic player in the SEA and Asia-Pacific regions, Vietnam is in a
position to contribute more positively to regional maritime security both alongside
other middle powers and major powers in the Asia-Pacific. It is also a key player
in ASEAN-centric architecture, helping to shape the future contours of the
regional integration dynamics. Equally important, Vietnam is a littoral state on
the SCS through which vital sea lines of communication (SLOCs) pass. Finally,
the relevance of this case study springs from the fact that “China’s Dream” causes
Vietnam to face stark choices, difficult dilemmas and acute challenges regarding its
relationship with China. This is the case mainly because the level of dependency
exhibited by Vietnam vis-à-vis China is greater when compared to other states
in the region. At the same time, given the geographical proximity and the socialculture affinities, China’s influence in Vietnam’s economic and political security,
10 While there is no academic consensus on the concept of “middle power,” the assumption that countries
which are not identified as superpowers or great powers can influence both regional and international politics
is unproblematic. Vietnam’s influence stems from its both positional and non-positional characteristics. Among
these, the following should be stressed: the size of its population; its geographic position as a littoral state in such
strategically important area as the SCS; and the (foreign) policy options which the country has adopted over
the last 15 years or so in relation to the regional integration initiatives that allowed Vietnam to punch above its
weight. Furthermore, the country has been modernizing its armed forces for a number of years now. Finally, its
economic performance allows it to be positioned within the group of emerging middle-income countries. In
2007, the international position of Vietnam has been further reinforced with the country’s election as a nonpermanent member of the United Nations Security Council. Hence, nowadays, Vietnam is recognized as a key
player in ASEAN and in ASEAN-based regional architecture.

166

in addition to the country’s cultural and social life, is sizeable. Consequently, the
country has seen its room for maneuver in both the regional and international
sphere being dramatically reduced, increasing the feeling of necessity to notably
turn the situation around by undertaking what this study calls “strategic hedging.”
Along these lines, it is worth noting that the case of Vietnam allows one to gauge
major complex challenges and pressures posed to other countries in the region by
the not-so-peaceful rise of China and to hint at the potential that this holds for
the improvement of the international roles of both the EU and Russia in the SEA.
Vietnam’s foreign policy in the regional context
The current political choices of Vietnam’s foreign policy should be viewed
as a consequence of the experience of both political and economic isolation which
Vietnam underwent in the late 1980s. As a result of that, greater importance came
to be ascribed to the expansion of foreign relations as the necessary condition, not
only for overcoming political isolation and economic blockade, but also for building
up a strong economy. Vietnam’s economic reforms, which were inaugurated
in 1986, started to reflect this outlook: Hanoi recognized the importance of
expanding foreign relations with all countries while paying special attention to its
neighboring states and big powers. Lessons learned from the experience of isolation
became part of a new foreign policy thinking, whose emphasis was now placed
on the country’s integration into regional and international markets on the basis
of a new division of labor. Eventually, this new thinking entailed the adoption by
the Vietnamese leadership of a new concept: “comprehensive security.”11 While
confirming the prioritization of military affairs, the adoption of the aforementioned
concept allowed for a new foreign policy which also supported national economic
development. Reinforced by the “being-a-friend-to-all” approach, which
Vietnam has consistently pursued since the end of Cold War,12 the concept of
“comprehensive security” has guided Vietnam’s foreign policy until today.
Since 1991, as part of the new foreign policy thinking, the country has
continuously promoted a rapprochement with China. In addition to this, Hanoi
has been increasingly interested in participating in regional organizations, notably
ASEAN. In line with both the aspiration to open the country’s economy and
with the “being-a-friend-to-all” approach underlying national foreign policy,
participation in such organizations has been viewed as crucial to both national
security and economic development. Hence, Vietnam decided to apply for
accession to ASEAN and became an official member of the organization in
11 Nguyen, V. T. (2000). Vietnam’s New Concept of Security. In Radtke, K.W. and Feddema, R. (eds).
Comprehensive Security in Asia: Views from Asia and the West on a Changing Security Environment. Boston: Brill,
p. 409–410.
12 Nguyen, M.C. (1995). Integrating into the World and Preserving our National Identity. Hanoi: The National
Politics Publishing House.

167

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

1995—something that has enabled Vietnam to full-fledgedly participate in all
multilateral arrangements in force. Since then, together with the remaining member
states of ASEAN, Vietnam has been proactive in building up the regional security
architecture, of which the East Asia Summit (EAS)13 is just one example.
However, Vietnam’s bilateral relationship with China has not been free of
tensions. The legacy resulting from the border war in 1979 and the military conflicts
linked to territorial disputes over the Spratly Islands in 1988 left their marks on
the current Sino-Vietnamese relationship. Therefore, relations between the two
countries represent a fundamental factor in Hanoi’s strategic calculations, as it
will be discussed later in the article. These historical legacies have aggravated the
perception of complex security challenges confronting Hanoi. Nowadays, they still
shape the Vietnamese position regarding the SCS, hinder the positive evolution of
the bilateral relations between Vietnam and China, and exacerbate the situation
around the SCS conflicts. Nevertheless, the same historical legacies help explain
some decisions and statements which may appear to be, to some observers, a
diplomatic “overreaction.” This is the case, for instance, of the statements indicating
Vietnam’s concern over Beijing’s lenient position regarding the dissemination
of ideas on the internet regarding the Chinese “invasion of Vietnam.”14 To the
Vietnamese leadership, the position taken by the Chinese authorities is considered
excessively benevolent, and serves as yet another indication of the contradictory
nature of the “China’s Dream.”
In order to understand Vietnamese policy regarding the protection of its
national interests in the SCS, it is important to take into account that, historically
speaking, the relationship between Vietnam and China has always been embedded
in a structure of persistent asymmetry.15 Consequently, the major strategic
preoccupation of Hanoi’s leadership has been how to use the levers of diplomacy,
economic relations, and military ties to maintain the country’s autonomy. At
the same time, the room of maneuver for the Vietnamese authorities has been
rapidly decreasing, calling for a reaction on the part of Hanoi. For example, the
SCS disputes touch upon Vietnam’s core national and security issues, as well as
its economic development. Thus, as mentioned above, Vietnam has promoted its
claims of sovereignty over the Paracel and Spratly islands in the SCS, including
at the UNCLCS, and also adopted the Vietnamese Maritime Law in June 2012.
With the adoption of this Law, the country for the first time has a document legally
13 East Asia Summit meetings have been held every year since 2005. They bring together 16 East Asian countries,
and since 2011, also Russia and the United States. EAS therefore represents a layer of the regional institutional
architecture which is wider in its membership than ASEAN and other groupings, such as ASEAN Plus Three
(Japan, China, and South Korea).
14 The dissemination of anti-Vietnamese internet material is analyzed in: Thayer, C. A. (2011). The Tyranny of
Geography: Vietnamese Strategies to Constrain China in the South China Sea. Paper presented at International
Studies Association 52nd Annual Convention, Montréal, Québec, Canada, March 16–19.
15 Womack, B. (2006). China and Vietnam: The Politics of Asymmetry. New York: Cambridge University Press.

168

defining Vietnam’s sovereign rights in the SCS.16 In practice, this means Vietnam
continues to reject Chinese claims (referring to the U-shaped, nine-dash line) and
is by no means prepared to abdicate from fishing or oil exploration in these areas,
which Vietnam considers to be inside its exclusive economic zone. However, the
Law clarifies that Vietnam’s policy is oriented towards the principle of resolving
the disagreements and disputes over the islands and seas by peaceful means, in
accordance with the UNCLCS and international law and practices.
At the same time, it should be noted that the foreign policy options available
to Hanoi have been limited. Both options which could be considered as an
alternative to hedging, i.e. aligning with the US, or strengthening the ASEAN
as a counterweight to China, present important shortcomings which need to be
carefully considered in Hanoi.17 An exclusive pro-US orientation could not only
upset the relationship with other strategic partners, such as Russia, critical to
Hanoi’s foreign policy considerations, but also generate domestic political costs
associated with political liberalization. As for the ASEAN option, it represents
a heterogeneous group of countries which do not necessarily support an overt
objective of acting as a counterweight to China. A potential reordering of objectives
stemming from a rethinking of the ASEAN relationship with China would put
in danger the region’s integration process. The latter is clearly not an objective
of the Vietnamese leadership. ASEAN plays an important role in Vietnamese
foreign policy in hedging against China since it allows Hanoi to discuss the SCS
issue from the position of ASEAN (i.e. as a group). Along with ASEAN, ASEAN’s
Regional Forum (ARF) and EAS are also important. They have been established
to discuss regional security issues, including maritime security, and are therefore
critical to Hanoi’s objective of dealing with the SCS disputes by moving them
from a bilateral to a multilateral agenda. Furthermore, the discussion of the SCS
issue entails the involvement of external players in their capacity as members of
these fora to portray their commitment to strive towards peace, stability, and
prosperity of the region. All this corroborates Vietnam’s perspective on regional
security and its national interests, to the extent that ASEAN, ARF, and EAS have
become critical instruments in support of the Vietnamese position.
Finally, it is important to note that when dealing with SCS issues, the
Vietnamese authorities have been facing the need to strike a balance between
domestic and international politics surrounding this matter. Internally, the
Vietnamese government has been under pressure to introduce effective measures
to protect the country’s territorial integrity, to secure maritime interests, and to
promote the welfare of its people. Hence, the government had to show a firm
16 The Vietnam Maritime Law 2012. Retrieved August 20, 2012, from <http://danluat.thuvienphapluat.vn/
luat-bien-viet-nam-2012-72100.aspx>.
17 Vietnam’s balancing strategy to cope with China analyzed in: Tran, T. P. (2012). How are Southeast Asian small
states coping with the rise of China? The Case of Vietnam, BUM, p. 98–103. Retrieved from <http://hdl.handle.
net/1822/19885>.

169

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

position on the SCS disputes in order to forge domestic consensus regarding a
matter critical for national security. Externally, the government has attempted to
avoid exacerbating the situation while trying to avoid being seen as adopting a
confrontational approach with regard to the other claimants. The reasons behind
this foreign policy stance are twofold. On the one hand, they include the adherence
of Hanoi, from 1986 onwards, to the principles of good neighborhood policy
vis-à-vis the SEA countries. On the other hand, they are informed by Vietnam’s
aspiration to forge a common ASEAN position regarding the SCS disputes.
All the above-mentioned constraints and dilemmas which Hanoi has been
facing in light of the new assertive posture of a rising China have been critical
to Vietnam’s foreign policy choices in the complex SEA region. These choices
ultimately culminate in the adoption of a position, which can be called “strategic
hedging.”
Hedging in Vietnam’s foreign policy
Contemporary academic literature has paid little attention to the hedging
strategy. That being said, hedging is defined as “a purposeful act in which a
state seeks to insure its long term interests by placing its policy bets on multiple
countering options that are designed to offset risks embedded in the international
systems.”18 The objective of hedging is to “cultivat[e] a middle position that forestalls
or avoids having to choose one side at the obvious expense of another.”19 In this
regard, states will continue to stay in the “middle” of balancing and bandwagoning.
Strategic hedging behavior, which may assume various forms, notably
economic, diplomatic, or even military, “helps states cope with the threats
and constraints they are likely to encounter under conditions of unipolarity,
while simultaneously preparing them for new threats and opportunities that are
likely to emerge as the system leader falls farther into relative decline.”20 Thus,
strategic hedging allows minimizing long-term threats and maximizing long-term
opportunities. It can enhance a given state’s capabilities, impossible to obtain
through other strategies, e.g. hard balancing.21 Such an enhancement is particularly
crucial for Vietnam in view of an unrivaled rise of China.
Moreover, strategic hedging can also improve the ability of the hedging state
to decrease its dependence on public goods or direct subsidies which are provided
18 Kuik C. C. (2008). Rising Dragon, Crouching Tigers? Comparing the Foreign Policy Responses of
Malaysia and Singapore toward a Re-emerging China, 1990–2005. BiblioAsia, 3(4). Singapore: National
Library Board, 4.
19 Goh, E. (2005). Meeting the China Challenge: The US in Southeast Asian Regional Strategies. Policy
Studies 16. East-West Center, p. 41.
20 Tessman, B.F. (2007). System Structure and State Strategy: Adding Hedging to the Menu. Security Studies
21 (2), p. 192–231, p. 193.
21 Ibid.

170

by the country that is being hedged against.22 Notwithstanding Vietnam’s strategy
of economic diversification, China’s prevailing influence is undeniable, especially in
the context of the former’s substantial trade deficit which in the first nine months
of the year 2012 amounted to US$ 11.3 billion.23
The Vietnamese government saw the Chinese investment both as a
solution to the problem of deficit reduction and as precondition of the increase
of its exports, which had become critical after Vietnam’s accession to the World
Trade Organization (WTO) in 2007. However, the encouragement of Chinese
investments in Vietnam had negative consequences. Economically, due to
Vietnamese enterprises’ weakness and/or lack of competitiveness vis-à-vis the
Chinese ones, Vietnam’s economic dependence on China has been reinforced.
Eventually, China’s leverage has increased with the possibility of introducing
sanctions against Vietnam in the context of tensions in the SCS.
Furthermore, encouraging the Chinese economic investment on national
territory has been a double-edged sword for Vietnam’s government also due to the
prevailing strong anti-China domestic feelings. Symptomatic of this is the criticism
that has been voiced against the Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung by such highranked figures as the 97-year-old General Vo Nguyen Giap, that is a national
military icon.24 The General’s criticism, whose main target was the controversial
bauxite mining venture involving China in 2009,25 soon evolved into a public
manifestation of the existing fears of Chinese economic imperialism, expansion, and
even colonization. At the same time, the support given to the project by many of
the most powerful members of the Vietnamese Communist Party was interpreted
as a result of the Chinese bribery of these officials, viewed as being kowtowing to
China and selling themselves out to Beijing and to capitalism.26
Along these lines, the strategic hedging presented itself as an especially
valuable political option to the Vietnamese government. That being said, strategic
hedging is no panacea for the resolution of the SEA problems and involves risks.
These risks are not only linked to Vietnam’s foreign policy autonomy, but also
to the formidable balance of power that has been promoted and safeguarded by
ASEAN. The risks are exacerbated by the growing arm race in the region. According
to Evan S. Medeiros, “hedging is fraught with complications and dangers that
22 Ibid.
23 Vietnam Aims to Cut Trade Deficit With China. The Wall Street Journal, Asia News, November 12, 2012.
The respective amounts for 2011 and 2010 were US$ 13.5 billion and US$ 12.46 billion.
24 McCornac, D. C. (2011). Vietnam’s Relations with China: A Delicate Balancing Act. China Research
Center, 10(2).
25 The project raised criticism due to two major reasons. Firstly, there were environmental concerns since it
would produce effluents that would pollute farmland and water sources. Secondly, China announced that it
would resort to its own workers to run the project, meaning that only a few jobs would be allocated to Vietnamese
workers while a permanent Chinese settlement would be created in this strategically sensitive area. Members of
the Vietnamese Communist Party were suspected of having received payoffs by the Chinese.
26 Ibid.

171

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

could precipitate a shift toward rivalry and regional instability,”27 mainly due to
the increasing competitive engagement of external players in the Southeast Asia
region, at the cost of the marginalization of ASEAN. To be sure, this is a scenario
that does not correspond to Vietnam’s national interests. Finally, it should be said
that in order to be a viable option the former requires flexibilities of alignments,28
and a skillful implementation of the strategy involved.
This hedging research stream suggests that Vietnam walks a very fine line
in its strategy towards the US, ASEAN, and China, and makes adjustments
depending on its national interest.29 The reason behind adopting a hedging
behavior is that small states, such as Vietnam, “cannot get too ‘cozy’ with either
Washington or Beijing because it makes the other country uncomfortable.”30
Indeed, Vietnam does not want to be seen as a bulwark for Chinese containment.
It also does not want to court trade only with American firms, nor does it want
to court US support in security relations in the SEA region. Furthermore, Vietnam
does not simply bandwagon with China. Instead, Vietnam adopts hedging
vis-à-vis China.
Therefore, given this preference for hedging dynamics, Vietnam has been
opting for the following twofold strategy. On the one hand, Vietnam’s foreign
policy has sought to engage China while aiming to repair and deepen the
relationship between the two countries. On the other hand, Hanoi’s strategy has
been designed to buttress this foreign policy option by seeking to engage other
great powers in the region, notably the US, India, Japan, the EU, and Russia,
in order to counterweight Chinese ambition. While supporting this twofold
strategic orientation, Vietnamese foreign policy has paid special attention to
regional institutions, predominantly to ASEAN, due to its capacity of keeping
China engaged while simultaneously restraining Beijing’s assertive and sometimes
even aggressive behavior in the SCS. Economic relations are part of this twofold
strategy: Vietnam uses its economic relations to deepen both bilateral ties with
China and engage it in multilateral fora, such as ASEAN. Accordingly, Vietnam is
expected to continue to further develop relationships with major external players
in addition to ASEAN, as part of its quest for economic growth and security.
An illustration of Vietnam’s strategic hedging is the position adopted by
the Vietnamese leadership on the issue of the Cam Ranh port. The latter is
strategically located in the SEA and Western Pacific and is only 1,000 km away
from the Hainan Island, where the Chinese government established the Sansha
27 Medeiros, E.S. (2005) Strategic Hedging and the Future of Asia-Pacific Stability. Washington Quarterly, 29
(19), Winter 2005–2006.
28 Waltz, K. N. (1979). Theories of International Politics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 168.
29 Dosch, J. (2006). Vietnam’s ASEAN Membership Revisited: Golden Opportunity or Golden Cage?
Contemporary Southeast Asia: A Journal of International and Strategic Affairs, 28 (2), p. 242.
30 Zissis, C. (2006). The Surging Vietnamese Economy. Council of Foreign Relations Backgrounder (October 30).

172

administrative district. The importance of the base stems from the fact that
this base can be used to encircle China, blocking its access to Asia-Pacific, thus
diminishing China’s extensive influence over Vietnam. An upgraded Cam Ranh
base might thus allow for naval force projections into disputed areas in the SCS.31
In these circumstances, the issue of external actors’ access to the Cam Ranh base
acquires critical importance; by allowing a foreign country to enter the base (even
if only for purposes of fuel refilling and maintenance), Hanoi does not only open
the possibility of strengthening military cooperation, but also forging a strategic
anti-China alliance.
In the past years, especially since 2000, Vietnam has strengthened its
security cooperation and relationships with naval forces from the US, Russia,
and India, among others, thereby reinforcing its strategic role in the region.
However, instead of choosing one particular country and granting access to the
latter, Hanoi’s tactic has been to adopt strategic hedging. Eventually, this option
would allow maximizing the benefits brought about from using the base. The
decision has been backed up by two carefully calculated steps. Firstly, in October
2010, Vietnam declared that it “will sell its military port services to all navies,
including submarines”32 at the Cam Ranh port after the upgrade of the port,
despite not having mentioned the time when the upgrade would start and when
the port would be officially open to all countries33—with the exception of the
upgrade duration, which is planned to take three years.34 The facility would offer
“repair services to foreign naval ships and submarines and could be [used as] a
fuel stop for aircraft carriers.”35 Vietnam thus decided not to lease Cam Ranh
port to any foreign partner, instead focusing on actively diversifying cooperation
with different countries.
Eventually, the hedging illustrated by the case of the Cam Ranh port allowed
Hanoi to achieve two goals. Firstly, in line with its foreign policy objectives,
Hanoi avoided direct confrontation with China (or any other party). Secondly,
Vietnam has increased its leverage vis-à-vis external powers that are competing
with one another to increase their influence in the region. The decision has also
enabled Hanoi to profile itself as a “reliable partner,” something that can help
draw attention of major external players with geopolitical interests in the region.
Eventually, this increasing interest on the part of the external powers is expected
to produce the necessary containment effect over Chinese behavior in the SCS.
31 Cited in Cang Cam Ranh va Chien luoc an ninh cua Viet Nam [Cam Ranh base and Vietnam’s security
strategy], The South China Sea Studies, August 2, 2012.
32 PM says Cam Ranh Port to be solely managed by Vietnam. ThanhNienNews, June 11, 2012.
33 Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung statement at a press briefing following the 17th ASEAN Summit in Hanoi,
October 2010.
34 Vietnam’s Cam Ranh base to welcome foreign navies. Associated Press, November 2, 2010.
35 PM says Cam Ranh Port to be solely managed by Vietnam, op. cit.

173

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

Vietnam-EU: the economic hedging dynamics
It comes as no surprise that Vietnam has been increasingly anxious about the
growing power of the “Giant of the North” and its consequences for its national
economic interests. China is currently one of the biggest economic partners of
Vietnam and therefore holds an important position in the country’s economy.36
Indeed, it is one of the largest Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) providers37: in the
period of 2002–2009, China figures as the 5th largest investor with the total capital
of US$ 649.9 million. In the manufacturing field alone, Chinese investments in
Vietnam have risen from US$ 20 million in 2005 to more than US$ 300 million
in 2010.38 Through its investment, economic aid, and development aid,39 China
has reinforced Vietnam’s dependence. Moreover, aid and financial assistance
originating from Beijing and flowing to Vietnam indicate that finding out solutions
regarding how to deal with Vietnam’s increasingly powerful neighbor is far from
an easy task. The growing economic dependence on China has led to a drastic
reduction of leverage for Hanoi’s authorities (i.e. autonomy and independence in
decision-making processes). This considerably thwarts the capacity of Vietnam to
resolve the SCS disputes on equal footing with China.
In this regard, EU has the potential to profile itself as an economic partner
able to ultimately counterbalance the economic leverage of China in the Vietnamese
economy, favoring Hanoi. Indeed, the EU provides Vietnam with an alternative
to economic diversification while reducing the country’s dependence on China,
both in trade and FDI—even after having been dramatically hit by economic and
financial crises.
Due to prevailing tensions between the two countries and the increasingly
serious concern about China’s presence within its national economy, the
36 According to the European Commission Directorate General Trade Statistics Database, as of March 21,
2012, Vietnam’s largest trade partners in 2010 were China (€ 20,671.8 million), the US (€ 13,608.1 million),
EU (€ 13,403.4 million), and Japan (€ 12,642.8 million).
37 The US held the first position with US$ 5,130.4 million; South Korea, the third position with
US$ 3,598.9 million; and Japan, the fourth position with US$ 3,428.4 million. ASEAN Secretariat-ASEAN
FDI Database, as of July 5, 2010.
38 Laudermilk, B. (2012). Vietnam: Prime Opportunity or Risk Investment? Investin, 2012.
39 It should be noted that while China is one of the largest bilateral aid donors in Southeast Asia, particularly
in mainland Southeast Asian states (i.e. Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar), Chinese aid to Vietnam has been
more limited. The most significant Chinese aid allocation has been related to infrastructure; in particular, the
railway projects, as well as hydro-power development and ship-building facilities. Chinese assistance to Vietnam,
which corresponds approximately to US$ 200 million–US$ 300 million loans stands in contrast to the amounts
in assistance given to Indonesia and the Philippines. Thus, the total amount of Chinese funds allocated to the
Philippines reached US$ 5.4 billion between 2002 and 2007. As of 2008, the Philippines were the largest
recipient of Chinese loans in Southeast Asia, which reportedly totaled US$ 2 billion, of which about half has been
already disbursed. Lum, T. and Niksch, L. (2009). The Republic of the Philippines: Background and US Relation.
Washington DC: Congressional Research Service Report for Congress. On the other hand, Beijing has stopped
the economic assistance to Vietnam, in 2006, after the Vietnamese government invited Taiwan, a major investor
in the country, to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) November 2006 summit in Hanoi.
Saunders, P. C. (2010). Will China’s Dream turn into America’s Nightmare? China Brief 10, No. 7, (April 1).

174

Vietnamese government has attempted to diminish its reliance on trade with
China through expanding its export portfolio—although not exclusively—to the
Eurozone. As a result, in 2010, the EU became Vietnam’s third major trade partner
with € 13,403.4 million and its second major export partner with € 8,589.9 million
(accounting for 16.7% of the value of Vietnam’s exports with the world), while
China held the fourth position with € 5,537.2 million (10.8%).
However, Vietnam has become highly dependent on FDI originating from
China. The latter’s cooperation with Vietnam in the critical export-oriented
rubber, tire, and coffee industries has increasingly transformed Vietnam into one
of China’s manufacturing and resource-saturated “provinces.” Pressed to diversify
its investments in order to prevent itself from being exploited and dominated by
Chinese investors, Vietnam has been seeking more investments coming from the
EU. The EU has been attributed a special role in this regard, as the total FDI
inflow to Vietnam coming from the EU between 2002 and 2009 amounts to
US$ 4,7 billion (as compared to US$ 649,9 million coming from China), which
makes the EU the second largest external investor in Vietnam, just after the US.40 In
2011, the EU’s FDI in Vietnam was US$ 32 billion, encompassing 1,687 projects41,
which amounted to more than 12% of Vietnam’s total FDI.42 This was ten times
bigger that the FDI coming from China, which covered 805 projects with a total
pledged investment capital of US$ 3.184 billion. This position of the EU has
been reinforced in 2012, with an FDI record of US$ 1 billion.43 The EU has also
remained the main provider of development aid to Vietnam.
The rapport with the EU has been highly valued by Hanoi’s authorities.
Assessing bilateral cooperation between the EU and Vietnam, particularly in the
fields of trade and investment, Vietnamese National Assembly Chairman Nguyen
Sinh Hung referred to the EU’s “privileged position in Vietnamese foreign
policy.”44 Moreover, Foreign Affairs Minister Pham Binh Minh has highlighted the
importance of this bilateral relationship for regional security where he saw “favorable
conditions for the EU to promote and strengthen its role in SEA region.”45
Due to the importance attached by both parties to the bilateral relationship,
they have endeavored to strengthen their rapport so as to move it to a more advanced
level. Indicative of this was the signing of a new Partnership and Cooperation
40 The US held the first position with US$ 5,130.4 million; South Korea, the third position with
US$ 3,598.9 million; and Japan, the fourth position with US$ 3,428.4 million. ASEAN Secretariat-ASEAN
FDI Database, as of July 5, 2010.
41 Vietnam seeks more investments from EU. NhandanOnline, April 13, 2012.
42 EU Delegation to Vietnam. (2012). The EU and Vietnam vow to boost further relations, Media Release. (March 1).
43 China’s FDI into Vietnam crosses US$ 3 billion mark. Global Business Service, August 19, 2011.
44 EU la doi tac quan trong hang dau Vietnam, [EU—the top important partner of Vietnam]. Nguoilaodong,
June 30, 2012.
45 Ha, A. (2012). Quan he doi tac Vietnam–EU binh dang hon, [Vietnam-EU partnership]. BaoDatViet, June
29, 2012.

175

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

Agreement (PCA), on June 27, 2012,46 in Brussels, in addition to the launching
of formal negotiations for a Vietnam-EU Free Trade Agreement (FTA) on June
26, 2012. The entry into force and subsequent implementation of the PCA
and the eventual establishment of an FTA are recognized by Vietnam’s Foreign
Affairs Minister Pham Binh Minh as important new milestones in the evolution
of relations between Vietnam and the EU, both bilaterally and multilaterally.47
The EU is currently Vietnam’s second trading partner, with bilateral trade
amounting to US$ 24.29 billion in 2011. Vietnam’s exports to the EU have
increased by 33.5% in 2011.48 In addition, large EU-based energy companies such
as BP have been involved in oil and gas exploitation and drilling in the region. The
considerable trade turnover between the European companies and the regional
states, including Vietnam, is closely connected to the freedom of navigation and
the stability of the SCS. This fact has urged stronger EU engagement in regional
security matters, and especially into the maritime security in the SCS.49 Along these
lines, whilst it is clear that the EU’s economic presence in the SEA is growing at a
fast pace, it is also true that this circumstance has been particularly promoted by
the Vietnamese authorities since it enhances the country’s capacity to address the
complex challenges and pressures stemming from the rise of China.50
In contrast, the EU is unwilling to have any significant military force in
the region, which could further complicate the already puzzling regional military
equation while sending wrong signals for both insiders and outsiders. The EU
declines to participate in the region’s militarization arguing that the region’s realist
thinking as well as its trends towards militarization and confrontational policies
might lead the region into disastrous wars similar to the ones Europe experienced
during the 20th century. 51 Therefore, the EU attempts to make a contribution to
the resolutions of the SCS disputes through pursuing a “soft” policy. Its position
on the SCS is promoted in various meetings, including those of the ASEAN, ARF,
and EAS, in which the EU stresses the need for a peaceful resolution of the existing
conflicts while emphasizing the need to respect international law.
The EU has also demonstrated its support for the ASEAN-China Code of
Conduct (COC) of the parties in the South China Sea. The latter provides guiding
principles for solutions to the SCS disputes among claimants, which should be
found through the application of “peaceful means, without resorting to the threat
46 The EU and Vietnam to sign Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. (2012). European Commission Press
Release IP/12/691, (June 26).
47 Ibid.
48 Vietnam seeks more investments from EU, op. cit.
49 Rogers, J. (2009). From Suez to Shanghai: The European Union and Eurasian maritime security. Occasional
Paper, No. 77, The European Union Institute for Security Studies, (March); Evers H. D. and Gerke, S. (2006).
The Strategic Importance of the Strait of Malacca for World Trade and Regional Development. ZEF Working
Paper Series No. 17. Bonn: University of Bonn, p. 5.
50 Vietnam seeks more investments from EU. NhandanOnline, April 13, 2012.
51 Doan, X. L. (2011). Will Europe Play a Role in the ‘Asian Century’?. World Politics Review Briefing, (November 16).

176

or use of force, through friendly consultations and negotiations by sovereign
states directly concerned, in accordance with universally recognized principles of
international law, including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.”52
In addition, the EU has consistently promoted the position that all SEA states,
including Vietnam and China, need to define their exact position regarding the
claims in the SCS disputes.
Finally, the EU has declared that it was ready to share its own experiences
with regards to maritime disputes and fishing rights. Thus, the EU strengthens its
position in the SEA as a mediator in the current tensions and any potential conflict.
The statement of Philippe van Amersfoort, Deputy Head of the Southeast Asia
Division in the European External Action Service is a vivid illustration of this fact.
The EU official has namely declared that the “EU would welcome any request
from ASEAN to help resolve the dispute. As this strategic situation develops, the
EU may be a useful element of balance.”53 Along these lines, not only does the EU
play an important role in helping Vietnam to reduce its economic dependence on
China, but the EU has already started to engage itself in the search for solutions to
the SCS disputes, notably through emphasizing the respect for international laws
by the involved parties in any dispute, for the sake of regional and global security
issues related to the freedom of navigation in the area.
It is not difficult to find examples that illustrate the increasing role of the
EU in the domain of the SCS issues. On the one hand, the EU has promoted the
rapprochement with Vietnam. On February 29, 2012, the 1st EU-Vietnam political
dialogue at the Vice-Minister level was established to exchange views on promoting
convergence regarding several issues of common interest, including developments
in the SCS. On the other hand, at the 19th ARF meeting held in Cambodia on
July 12, 2012, the EU, together with the US, reached a joint statement in which
it was stated that they “will cooperate with Asian partners to enhance maritime
security based on international law as specified in United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, as well as contribute to confidence building measures to
increase trust in order to reduce the risks of crisis and conflicts.”54 The EU has
expressed its willingness to continue to pay close attention to the regional security
situation and support ASEAN’s position; and at the same time, along with the US,
to “continue to encourage ASEAN and China to promote building the COC and
to resolve the disputes through peaceful solutions, diplomacy, and cooperation.”55
The position that has been adopted so far by the EU does not explicitly
support Vietnam in the SCS disputes, neither does it strengthen Hanoi’s military
posture vis-à-vis China. However, an ever closer relationship between Vietnam and
52 ASEAN Secretariat. (2002). Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea. (November 4).
53 EU ready to play vital role in West Philippine Sea dispute. New Europe online, November 25, 2011.
54 ASEAN khong dua ra thong cao chung, [ASEAN has not reached a joint statement regarding the SCS disputes
after the 19th ARF Meeting]. BBC, July 12, 2012.
55 Ibid.

177

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

the EU has been critical to the Hanoi’s approach marked by strategic hedging. In
other words, it has been vital to diminish the country’s economic dependence on
China while generating further support to the existing regional security institutions
which tend to restrain China’s behavior.
Vietnam-Russia: the military hedging
At the military-political level, the US remains the only external player in the
SEA with the capacity of counterweighing China’s powerful influence. The military
expenditure of the US exceeds that of China sevenfold and that of Russia tenfold.
The US holds the largest amount of military spending with US$ 711 billion
annually while US$ 143 billion and US$ 71.9 billion is spent by China and Russia
respectively.56 Recently, Vietnam and the US have strengthened their military
cooperation through the reinforcement of defiance cooperation and the launching
of initiatives such as a political-military dialogue and direct military-to-military
contacts.57
That being said, it is important to emphasize the significant role played by
Russia when it comes to the issue of SCS disputes in which Vietnam has been
involved. While the US is considered a guarantor of regional security, Russia
represents a tangible threat to China for three main reasons. Firstly, Vietnam and
Russia have a long history of friendship, support, and military alignment against
China. This cooperation has encompassed the establishment of a common front
during the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese Border War as well as during the ensuing
conflict which persisted over a period of ten years. Secondly, Russia has been
present in the SCS area since the 1980s, long before the US. As a result of this,
Russia has longstanding economic interests in the SCS that include cooperation
with Vietnam in oil and gas exploitation projects. Thirdly, Moscow and Hanoi
have signed several contracts to sell modern weapons, including submarines and
aircrafts to Vietnam, as will be elaborated below. Thus, all the naval weapons in
use in Vietnam, including the critical Kilo class submarines, as well as Su-30Mkk
fighters, have been purchased from Russia, which allowed Vietnam to strengthen
its military capability in preparation for armed conflicts. This longstanding history
of military-industrial cooperation and the currently close relations in this area make
a fundamental difference between Vietnam-Russia and Vietnam-US relations on
the SCS issue.

56 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. (2012). Facts on International Relations and Security
Trends Database. In SIPRI Yearbook 2012: Armaments, Disarmament and International Security. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
57 In late 2009, after a six-year pause, Vietnam’s Defense Minister visited Washington for the second time.
For an analysis of defense cooperation between Vietnam and the USA, see: Thayer, C. A. (2010). Southeast Asia:
Patterns of Security Cooperation. Australia Strategic Strategy Institute.

178

Modern weapons, especially submarines, are critical to any power in the SCS
facing the possibility of an armed conflict. This is particularly the case in light of
China’s rapid military modernization. Indeed, the Chinese defense expenditure,
with an impressive double-digit growth for almost two decades, has remarkably reinforced the country’s power projection capability in both conventional and nuclear
terms. In 2011, China’s total military expenditure was US$ 119 billion, the second
largest in the world;58 while the respective number in 2009 was US$ 70 billion.59
In addition, the country is upgrading its naval base in Hainan Island and building
two aircraft carriers as part of a military modernization program.60
Vietnam has also undertaken measures towards military modernization. In
2009, Vietnam announced that it would procure six conventional diesel-powered
Kilo class submarines from Russia, which are scheduled to be delivered by 2014.
These submarines are likely to be equipped with sea-skimming 3M-54 Klub antiship missiles with a range of 300 km. In February 2012, Russia announced it will
co-produce the Uran anti-ship missile (SS-N-25 Switchable) with Vietnam.61 While
the submarines are being built, Russia and India are currently in charge of training
Vietnamese officers who will work in the submarines.62 These new submarines are
expected to improve Vietnam’s defense system since they allow to operate more
quickly and effectively in the SCS.
The acquisition of military capabilities is critical, not only purely for the
sake of defense and strategic calculations, but also for the important function it
plays in the safeguarding of both economic interests and the security of oil field
explorations in the SCS. This latter aspect is particularly critical given the role
that Russia has been playing herein. Indeed, the lion’s share of these exploitation
projects has being undertaken by Vietnam jointly with Russia.
The cooperation in oil exploitation between Vietnam and Russia dates back
to the 1980s, when the Soviet Union together with Vietnam established in 1981 a
joint venture, Vietsovpetro. The major objective of this cooperation was to exploit
oil in the White Tiger oilfield in the SCS, which still remains to be the largest one
in Vietnam. Vietsovpetro is presently the main force behind Vietnam’s petroleum
industry and economy. To date, Vietsovpetro has produced more than 185 million
tons of crude oil and more than 21 billion cubic meters of associated gas and
liquefied petroleum gas from the White Tiger, Dragon, and Big Bear oilfields in the
SCS area. Incidentally, all these fields are inside the zone contested by China. Eighty
percent of Vietnamese oil and gas comes from Vietsovpetro, ranking Vietnam as
58 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, op. cit.
59 Banlaoi, R.C. (2010). Southeast Asian Regionalism and China’s Soft Power Strategy in a Global Age. Jebat:
Malaysian Journal of History, Politics and Strategic Studies, 37(60).
60 Blanchard, B and Lim, B. (2011). China building aircraft carriers; neighbors worried. Reuters (July 27).
61 Thayer, C. A. (2012). The Rise of China and Maritime Security in Southeast Asia. Ide-Jetro, (February 15).
62 Bao Trung Quoc binh luan ve cac hoc vien tau ngam Vietnam tai Nga [Chinese Newspapers have commented
on Vietnamese submarine trainees in Russia], The Global Times & RussiaMil, December 3, 2011.

179

Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional

Vietnam’s strategic hedging vis-à-vis China: the roles of the European Union and Russia

Phuc Thi Tran; A lena V ysotskaya G. Vieira; L aura C. Ferreira-Pereira

the third largest oil producer and exporter in SEA. In addition, Vietsovpetro’s total
crude-oil turnover up until now is US$ 33 billion, contributing US$ 20.2 billion
to Vietnam’s state budget (which corresponds to 22–25% of the state income).63
The cooperation has generated high dividends for both Vietnam and
Russia. In the field of oil industry alone, the two-way trade turnover rose
from US$ 1.83 billion in 200964 to US$ 33 billion, as of July 2012.65 This
cooperation has triggered further Russian investment into various projects in
Vietnam. By 2008, Russia had 59 projects with a total registered capital of over
US$ 376 million, surpassing China’s FDI in that particular year (which amounted
to US$ 53 million). In the first half of 2009, Russia became the 5th foreign
investor; once again surpassing China; shortly thereafter it became the biggest
foreign investor in Vietnam, with two new projects valued at US$ 330 million in
registered capital.66 As of July 2012, Russia had 80 investment projects in Vietnam
with total registered capital of US$ 920 million.67 Investments have been mainly
concentrated around the petroleum and oil industries, but have also included heavy
and light industries, transportation, post, aquatic culture, and fishing.68 Along
these lines, it can be said that Russia was a pioneer in establishing cooperation with
Vietnam which, since 2000, increasingly attracted other international players, such
as Mobil, BP, and TOTAL. Due to their investment in Vietnamese oil and gas
exploration, these actors would possibly be willing to support Vietnam’s position
in the SCS disputes.69
Russia’s importance to Hanoi’s strategic calculations is also closely related to
the Cam Ranh port. Even though Hanoi has pursued the policy of “equidistancing”
all external actors to the Cam Ranh, Russia stands out from the other major
players in its role as an exporter of military equipment and technology, which may
constitute the basis for fostering closer military ties between these two countries.
Prior to the opening of the port to other foreign actors, on November 1, 2010,
Vietnam declared that there were plans to hire Russian consultants and to buy
Russian technology for the port’s construction and upgrading projects.70 This
63 The official website of Joint Venture Vietsovpetro may be visited at <http://www.vietsov.com.vn/Pages/
introduction_en.aspx>.
64 Vietnam’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. (2007). Vietnam, Russia deepen bilateral ties (April 18).
65 Vietnam and Russia’s strong energy. Vietnam Investment Review, July 23, 2012.
66 Vietnam’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. (2009). Enterprises suggest keys to boosting Vietnam-Russia trade (August 4).
67 Vietnam and Russia’s strong energy, op. cit.
68 Vietnam’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, op. cit.
69 On June 23, 2012, the Chinese National Offshore Oil Corporation invited international bids for oil and gas
lots within Vietnam’s exclusive economic zone (contested by China with its U-shaped, nine-dash line claim),
which is the area of joint Vietnam-Russian oil and gas exploration projects. See: PetroVietnam protests Chinese
firm’s oil building. TuoiTreNews, June 28, 2012.
70 Declaration to the media by Vietnamese Defense Minister Phung Quang Thanh on the sidelines of the
parliamentary session (November 1, 2010). The statement came after Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung
announced the plan to re-open the tactical base to foreign fleets. See: Shipyard will not put military secrets at
risk. Talkvietnam, June 11, 2012.

180

decision of the Vietnamese government has been seen by agencies like Stratfor
as an evidence of the “favorable conditions for Russian troops to return to the
base,” hence supporting the common goal of “preventing and deterring China’s
growing aggression in the SCS.”71 Such interpretation of the role of Russia in
Vietnam’s security strategy seems to be the line with the strategic calculation of the
Vietnamese leadership, i.e. Vietnam welcoming Russia’s tangible engagement in
regional security issues. The Vietnamese President Truong Tan Sang asserted that
Vietnam’s relations with Russia are “bound by long-term cooperation and strategic
partnership. […] Hence, we will provide benefits for Russia in Cam Ranh port,
including in the field of military cooperation.” Vietnam will thus “allow Russia
to set up a ship maintenance base at its Cam Ranh port.”72
Besides the traditional emphasis placed by Vietnamese authorities upon
military cooperation with Russia, efforts have been made so as to engage Russia in
the region’s security architecture—something that is in harmony with the relevance
that has been ascribed by Hanoi to ASEAN, ARF, and EAS. Thus, the leaders who
gathered at the 5th EAS, held in Hanoi in 2010, decided to invite Russia (a full
dialogue partner of ASEAN since July 29, 1996)73 to participate in this regional
structure. Eventually, the EAS membership was extended to Russia in 2011.
Due to the radically reduced room of maneuver in the shadow of the rise of
China, Vietnam’s relations with Russia have acquired crucial importance to Hanoi.
Indeed, these relations represent military strategic hedging to the extent that such
strategies address Vietnam’s need for military modernization. Cooperation with
Russia is unique since it allows the country to prepare for a potential armed conflict
in the region while ensuring national security and interests vis-à-vis China. At the
same time, Russia enhances its role and influence in the area as a re-emerging power.
Equally important, Vietnam’s military strategic hedging towards Russia is
closely connected to its economic cooperation in oil exploration, which brings
significant economic benefits to both parties. Undoubtedly, Vietnam’s hedging
towards Russia has been successful. The stronger military cooperation between
these two countries has enabled Vietnam to acquire modern military equipment,
providing the country with the ability to advance joint explorations of oil and gas
in the SCS despite growing Chinese opposition towards these projects.
Conclusion
This article has explored Vietnam’s hedging strategy to cope with the
growing power, influence, and presence of China in the region. It has scrutinized,
in particular, the role played by two external players—Russia and the EU—in Vietnam’s hedging against its powerful neighbor. As the present study has
demonstrated, such hedging is especially noticeable in the strategies adopted by
Vietnam in territorial disputes with China.
As a relatively small country in terms of bargaining power, Vietnam believes
that the involvement of third parties is needed. This is all the more apparent as
the issue of maritime security in the SCS, as associated to the freedom and safety
of navigation, has become a source of concern not only for the SCS countries, but
also for the rest of the world.
Received December 27, 2012
Approved February 5, 2013
Abstract
Against the backdrop of China’s assertive policies in the South China Sea, the present study
evaluates how Vietnam has sought to mitigate the increasingly unequal regional power
distribution vis-à-vis China. It argues that Vietnam tends to cope with China mainly by engaging
itself in hedging strategies on the basis of diversified and strong relationships with different
players. Appraising the roles of Russia and the European Union (EU), the study analyzes the
pay-offs of Vietnam’s military hedging with Russia and its economic hedging with the EU.
Keywords: China; European Union; Russia; South China Sea; Southeast Asia; Vietnam.

Resumo
Tendo como pano de fundo a crescente afirmação da China no Mar da China Meridional, o
presente estudo avalia a forma como o Vietnã procurou mitigar o desequilíbrio de poder que se
instalou nessa região em consequência de tal desenvolvimento. O principal argumento assenta
na ideia de que o Vietnã tende a gerir a crescente assertividade regional da China recorrendo
a estratégias de hedging baseadas no reforço e diversificação das suas relações externas.
Fazendo incidir o foco analítico nos papéis desempenhados pela União Europeia e pela Rússia,
especialmente, nos domínios econômico e militar, o presente artigo examina e discute a estratégia
vietnamita de hedging militar com a Rússia e de hedging econômico com a UE.
Palavras-chave: China; União Europeia; Rússia; Mar da China Meridional; Sudeste Asiático; Vietnã.

182
View publication stats

