The Paciﬁc Review

ISSN: 0951-2748 (Print) 1470-1332 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpre20

A harmonized Southeast Asia? Explanatory
typologies of ASEAN countries’ strategies to the
rise of China
Ian Tsung-Yen Chen & Alan Hao Yang
To cite this article: Ian Tsung-Yen Chen & Alan Hao Yang (2013) A harmonized Southeast Asia?
Explanatory typologies of ASEAN countries’ strategies to the rise of China, The Paciﬁc Review,
26:3, 265-288, DOI: 10.1080/09512748.2012.759260
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2012.759260

Published online: 26 Feb 2013.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 5684

View related articles

Citing articles: 14 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpre20

The Pacific Review, 2013
Vol. 26, No. 3, 265–288, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2012.759260

A harmonized Southeast Asia?
Explanatory typologies of ASEAN
countries’ strategies to the rise of China
Ian Tsung-Yen Chen and Alan Hao Yang

Abstract In the face of a rising China, some scholars have argued that ASEAN
countries will choose to either bandwagon with or balance against China, while others believe they will respond with a more moderate policy known as ‘hedging’. In
considering these options, ASEAN countries must take into account their individual interests within the economic and security structure of this region. In this research, we argue that each ASEAN country confronts divergent sets of security
and economic relations with China, which play a major role in shaping their policy responses. We can characterize their responses into four quadrants. Each cell
can be categorized in terms of a high or low degree of threat perception (HT or LT)
from China, as well as a positive or negative economic expectation (PE or NE) with
China. We thus hypothesize that ASEAN countries in the HT–NE situation will balance against China; those in the LT–PE situation will bandwagon with China; those
in the HT–PE or LT–NE situations will hedge against China. Hypotheses are supported by three case studies, Vietnam–China (HT–NE), Cambodia–China (LT–PE)
and Singapore–China (HT–PE) relations.
Keywords Southeast Asia; China; explanatory typology; hedging; bandwagoning;
balancing.
Ian Tsung-Yen Chen is a PhD student in the International Doctoral Program in Asia–Pacific
Studies of National Chengchi University in Taiwan and project coordinator in the secretariat of
Taiwan Participatory Group, Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP).
He earned his MA in East Asian studies from Stanford University. He works in the fields
of international relations, international political economy, international organizations, game
theory and quantitative analysis with a focus on East Asia. His current research focuses on the
convergence and divergence of international financial regulation.
Address: International Doctoral Program in Asia-Pacific Studies (IDAS), No.64, Section 2,
ZhiNan Road, Wenshan District, Taipei 11605, Taiwan. E-mail: ian.ty.chen@gmail.com
Alan Hao Yang is an assistant research fellow at the Division of Asia–Pacific Studies, Institute of International Relations and assistant professor at IMAS/IDAS in National Chengchi
University in Taiwan. He serves as the executive secretary in the secretariat of Taiwan Participatory Group, Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP). His research
interests center on international relations theory, border politics in Southeast Asia and ChinaASEAN relations with specific focus on the soft power politics of Confucius Institutes.
Address: Institute of International Relations, No. 64, WanShou Road, Wenshan District,
Taipei 11666, Taiwan. E-mail: alanhao@nccu.edu.tw
C 2013 Taylor & Francis


266

The Pacific Review

Introduction
The end of the Cold War and the rise of China have changed the international landscape. For East Asian countries, fear from the threat of communist ideology has largely dissipated to the extent that communism is
no longer the primary concern around which policy-making decisions are
made. International geopolitics, defined by the clash of competing superpowers during the Cold War, has changed, and the need to rely on building a security alliance with the US for geopolitical survival has more or
less abated. Currently, however, the rise of China regionally and globally
presents a new, dynamic and potentially volatile variable in the East Asian
geopolitical arena. For relatively weaker East Asian nations, the question
of how best to avoid an outright conflict within a changing regional power
structure has become an important issue.
This article discusses how Southeast Asian states will respond to China’s
ascendance, which may be viewed both as a promising opportunity and
a potential danger. Despite a litany of literature published on this topic,
many are plagued with shortcomings we identify as being ‘less relevant’,
‘overgeneralized’, ‘static’ and ‘outdated’. These works generally suffer
two drawbacks. First, though they pertinently describe patterns of foreign policy behaviors, many fail to identify the causes behind such behaviors. This obscures the different independent variables that may lead
Southeast Asian countries to adopt different policy options towards China.
Second, shortcomings in the existing literature stems from the treatment
of policy-making as a dichotomy rather than a continuum. In this framework, Southeast Asian states are portrayed as pursuing a static strategy instead of a dynamic one that constantly evolves in a changing
regional landscape. We believe Southeast Asian states’ policies toward
China are dynamic, varying among countries and across different periods of
time.
In this article, we introduce an analytical spectrum characterizing how
Southeast Asian countries are likely to perceive China based on the interaction of two theories: ‘balance of threat’ and ‘trade expectation’. We
argue that these perceptions will influence the types of policies that these
countries will employ against China, which include ‘soft-balancing’, ‘hedging’ and ‘bandwagoning’. As political climates and situations fluctuate over
time, so will the strategies used by different players. We hypothesize that
Southeast Asian countries perceiving a high level of threat from China (HT)
and expecting a negative economic relationship (NE) will view Beijing as
an undesirable regional neighbor, and therefore more likely to choose the
soft-balancing strategy. On the other hand, if these countries perceive a low
level of threat (LT) and expect a positive economic relationship (PE), they
will find in Beijing a more desirable neighbor, and are more likely to adopt a
bandwagoning strategy. Countries in situations between these two extremes

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 267
(either a HT-PE or LT-NE scenario) will choose a hedging strategy against
China.
Past literature on this topic and their shortcomings will be reviewed in
the next section. In the third section, two major pillars of Southeast Asian
states’ policies toward China and relevant strategic choices are identified
within a policy spectrum. Furthermore, we will discuss the logic behind the
analytical model. In the fourth section, we offer preliminary empirical evidence to support our theoretical framework by discussing Vietnam–China,
Cambodia–China and Singapore–China relations. The final section concludes the article.

Literature review
Most literature on the reactions of Southeast Asian states to the rise of
China can be divided into four categories. The first category tends to
group Southeast Asian countries as a unitary international actor embedded within the framework of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), and explains individual countries’ behaviors through the lens of
observing actions undertaken by ASEAN. The second category examines
Southeast Asian countries’ foreign policy-making as a response to regional
power structures; in this case, these countries are considered as belonging
to a group of ‘secondary’ or weaker states within the international system
(Acharya and Goh 2007; Ganesan 1995; Hsiao and Yang 2008; Rajendran
1985; Saravanamuttu 1999; Severino 2009). These two categories seek to
depict a general pattern that reflects interests concentrated within either
ASEAN or a group of secondary states.
The literature in the last two categories pay attention to foreign policy variations among the different Southeast Asian countries, and refrain
from treating Southeast Asian countries as part of a larger, unitary international actor. The third category discusses a range of policy choices including strategies such as ‘balancing’, ‘accommodating’, ‘bandwagoning’ or
‘hedging’. Such an approach may overlook the variation of policy choices
among different countries (Chung 2009; Dayley and Neher 2010; Pholsena
and Banomyong 2006; Subianto 2002). The fourth category also recognizes
the foreign policy variations among each Southeast Asian country, but pays
attention to the influence of different domestic factors, such as ideology,
leadership or regime type, in foreign policy-making (Chachavalpongpun
2010; Perwita 2007).
In this section, we discuss these divergent perspectives and identify their
limitations. Afterwards, we briefly propose our idea to mitigate these shortcomings and offer a theoretical framework based on a foreign policy continuum characterized by two relevant conditions, which are ‘threat perception’
and ‘expectation of economic relations’.

268

The Pacific Review

ASEAN for socializing China?
The first category of literature focuses primarily on how the regional institution of ASEAN influences China’s external behavior, and how Southeast
Asian countries respond. Amitav Acharya suggests that a processorientated ASEAN has successfully created four crucial ideas in the region, which are ‘cooperative security’, ‘open regionalism’, ‘soft regionalism’ and ‘flexible consensus’ (Acharya 1997). These ideas can be helpful in
shaping a regional identity for its actors to abide by. Nikolas Busse praises
ASEAN members for abandoning the balance of power logic and successfully establishing a regional code of conduct centered around the concepts
of ‘non-use of force’, ‘non-interference’ and ‘informality in conflict management’ (Busse 1999). China, as a more proactive participant in ASEAN,
consequently is expected to be socialized in the informal principles set
forth by Southeast Asian countries. This socialization proposition is sometimes termed as ‘binding-engagement’ (Kuik and Lee 2008). Accordingly, in
Alice Ba’s words, China ‘has moved from skeptic to observer to participant
as a dialogue partner with ASEAN and has full membership in the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) and other regional arrangements’ (Ba 2003). According to Rosemary Foot, the ARF’s central purpose is to manage transnational conflicts between Southeast Asia and China and ‘envelop China in
this multilateral organization’ (Foot 1998). According to these scholars,
the utilization of regional organizations remains the primary way in which
Southeast Asian countries attempt to engage and ‘socialize’ China. In doing
so, Southeast Asian countries can seek to secure a mutually beneficial economic relationship and tame China’s aggressive posture in the South China
Sea (SCS). From China’s perspective, regional organizations serve to reassure ASEAN states of Beijing’s peaceful regional ambitions, thus winning
them over, gaining their support possibly at the expense of US–ASEAN
relations.
Over the past decade, although China has become a proactive player in
regional institutions and multilateral forums, some scholars have doubted
the effectiveness of attempting to socialize China according to the desires
of ASEAN members. Ba wonders whether regional institutions founded
by less powerful states are able to socialize the most powerful regional
player. She suggests a need to include the variable of power in the study of
Sino–ASEAN relations. By raising the question ‘who’s socializing whom?’,
Ba points out the possibility of ASEAN members being socialized by China,
rather than the other way around (Ba 2006).
David Jones and Martin Smith argue that although ARF has helped avoid
large-scale conflicts between China and other sovereign claimants about
possessions in the SCS, it has merely managed the problem, not solved
them. They suggest that prolonging the dispute plays into the hands of
China, stoking the hegemonic ambition of returning the region to the historical tributary system where Southeast Asian countries would obey China’s

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 269
‘mandate of heaven’ (Jones and Smith 2007). To them, norms put forth by
ASEAN and other regional institutions are merely ineffective rhetoric in
the larger game of regional diplomacy, which in reality is always dominated
by power politics. ASEAN, according to their perspective, is merely a platform for great powers to pursue their interests. In March 2010, Chinese
officials, bypassing regional institutions, unilaterally told Washington that
the SCS is its ‘core interest’, which raised alarm bells throughout Southeast
Asia (Zhong 2010). This incident suggests that regional frameworks have
failed to socialize China into the regional community, turning China into a
desirable player, taming its aggressive postures in the region, and managing
the potential confrontation between China and US (Manicom 2010). Using
ASEAN as a central factor in understanding Southeast Asian countries’ reactions toward the rise of China might not be a relevant approach since it
not only fails to recognize regional power as an important factor in foreign
policy, but also neglects possible policy variations, determined by different
political and economic conditions, within each Southeast Asian country.

A group of secondary states?
Similar to Jones and Smith’s argument that regional institutions are epiphenomenal to great power politics, other experts suggest that Southeast Asia
is composed of 10 ‘secondary’ states sensitive to the variation of power
structure, rather than regional norms. The balance of power between the
countries in the region is the most critical factor in determining their foreign
policies. In discussing the responses of East Asian secondary states toward
China, Robert Ross argues that South Korea and Taiwan have increasingly developed an accommodating posture towards China, while Japan and
ASEAN states are joining with the US to balance against it (Ross 2006). But
balancing is a strategy usually employed by great powers, i.e., China, India,
Japan and the United States. David Kang sees Asia’s regional order as a hierarchical one where China acts as a dominant power and the surrounding
countries are secondary states. Kang unswervingly argues that in the face
of a powerful China, these secondary states have no choice but to strive for
friendly bilateral relations with Beijing, and such a hierarchical order will
be stable and peaceful (Kang 2003).
While these arguments suggest that secondary states will accommodate
China’s interests, different scholars contend otherwise. In discussing the
foreign policy options of weaker states, Eric Labs observes that balancing
against a powerful country is a far more common behavior than accommodation, also known as bandwagoning. Instead of hedging their bets by
bandwagoning, weak states fight by balancing against a rising power (Labs
1992). Aaron Friedberg similarly expects ASEAN states to internally balance themselves against China’s growing capability (Friedberg 1993/1994).
Furthermore, Gerald Segal suggests that judging from East Asia’s recent

270

The Pacific Review

history, although China seems to be an unrivaled player, concerted containment by other regional players is capable of moderating China’s aggression
(Segal 1998).
In light of the larger debates within the realist IR theory regarding
whether weaker states are likely to bandwagon with the most powerful state
or join together to balance against it, scholars disagree on how secondary
states in Southeast Asia will respond to a rising China. These conflicting
opinions also highlight what we call the problem of ‘relevance’, in that the
traditional understanding of balancing and bandwagoning, which focus on
formal military alliances involving arms buildups, is now no longer as applicable as it was before (Paul 2005). Relying on old notions of international relations theory from the Cold War era may lead one to incorrectly
assess the complexities of contemporary Southeast Asian affairs. Such an
approach also downplays the domestic policy variations among states and
run the risk of overgeneralization.

Balancing, bandwagoning, hedging and others
Over the past decade, many studies have attempted to redress the issues of
relevance and overgeneralization by refraining from both treating Southeast Asian countries as unitary actors and confining their assessment of
policies regarding China to the limited options of balancing or bandwagoning. Denny Roy argues that most Southeast Asian countries neither balance against nor bandwagon with China. Rather, their strategies can best be
understood as ‘hedging’ on different levels. Hedging, in his understanding,
is a policy that seeks positive relations with all great powers in a region – in
this case, China and the US. In Roy’s words, Southeast Asian states ‘prefer
not to antagonize any of the external great powers unless one poses a direct threat to a vital interest’ (Roy 2005). Seeking a modest level of defense
cooperation with Washington, for example, can serve as a hedge against
China.
Some evidences suggest that whereas high-income neighbors, such as Singapore, can enjoy economic benefits, low-income countries, such as Vietnam, may be affected negatively (Eichengreen et al. 2007). John Wong
and Sarah Chan also notice that Sino–ASEAN economic relationships are
both competitive and complementary. While Singapore and China can
benefit from each other’s specialization in different sectors and industries, most developing countries in Southeast Asia are competing for direct
investment (FDI) in the same sectors and exporting products for similar
markets (Wong and Chan 2003). As such, the unique economic conditions
in each Southeast Asian country can affect their perception of China in very
different ways. Discussing Southeast Asia’s views on the rise of China, Evelyn Goh suggests that it is useful to divide Southeast Asian countries into
maritime and continental ones. The former are more reassured by the wider
geographical distance between them and China, i.e., the stopping power of

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 271
water, while the latter are more anxious of their powerful continental neighbor (Goh 2007). This would result in different perceptions of threat, characterizing states with different geographical features and strategies to engage
Beijing.
Although scholars have paid attention to the policy variations between
states, policy options are often treated as ‘static’ and dichotomous, rather
than dynamic and continuous. For example, as a continental state that is in
competition for foreign economic advantages with China, Vietnam should
see China as a grave threat and consequently balance, or at least hedge,
against Beijing. However, Vietnam’s policy towards China has changed
several times in the past two decades, suggesting that Hanoi’s response to
China has been a dynamic one determined by altering conditions (Vuving
2006). Subsequently, identifying the most relevant conditions and then constructing a continuous policy spectrum would be a most helpful approach in
understanding Southeast Asian states’ responses to a rising China.

Domestic factors
Domestic factors, namely, ideology or regime type, sometimes play important roles in shaping foreign policy. For example, while ideology has traditionally aligned Vietnam with the socialist front, Carlyle Thayer has noted
that ‘the ambivalence in Vietnam’s China policy reflects the tension that occasionally arises when ideology and national interest cannot be reconciled’
(Thayer 1994). On the other hand, ASEAN was established by countries
threatened by the spread of communism that sought close defense cooperation with the US.
After the end of the Cold War, ideological conflicts between communist
and democratic groupings became largely irrelevant and no longer constituted the most critical pillar in the making of Southeast Asian states’ foreign
policies. In less autocratic Southeast Asian states, such as the Philippines,
domestic politics is capable of determining foreign policy. For instance, Renato De Castro argued that the disappearance of the threat of communist
ideology and the influence of a Philippines Senate opposed to US military
bases were two major causes that drove away the US naval station in Subic
Bay (Castro 2003).
Furthermore, the influence of domestic politics may be salient in investigating how different types of regimes affect foreign policy settings. Countries with similar political institutions may be less willing to fight each other
(Doyle 1983; Peceny et al. 2002). From this perspective, most Southeast
Asian countries are more or less autocratic countries, which would downplay the importance of domestic political factors. In addition to regime
types, domestic elite contestation may affect foreign policy formulation especially when elites’ personal interests contradict national interests (Kuik
2008). Policy outcomes can be seen as bargaining results contested by a

272

The Pacific Review

group of ruling elites in authoritarian Southeast Asian countries who possess enough power to decide the regime’s political survival (Bueno de
Mesquita 2003). Foreign policies are chosen to continue elites’ ruling power
as long as possible. Realizing political survival precedes securing personal
interests (Kinne 2005). With this rational assumption, we offer two reasons
to explain why the elites in Southeast Asian countries care no less about
national interests than personal interests regarding China-related security
and economic policies. First, if the aggregate elites’ perception of China’s
threat does not reflect the state’s perception as a whole and relevant decisions aren’t made based on national interests, the threat perception will
create the impression that they are lowering their chances of survival. If
the country has a hard time to survive, their regime’s political survival will
also be in danger. Security issues are less likely to be given up by ruling
elites in order to pursue personal interests. Second, although most Southeast Asian countries are considered autocracies, their foreign economic
policies are not solely and arbitrarily decided by a few ruling elites, such
as in oil-exporting autocracies. In order to keep the state functioning and
maintain legitimacy (Kuik 2008), each ruling regime needs to compete with
its neighbors for more investments and economic opportunities to satisfy a
fast-growing group of middle class. This is even truer when we recognize
that most Southeast Asian countries are pursuing democratization, as well
as trying to incorporate their people into global markets. Elites’ perception
of China-related economic policies here would not be that incompatible to
the aggregate national economic interests. As a result, the overall perception of Southeast Asian elites in each state should reflect what’s best for the
state and initiate foreign policies accordingly. This suggestion, therefore,
plays down the relevance of the domestic elite contestation.1
In this section, we have classified past literatures regarding Sino–
Southeast Asian relations into four categories and identified their limitations. Subsequently, we seek to mitigate these shortcomings by developing a theoretical framework that identifies the interplay of two major
factors concerning Southeast Asian states the most. Using this explanatory typology, we present a spectrum best capturing Southeast Asian countries’ foreign policies toward China which is helpful to the understanding of
Sino–Southeast Asian relations.

Typologies of strategies directed at the rise of China
In this section, we identify and discuss two influential factors that determine Southeast Asian states’ policies toward China. Next, we present policy
options and construct a policy spectrum which corresponds to the interplay
of such factors. Assuming that domestic politics play a minor role in our
cases, this spectrum adopts a state-centric approach that parsimoniously
demonstrates a Southeast Asian state’s perception of China and its subsequent policy choices.

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 273

Threat perception and expectation of economic relations
When analyzing the strategic options of any state, it is always crucial to
identify factors that concern it the most. Investigating Southeast Asian perspectives on the challenges posed by a rising China, Goh pointed out that
territorial disputes over islands in the SCS, Sino–US conflicts, China’s regional dominance, and the economic benefits and/or costs of China’s growth
are factors that Southeast Asian states worry about the most (Goh 2007).
She categorizes them into three dimensions: political, military, and economic challenges. Similarly, we boil down these categories in a broader
way that includes only two factors: threat perception and the expectation
of economic relations.
The ideas behind the first pillar that constitutes the underlying basis of
our policy spectrum, threat perception, derive from the ‘balance of threat’
theory. Studying the sources of alliances, Stephen Walt argues that a great
power’s ‘aggregate power’, ‘geographic proximity’, ‘offensive power’ and
‘aggressive intentions’ are the four major sources of threats, which serve as
a signal to surrounding states and influence their decisions over whether or
not to ally with another state. When a powerful country has a high aggregate value of these four factors, it will generally be perceived as a grave
threat and trigger the surrounding states to ally against it (Walt 1987). We
find using Walt’s theoretical framework useful in evaluating the extent to
which each Southeast Asian country feels threatened by China. Countries
having a higher threat perception of China are likely to feel less secure,
and as a result will seek ways to check its aggressive postures. Countries
that have a lower threat perception are more reassured of the benefits of
China’s growth, and will worry less about suffering losses from a powerful
China.
Whereas China’s growing economic and military strength can be seen as a
potentially threatening posture, the maritime–continental divide mentioned
earlier may lead maritime Southeast Asian states to be more reassured
by the larger geographic distance, while continental states may perceive
a HT because of their proximity. But China’s recent military excursions
into disputed islands in the SCS is also a signal to maritime states of its aggressive intentions (Castro 2003). After People’s Liberation Army’s Navy
(PLAN) was discovered doing construction on Mischief Reef in 1995, for
example, Manila sensed the growing threat from Beijing and started to rethink the possibility to revitalize its defense cooperation with the US. In
addition, experiences of historical conflicts with China also magnify Beijing’s aggressive intentions for Southeast Asian countries, which will try
to build upon stronger military forces to mitigate their relative weakness.
Applying Walt’s four components constituting the threat, we consider that
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Vietnam currently confront HT while Brunei, Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos and Thailand face LT
(Adriano 2011; Chung 2009; Goh 2004; Koong 1999; Kurlantzick 2007;

274

The Pacific Review

Pan 2003; Sarkees and Wayman 2010; Tan 2009; Vaughn and Morrison
2006).
Aside from threat perception, Sino–Southeast Asian economic relations
serve as the other pillar of our policy spectrum. Whether a deeper and
more open economic relationship with China is beneficial or not to Southeast Asian states remains controversial. A more relevant analysis should
focus on different domestic economic conditions of each state. Thanks to
the inception of the ASEAN–China Free Trade Agreement, many Southeast Asian countries expect to attract more FDI and export more products
to China (Ravenhill 2006). Others, however, fear that future FDI will decrease, accompanied by an increase in the trade deficit with China (Wong
and Chan 2003). These contrasting expectations have been thoroughly discussed in disagreements among IR scholars’ over the impact of interdependence on conflicts. Realists contend that greater interdependence may lead
to more conflict due to the increasing vulnerability of the more dependent
side. The vulnerable would be compelled to control what they depend on
(Waltz 1979). Liberals, correspondingly, argue that the interdependency
offers absolute economic benefits to most involving parties, and therefore no incentive for conflict exists (Keohane and Nye 1977; Rosecrance
1986).
In an attempt to mediate this discrepancy between realists and liberals,
Dale Copeland suggests a ‘theory of trade expectation’, which puts more
weight on the expectation of future impact from interdependence. Following along his work, we recognize that for a state participating in an economically complex world, the relationship of interdependence within a certain time period is less important than its expectations about the future
economic situation (Copeland 1996). In the context of this paper, the expectation of future economic impact on Southeast Asian countries is of
greater significance than the past or current situation. In line with this suggestion, we consider that countries competing more fiercely with China
on FDI inflows and export markets will expect to suffer from higher unemployment rates soon, then the interdependent relationship between
them will be considered as a negative one that leads to a fear of losing economic interests (Chowdhury 2007). As a consequence, we expect Brunei,
Cambodia, Malaysia, Myanmar and Singapore to have positive economic
expectations while Indonesia, Laos, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam
will have negative ones. Incorporating the economic expectation factor with
threat perception, Table 1 demonstrates our categorization of how each
Southeast Asian country perceive China (Chowdhury 2010; Ehrlich 2011;
Eichengreen et al. 2007; Shee 2005; Storey 2007; Yue 2005).
Taking these two factors into account, this article contends that a HT
and NE combination will make China’s presence in Southeast Asia undesirable. Conversely, a LT and PE will craft China a more acceptable partner.
Since this interplay of two factors varies across different countries and time
periods, a spectrum of the desirability of China (from the perspective of

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 275
Table 1 Southeast Asian countries’ perceptions of China
High threat
Negative economic
expectation
Positive economic
expectation

Vietnam, Philippines,
Indonesia
Singapore, Malaysia

Low threat
Thailand, Laos
Myanmar, Cambodia, Brunei

Southeast Asian states) can be constructed as in Figure 1, ranging from the
most undesirable to the most desirable.

From soft-balancing to bandwagoning for profit
Given that China presents different options and challenges for each Southeast Asian country, their response to its presence will vary. These states
will either balance against China by allying with Washington (Ross 2006),
hedge against China by means of maintaining defensive pacts with both
Beijing and Washington (Murphy 2010; Roy 2005), or bandwagon with

Figure 1 A spectrum of the desirability of China.

276

The Pacific Review

China (Kang 2003). These policy options can be seen as a set of fluid, flexible strategies that take into account changes in the geopolitical situation.
States are likely to choose the balancing strategy when China is considered
threatening, adopt the bandwagon strategy when China’s posture is seen
as more favorable, and hedge if their assessment of China is somewhere
in between. Given that each Southeast Asian country will choose different
strategies in response to different situations during different periods, we do
not assume that any particular strategy is enough to explain each state’s
policy-making.
It is necessary to clearly define the terms ‘balancing’, ‘bandwagoning’ and
‘hedging’ in our framework. A ‘balancing’ strategy connotes the balance of
power. Naturally, power is important for states to survive. For great powers, they need enough material power to survive a war with others. Weaker
states can choose to ally with powerful ones in order to seek protection.
Maintaining a balance of power is considered to promote stability, since
equal power distribution between different alliances will raise the cost of
war and decrease the likelihood of an easy victory (Wagner 1994). As we
have mentioned, however, while survival has historically been the main motivation for weaker states to balance against a rising power, this threat has
largely diminished in the post-Cold War era (Paul 2005). In Southeast Asia,
the shared norm of ‘non-interference’ has been embraced, rendering actual
territorial invasions less likely. Today, diplomacy replaced military ventures
as an alternate means to resolve disputes (Ramcharan 2000).
States today are more likely to adopt a ‘soft’ balancing strategy to contain perceived threats. Soft balancing involves the formation of limited
diplomatic coalitions or entities through upgrading existing alliances. Examples of soft balancing include joint military exercises and coalitions in international organizations. Roy uses a similar concept called ‘low-intensity
balancing’ to describe that, rather than forming a formal military alliance
with Washington, some Southeast Asian countries have been trying to
bring more US military presence back in Asia to constrain China. He also
called this soft balancing (Roy 2005). Such strategies include containing
China through forming diplomatic coalitions in international organizations
to check China’s ambitions, or bringing other great powers, such as India,
Japan or the US, into the region by means of holding joint military exercises
or hosting military bases for them.
In contrary to the strategy of balancing against a perceived threat, bandwagoning or cooperation in hopes of seeking protection or other benefits, is another commonly discussed behavior when states confront grave
threats (Kang 2009; Kaufman 1992; Roy 2005; Walt 1985). It involves forming military alliances with the potential threat. In our discussion, bandwagoning refers to Southeast Asian countries’ intent to forge military alliances
with China, whether to appease Beijing’s aggression or share spoils from
potential future conflicts. The end of the Cold War, however, has made this
logic less relevant since international wars between great powers seem less
likely to occur, especially in East Asia (Tønnesson 2009).

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 277
Some scholars propose that bandwagoning is more about gaining interests than ensuring survival. When a great power emerges as a revisionist
one, it attracts weaker states that seek the benefits of joining the revisionist group. Bandwagoning exists as a choice for weak states to respond to
a threat, rather than being a part of that threat; therefore, bandwagoning
should be more relevant if understood as a way to profit, not to survive
(Schweller 1994). Here we adopt the interpretation that bandwagoning, for
Southeast Asian countries, is to seek intensive defense and economic cooperation with China at the expense of cooperating with other major powers
for the sake of securing opportunities elsewhere (Murphy 2010). When Chinese actions are perceived as more desirable, Southeast Asian states will be
more prone to choose a bandwagoning stance.
Between soft-balancing and bandwagoning for profit, playing safe is another option. Potential regional institutions capable of resolving controversies are still in the making in East Asia; therefore, for weaker players like
Southeast Asian countries, there is great uncertainty ahead. Choosing to
side exclusively with China, India, Japan or the US may be unwise and
unnecessarily risky. Therefore, developing a strategy to maintain an equal
relationship with all the great powers may be the most rational choice.
For example, states can maintain a modest level of defense cooperation
with Washington while still militarily and economically engaging China in
a positive way. This strategy is typically called ‘hedging’ (Kuik 2008; Roy
2005).
A hedging strategy offers more flexibility for countries managing risks
and uncertainty. As Kuik defines it, a hedging strategy is ‘a purposeful
act in which a state seeks to insure its long-term interests by placing its
policy bets on multiple counteracting options that are designed to offset
risks embedded in the international system’ (Kuik and Lee 2008). Admittedly, maintaining equal distance with major powers would serve secondary
states’ interests, especially when the current Sino–US relationship in East
Asia is stable but competitive (Christoffersen 2002; Tow 2004). However,
should threats from China become more severe or economic benefits less
favorable, an initial hedging state might turn to side with other powers to
constrain China. On the other hand, if the threat from China diminishes and
economic benefits become more favorable, a hedging state may lean more
and more toward China, to the point of adopting a bandwagoning strategy
to seek greater profits from closer relations.
Here we hypothesize that if a Southeast Asian state is in a HT–NE situation, it is more likely to choose a ‘soft balancing’ strategy; if it foresees
a LT–PE situation, it is more likely to choose a ‘bandwagoning’ strategy;
if it perceives a HT–PE or a LT–NE situation, it is more likely to choose
a ‘hedging’ strategy. We demonstrate this explanatory typology with a policy spectrum, ranging from soft-balancing and hedging to bandwagoning, in
Figure 1. In the next section, we use three cases, Vietnam–China (HT–NE),
Cambodia–China (LT–PE) and Singapore–China (HT–PE) relations, to
test our hypothesis.

278

The Pacific Review

Empirical evidences from Vietnam, Cambodia and Singapore
In this section, we present three divergent scenarios where we expect Southeast Asian countries to behave differently. In order to downplay domestic
factors such as ideology, we focus our analysis on current events occurring
after the end of the Cold War. We begin each case by presenting the kinds
of threats and economic expectations confronted by the countries in question, followed by an analysis of their reactions to them.

Vietnam’s balancing strategy against China (HT–NE Type)
There have been ups and downs in contemporary Sino–Vietnamese relations. Both countries enjoyed close relations in the 1970s but this lapsed
into tension during the 1980s, triggered by a border war in 1979. Up to
now, even though frequent contacts among political leaders of both countries have been facilitated, Vietnam still regards China as a security threat
due to its geographic proximity as well as the ongoing territorial dispute in
the SCS. Economic competition with China further aggravates the negative
perception of China. More recently, Vietnam has pursued an assertive softbalancing strategy, embodied by seeking informal military relations with
the US through high profile joint military exercises, and favoring cooperation with non-China states on economic matters.
Clearly, much of the perception of China as a threat is related to the SCS
dispute. Sovereign disputes in the waters contribute to the deterioration of
China’s image in Vietnamese society. On 5 March 2011, Vietnam protested
a military drill conducted by China drilling in the Spratlys, arguing that the
People Liberation Army’s (PLA) anti-piracy exercise intruded upon Vietnamese territory (China Post 2011). In May, Chinese coast guards cut the
cable laid by a Vietnamese oil exploration vessel, followed shortly by another similar incident involving a Chinese fishing boat accompanied by two
fishery administration vessels in early June. Beijing’s move ignited a series
of domestic protests in Hanoi.
Geographic proximity and the recent memory of China’s invasive border
skirmishes have further magnified Vietnam’s perception of threat. Understandably, Beijing’s assertive claim over this region is problematic in the
eyes of the ASEAN countries. Among them, Vietnam has been the most
active state in working on a multilateral process of dispute resolution, especially during its ASEAN chairmanship in 2010. Vietnam has vigorously
publicized and internationalized the SCS disputes on almost all the major occasions related to ASEAN meetings, and has constantly looked for
possibilities to work with potential allies to balance China’s rising influence
in the region (The Hanoist 2010).
Vietnam has encountered several threats from China on the economic
front, most notably trade competitiveness and unequal access to job opportunities. In recent years, although bilateral trade volume between Vietnam

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 279
and China has been growing substantially, with an annual growth of around
30%, it is estimated that Vietnam’s trade deficit towards China has significantly increased from US$0.2 billion in 2001 to US$12.6 billion in 2010 (The
Council of Taiwanese Chambers of Commerce in Vietnam 2011). The exchange of Vietnam’s raw material (iron and coal) for China’s high price
products (steel and mechanic equipment) is one of the reasons for this increasing trade deficit, which has also led to the decline in Vietnam’s market
share of domestic products. In terms of global competitiveness, both countries are competing for global export market and FDI. Evidence shows that
Vietnam will suffer economically in these two aspects if its trade deficit with
China continues to grow (Eichengreen et al. 2007). In addition, unemployment has become another point of contention in their economic relationship. As we conducted fieldwork at the Vietnam–China border in Guangxi
province, and although current sub-regional development strategies pursued by both sides were fostering a closer local-to-local partnership, transborder tensions flared due to unequal access to jobs. For example, China’s
investment was supposed to provide employment opportunities for local
Vietnamese. However, some Chinese companies that have established factories in Vietnam, such as the power stations in Halphong, have hired only
Chinese migrant workers. In this regard, foreign investment projects have
threatened local labor markets, further fostering a negative image with regards to Chinese economic initiatives. These factors situate Vietnam in a
HT and NE condition, which has led it to react by adopting a soft-balancing
strategy embodied by informal military interactions with the US and the
pursuit of economic cooperation with other (non-China) powers.
During the summer of 2010, disputes between the US and China in
the ARF meeting centered on SCS issues, where the US Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton noted that the maritime security was a pivotal issue
(Bloomberg Businessweek 2010). The debates have triggered subsequent
confrontations between China and its neighbors. In August 2010, US bilateral cooperation with Vietnam on this ongoing dispute led to a joint
military exercises in the region. The joint training, which also involved
the super-carrier USS George Washington, focused on non-combat operations, and was the first military exercise conducted by the US and Vietnam, who only a few decades ago were enemies (Cooper 2010). This military exercise, which also included naval drills by US and South Korean
troops in the Yellow Sea, infuriated Beijing (Beech 2010). It is clear that
Vietnam, with its increasing emphasis on economic dynamism, emerging
markets and national security, has successfully gained support from the
US to counterbalance China’s claims and its military presence in SCS.
In addition, Vietnam and the US jointly conducted another high profile military exercise in July 2011 after another incident involving perceived Chinese encroachment in maritime territory claimed by Vietnam.
Such action triggered a tough response from the Beijing authorities.2
And Vietnam has not only reached out to the US to counter China’s

280

The Pacific Review

regional ambitions. Recently, Vietnamese authorities have approached
their counterparts in Russia for the purchase of diesel submarines and aircraft to enhance its defensive capabilities (RIA Novosti 2009).
Furthermore, Vietnam’s growing distrust of China has been illustrated in
its decision-making over local infrastructure investment projects. In recent
years, Vietnam has planned to build a 1570 km high-speed rail throughout
Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. Several countries such as Japan, Korea and
China have expressed their interest and willingness to invest in this project.
Considering the cost and technology involved, Japan and China are the
most competitive candidates. Japan, the number one creditor of Vietnam
at US$ 8.4 billion, has the most advanced Shinkansen technology. China,
on the other hand, has initiated a new building scheme at the lowest cost
while it has offered to develop a high-speed rail link between Ho Chi Minh
City and Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia.3 Vietnam rejected China’s
proposal and chose Japan’s plans. It was said that the decision in favor of
Japan instead of China’s was made on account of its high-speed rail technology. However, domestic critics later stated that this decision was actually made based on Vietnam’s national security concerns. They argued that
Vietnam political elites were worried about potential border skirmishes and
tensions over the disputed territory between the two states. They feared
that if war broke out, the high-speed rail built by China could be a critical
infrastructure that can be used to transport and supply troops and aid in
a swift invasion of Vietnam. Clearly, China is still regarded as a potential
foreign invader. Vietnam’s reactions to the China-related issues discussed
above indicate that soft-balancing strategies are adopted while engaging
China.

Cambodia’s bandwagoning stance with China (LT–PE type)
In the case of Cambodia–China relations, we find that Cambodia champions a pro-China policy on political and economic issues in the hope of creating a win–win partnership. Cambodia seeks to take advantage of China’s
powerful influence in international affairs to gain more influence to support its disputes against Thailand, while at the same time favoring Chinese
foreign investments and markets. Hence, Cambodia seeks a bandwagoning
approach exemplified by its need for political support, military protection
and deeper economic cooperation with China.
Cambodia does not see a threat in Beijing. Unlike other ASEAN countries, Cambodia does not have any significant disputes with China except
for the environmental degradation and water dispute in the lower Mekong
River basin, this resulting from the China’s dam construction project in
upper stream of the river, which runs through its southern provinces.
Although the members of Mekong River Commission, which includes
Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam, have criticized China’s dam construction project for retaining water and draining the downstream region of

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 281
water (Pohlner 2010), this issue has yet to damage the amity and cooperation between Cambodia and China. Cambodia’s threat perception of China
is further lowered by the fact that they do not share borders, relieving Cambodia from direct and immediate pressure from China. Finally, Beijing has
become Phnom Penh’s major donor of foreign aid, and has also cancelled
Cambodia’s entire debt to China. Beijing’s effective soft power, including
its regional diffusion of Confucius Institutes, helps to soften the public perception of its involvement in Cambodia (Kurlantzick 2007).
Chinese foreign aid is not perceived as a threat, but rather creates thriving economic expectations from the Cambodian people. Beijing has been
Phnom Penh’s most important aid provider and critical investor since the
2000s. In 2007 and 2008, for example, Beijing poured US$600 million and
US$260 million, respectively, into Cambodia, most of which was used to
construct roads, highways and local irrigation systems. In 2010, China also
provided US $300 million in loans and US $15 million in foreign aid to
Phnom Penh. It is estimated that Beijing has contributed to more than
1500 kilometers worth of roads and bridges in Cambodia. A new and solid
domestic transportation network is anticipated to boost economic growth
in Cambodia and promote the growth of trade volumes. In 2009, the total
bilateral trade volume between Cambodia and China totaled US $791 million, and the number now amounts to US$1.12 billion, reflecting a growth
rate of 41.5% (People’s Daily 2011). In December 2010, both sides pledged
to increase the trade volume to US $2.5 billion by 2015. In effect, just as in
other ASEAN countries, trade cooperation has been regarded as ‘pattern
cooperation’ for Cambodia–China relations.
These factors place Cambodia in a LT–PE situation, leading it to pursue a bandwagoning posture in its dealings with China. First, Cambodia has sought military aid and security guarantees from China (Dayley
and Neher 2010). According to the authors’ fieldwork conducted in Ubon
Ratchathani and Si Saket, China offered military assistance to Cambodia,
such as supplying weapons that are sent to the frontlines in the ongoing
Thailand–Cambodia border conflict. Because Cambodia is rather small and
weak in comparison to Thailand, Phnom Penh hopes to strongly publicize
its border dispute to the international community. As a result, Cambodia
has adopted an increasingly submissive posture to China, which, despite
seeming neutral in the eyes of the public, has actively supported Cambodian development. It is also evident in China’s growing influence in Cambodian domestic affairs. For example, Chinese police can disregard standard
extradition proceedings in Cambodian justice system and lead joint operations to arrest and deport alleged Chinese criminals in Cambodia. Chinese diplomats are also allowed to lodge bitter complaints to Cambodian
agencies about unfriendly reports regarding China published in local newspapers (Kuik and Lee 2008).
In economic affairs, moreover, Cambodia seeks to maintain a comprehensive partnership with Beijing to attract more investments and foreign

282

The Pacific Review

aid from China. While Cambodia is promoting its local economy by establishing 22 economic zones, the Royal Government continues to ask for
China’s support to invest in key areas. For example, the development of
the Sihanoukville Special Economic Zone has received investments by a
collaborative effort by the Cambodia International Investment Group Co.
Ltd. and the Taihu Cambodia International Economic Cooperation Zone
Investment Co. Ltd, a state-owned enterprise in China approved by Ministry of Commerce (Invest in Cambodia 2011). For China, the investment
project clearly underscores its commitment to the core values of its ‘going
out’ strategy. For Cambodia, the development of local industries in areas
such as textile and clothing, machinery and electronics, and high-tech products is highly desirable.
As these examples show, a LT–PE condition has led Cambodia to bandwagon with China in order to not only resolve its international difficulties,
but also proposer economically through active engagement with China. The
concerns of Cambodia are centred on seeking greater benefits as opposed
to ensuring survival.

Singapore’s hedging strategy against China (HT–PE)
The relationship between Singapore and China should be seen as a clear
example of the hedging strategy in practice. As See Seng Tan (2009: 21)
puts it, Singapore’s pragmatic relationship with China suggests the strategy
of ‘riding the Chinese dragon’. Singapore prefers to maintain a slight distance from China on security issues based on its calculation of power politics, while shaping a closer economic relationship with the rising Chinese
economy. Experts have agreed that Singapore seems to pursue a sophisticated hedging strategy towards China as a result of its perceived uncertainty
regarding regional stability and economic benefits (Kuik 2008).
Since independence, the strategic priority of Singapore has been to develop through economic initiatives to elevate its international influence and
tame down domestic opposition. Hence, Singapore depends heavily on international trade and investment, especially in energy imports. Maintaining
maritime stability thus stands out as its major security concern. Therefore,
although Singapore does not receive a direct and immediate threat from
China’s presence in the seas, it is nevertheless anxious about any potential events that could impair the freedom of navigation in nearby waters.
SCS disputes, thus, have become one of the primary issues influencing Singapore’s perception of China (Koong 1999). If SCS tensions result in restricted maritime traffic, Singapore is more likely in a HT situation. Otherwise, a LT situation is more applicable. Accordingly, when China’s recent
incursions in Vietnam-claimed and Philippines-claimed maritime territories
in mid 2011 endangered maritime stability, Singapore shortly filed a serious
complaint to China, despite it not being an active participant in the dispute

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 283
(Manicom 2010). This suggests that if SCS disputes turn the waters into a
full-fledged military flashpoint, it is very plausible that Singapore will find
itself in a HT condition and seek closer ties with the US.
But on the economic front, Singapore and China have established a positive relationship, one that is beneficial to both sides. Starting in 1999, Singapore turned its trade deficit with China to a surplus of more than US$4 billion. The surplus continued to widen to US$14 billion in 2006 and continues
to expand (Barbieri et al. 2009). Singapore is able to benefit from regional
economic integration, as its strong service sector is able to compete with
China’s industries. In addition, China’s rising domestic markets are suitable for Singaporean businessmen who can take the opportunity to profit
from China’s further incorporation into the world market (Eichengreen
et al. 2007). An example is the Suzhou Industrial Park, one of many successful projects promoted by both governments. Research has indicated that
the growth of China’s inward FDI came at the expense of most ASEAN
countries (Wong and Chan 2003). But according to our investigation, interestingly, Singapore is among the few that has seen a 3.2% increase in the
proportion of FDI comprising China and ASEAN countries, from 12.7%
in 1996 to 15.9% in 2010.4 It thus suggests that, rather than posing a salient
threat to Singapore, China’s rising economic power is beneficial – which
generates a PE scenario for Singapore.
Under a HT and PE situation, Singapore is concerned about maintaining
its profitable economic cooperation while reducing risk and uncertainty in
the maritime region. China’s growing military power and assertive behavior
in SCS has thus alarmed Singaporean leaders. In such an uncertain security
environment, Singapore hopes the US and China can coexist peacefully in
Southeast Asia. But rather than using the US presence in the region to balance itself against China, Singapore prefers to maintain an equal distance
between themselves and neighboring powers in Asia (Rajan 2012). Simon
Tay put forward the idea of ‘equi-proximatity’ as a survival strategy for
Singapore that keeps its away from being dominated by any one of the great
powers (Tay 2011). To Lee Kuan Yew, for example, drawing in other powers like Australia and India in discussions concerning East Asian affairs is
beneficial for Singapore to maintain a sort of balance against China (Barbieri et al. 2009). But he also indicated the necessity of responding to China’s
pressure to preserve healthy bilateral economic ties (TIME 2005).
Clearly in Singapore’s case, maintaining economic prosperity with China
while being vigilant to its strategic intention are its main survival concerns.
It cannot afford to infuriate China by seeking a soft-balancing strategy with
other powers like Vietnam, but cannot bandwagon with China, as in Cambodia’s case, since there is still uncertainty over China’s posture in the South
China Sea. Thus, Singapore’s strategy relies on bringing in other powers to
create a semblance of balance in an uncertain situation which they have no
influential control over.

284

The Pacific Review

Conclusion
In this paper, we investigate the interplay of Sino–Southeast Asian countries’ economic and security relations by introducing the theories of trade
expectation and balance, which help explain Southeast Asian countries’
divergent response to a rising China. From the cases of contemporary
Vietnam–China, Cambodia–China and Singapore–China relations, we offer
empirical evidences corresponding to the explanatory typologies. Countries
with a grave sense of threat and who expect to suffer economically from cooperation with China, such as Vietnam, will choose a ‘soft balancing’ strategy; countries such as Cambodia, which perceives a low sense of threat and
expects to benefit economically from cooperation with China, is more likely
to choose a ‘bandwagoning’ strategy; countries that have a positive perception in only one aspect like Singapore will choose an equal-distance ‘hedging’ strategy to ensure its long-term interests in the struggle of great power
politics. Although we take sides in identifying the scenario each Southeast
Asian country is in, and their subsequent strategies, we by no means suggest
that the situation will remain the same forever. Recognizing that the region
is changing rapidly, our model is adopted to understand such dynamics and
its implications for Southeast Asia–China relations. Should China change
its foreign behavior in critical issues such as the SCS disputes or the value
of the Renminbi in the future, each Southeast Asian country’s perception
of China will vary accordingly, thus altering their strategic options.
With the global epistemic communities focusing on China’s rise, it is understandable that small states appear to be mere peripheral players in the
East Asian power structure. However, when investigating the typology of
small states’ responses to this rising power, we may find that they are more
likely to have leverages that alter their importance in the power game,
which may lead to a further theorizing process of future ASEAN-China
relations.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Chengchi University’s Top University
Program and Taiwan’s National Science Council. We are grateful to the
participants at the panel of ‘Asian Integration: Prospects and Challenges’ in
2011 ISA annual convention for helpful comments, as well as Evan Berman,
Duygu Evren and Tony Wan for their advice and assistance.

Notes
1 We thank the anonymous reviewer who pointed out the relevance of the elites’
interests.
2 Chinese army chief General Chen Bingde said the exercises with the Philippines
and Vietnam were ‘extremely inappropriate’. See BBC (2011).

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 285
3 According to the blueprint of Beijing–Shanghai high-speed rail, this 1318 km rail
construction project will cost RMB 221 billion, while the Japanese proposal will
cost RMB 380 billion.
4 We use the data from United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and compare differences between 1996 and 2010, excluding the influence of the
Asian financial crisis in 1997 and the global financial tsunami in 2008.

References
Acharya, A. (1997) ‘Ideas, identity, and institution-building: from the “ASEAN
way” to the “Asia–Pacific way”?’, The Pacific Review 10(3): 319–46.
Acharya, A. and Goh, E. (2007) Reassessing Security Cooperation in the AsiaPacific: Competition, Congruence, and Transformation, Massachusetts: Belfer
Center for Science and International Affairs.
Adriano, J. (2011) ‘Sinophobia on the rise in the Philippines’, Asia Times, 13 July;
accessed at http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/MG13Ae01.html,
30 January 2012.
Ba, A. (2003) ‘China and ASEAN: renavigating relations for a twenty-first century
Asia’, Asian Survey 43(4): 622–47.
Ba, A. (2006) ‘Who’s socializing whom? Complex engagement in Sino–ASEAN relations’, The Pacific Review 19(2): 157–79.
Barbieri, K., Keshk, O. and Pollins, B. (2009) ‘Trading data: evaluating our assumptions and coding rules’, Conflict Management and Peace Science 26(5): 21.
BBC (2011) ‘US–China spat over South China Sea military exercises’, 11 July; accessed at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14097503, 30 January
2012.
Beech, H. (2010) ‘Asia’s new Cold War’, TIME, 3 October; accessed at
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2022546,00.html, 30 January 2012.
Bloomberg Businessweek (2010) ‘US signals to China it won’t keep out of South
Sea’, 23 July; accessed at http://www.businessweek.com/news/2010–07-23/
u-s-signals-to-china-it-won-t-ke ep-out-of-south-sea.html, 5 March 2011.
Bueno de Mesquita, B. (2003) The Logic of Political Survival, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Busse, N. (1999) ‘Constructivism and Southeast Asian security’, The Pacific Review
12(1): 39–60.
Castro, R. C. D. (2003) ‘The revitalized Philippine–US security relations: a ghost
from the Cold War or an alliance for the twenty-first century?’, Asian Survey
43(6): 971–88.
Chachavalpongpun, P. (2010) Reinventing Thailand: Thaksin and His Foreign Policy, Singapore and Thailand: ISEAS and Silkworm Books.
China Post (2011) ‘Vietnam protests China’s Spratly military exercises’,
China Post, 5 March; accessed at http://www.chinapost.com.tw/asia/vietnam/
2011/03/05/293400/Vietnam-protests.htm, 30 January 2012.
Chowdhury, A. (2007) FTA, Regional Integration and Development, Busan: Pusan
National University, Busan.
Chowdhury, N. (2010) ‘Free trade with China: ASEAN’s winners and losers’,
TIME, 22 January; accessed at http://www.time.com/time/world/article/
0,8599,1955863,00.html, 30 January 2012.
Christoffersen, G. (2002) ‘The role of East Asia in Sino–American relations’, Asian
Survey 42(3): 369–96.

286

The Pacific Review

Chung, J. H. (2009) ‘East Asia responds to the rise of China: patterns and variations’, Pacific Affairs 82(4): 657–75.
Cooper, J. (2010) ‘US Navy Destroyer docks in Vietnam for four-day visit’, Voice of
America, 10 August; accessed at http://www.voanews.com/english/news/asia/
US-Vietnam-to-Launch-Unprecedent ed-Naval-Exercises-100348919.html, 2
February 2012.
Copeland, D. (1996) ‘Economic interdependence and war: a theory of trade expectations’, International Security 20(4): 5–41.
Dayley, R. and Neher, C. (2010) Southeast Asia in the New International Era, Singapore: Westview Press.
Doyle, M. (1983) ‘Kant, liberal legacies, and foreign affairs, Part 2’, Philosophy and
Public Affairs 12(4): 323–53.
Ehrlich, R. (2011) ‘Anxiety as China influences Thailand’s economy’, Scoop,
1 August; accessed at http://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/HL1108/S00037/anxietyas-china-influences-thailands-economy.htm, 30 January 2012.
Eichengreen, B., Rhee, Y. and Tong, H. (2007) ‘China and the exports of other
Asian countries’, Review of World Economics 143(2): 201–26.
Foot, R. (1998) ‘China in the ASEAN regional forum: organizational processes and
domestic modes of thought’, Asian Survey 38(5): 425–40.
Fridberg, A. (1993/1994) ‘Ripe for rivalry: prospects for peace in a multipolar Asia’,
International Security 18(3): 5–33.
Ganesan, N. (1995) ‘Rethinking ASEAN as a security community in Southeast
Asia’, Asian Affairs, an American Review 21(4): 210–26.
Goh, E. (2004) ‘Singapore’s reaction to rising China: deep engagement and strategic
adjustment’, IDSS Working Paper 67: 1–24.
Goh, E. (2007) ‘Southeast Asian perspectives on the China challenge’, Journal of
Strategic Studies 30(4/5): 809–32.
Hsiao, M. and Yang, A. (2008) ‘Transformations of China’s soft power toward
ASEAN’, China Brief 8(22): 11–5.
Invest in Cambodia (2011) ‘Special economic zones’; accessed at http://www.
investincambodia.com/economic_zones/sezs.htm, 7 March 2011.
Jones, D. M. and Smith, M. (2007) ‘Making process, not progress: ASEAN and the
evolving East Asian regional order’, International Security 32(1): 148–84.
Kang, D. (2003) ‘Getting Asia wrong: the need for new analytical frameworks’, International Security 27(4): 57–85.
Kang, D. (2009) ‘Between balancing and bandwagoning: South Korea’s response to
China’, Journal of East Asian Studies 9(1): 1–28.
Kaufman, R. (1992) “‘To balance or to bandwagon?” Alignment decisions in 1930s
Europe’, Security Studies 1(3): 417–47.
Keohane, R. and Nye, J. (1977) Power and Interdependence: World Politics in Transition, Boston: Little, Brown.
Kinne, B. (2005) ‘Decision-making in autocratic regimes: a poliheuristic perspective’, International Studies Perspectives 6(1): 114–28.
Koong, P. C. (1999) Southeast Asian Countries’ Perceptions of China’s Military Modernization, Washington: George Washington University.
Kuik, C.-C. (2008) ‘The essence of hedging: Malaysia and Singapore’s response to a
rising China’, Contemporary Southeast Asia 30(2): 159–85.
Kuik, C.-C. and Lee, K. C. (2008) ‘Rising dragon, crouching tigers? Comparing the
foreign policy responses of Malaysia and Singapore towards a re-emerging
China, 1990–2005’, BiblioAsia 3(4): 4–13.
Kurlantzick, J. (2007) Charm Offensive: How China’s Soft Power Is Transforming
the World, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Labs, E. (1992) ‘Do weak states bandwagon?’, Security Studies 1(3): 383–416.

I. T. Y. Chen and A. H. Yang: A harmonized Southeast Asia? 287
Manicom, J. (2010) ‘Beyond boundary disputes: understanding the nature of China’s
challenge to maritime East Asia’, Harvard Asia Quarterly 12(3/4): 46–53.
Murphy, A. M. (2010) ‘Beyond balancing and bandwagoning: Thailand’s response
to China’s rise’, Asian Security 6(1): 1–27.
Pan, P. (2003) ‘China’s improving image challenges US in Asia’, Washington Post,
15 November, p. A01.
Paul, T. V. (2005) ‘Soft balancing in the age of US primacy’, International Security
30(1): 46–71.
Peceny, M., Beer, C. C. and Sanchez-Terry, S. (2002) ‘Dictatorial peace?’, American
Political Science Review 96(01): 15–26.
People’s Daily (2011) ‘Chinese vice commerce minister praises China–Cambodia
cooperation’, 22 February; accessed at http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/
90001/90776/90883/7295176.html, 8 March 2011.
Perwita, A. A. B. (2007) Indonesia and the Muslin World: Islam and Secularism in
the Foreign Policy of Soeharto and Beyond, Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Pholsena, V. and Banomyong, R. (2006) Laos: From Buffer State to Crossroads,
Ching Mai: Meking Press.
Pohlner, H. (2010) ‘Chinese dam diplomacy: Leadership and geopolitics in
continental Asia’, East Asia Forum Quarterly, 2(3); accessed at http://
www.eastasiaforum.org/2010/08/19/chinese-dam-diplomacy-leadership-andgeopolitics-in-continental-asia/. 30 January 2012.
Rajan, D. S. (2012) Re-evaluating US Foreign Policy Towards Asia, India: Chennai
Centre for China Studies.
Rajendran, M. (1985) ASEAN’s Foreign Relations: The Shift to Collective Action,
Kuala Lumpur: Arenabuku sdn bhd.
Ramcharan, R. (2000) ‘ASEAN and non-interference: a principle maintained’, Contemporary Southeast Asia 22(1): 60–88.
Ravenhill, J. (2006) ‘Is China an economic threat to Southeast Asia?’, Asian Survey
46(5): 653–74.
RIA Novosti (2009) ‘Vietnam could become key importer of Russian weaponry’, 12
April; accessed at http://en.rian.ru/mlitary_news/20091204/157097433.html.
30 January 2012.
Rosecrance, R. N. (1986) The Rise of the Trading State: Commerce and Conquest in
the Modern World, New York: Basic Books.
Ross, R. (2006) ‘Balance of power politics and the rise of China: accommodation
and balancing in East Asia’, Security Studies 15(3): 355–95.
Roy, D. (2005) ‘Southeast Asia and China: balancing or bandwagoning?’, Contemporary Southeast Asia 27(2): 305–22.
Saravanamuttu, J. (1999) Asian Peace: Security and Governance in the Asia Pacific
Region, ed. M. Tehranian, London: I. B. Tauris Publishers.
Sarkees, M. R. and Wayman, F. W. (2010) Resort to war: a data guide to inter-state,
extra-state, intra-state, and non-state wars, 1816-2007, Washington, D.C.: CQ
Press.
Schweller, R. (1994) ‘Bandwagoning for profit: bringing the revisionist state back
in’, International Security 19(1): 72–107.
Segal, G. (1998) East Asian Security, ed. M. E. Brown, S. M. Lynn-Jones and S. E.
Miller, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Severino, R. (2009) The ASEAN Regional Forum, Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies.
Shee, P. K. (2005) ‘Singapore–China Special Economic Relations: In Search of Business Opportunities’, Ritsumeikan International Affairs 3: 151–76.
Storey, I. (2007) ‘Malaysia’s hedging strategy with China’, China Brief 7(14); accessed at http://www.jamestown.org/single/?no_cache=1&tx_ttnews%5Btt_
news%5D=4298, 30 January 2012.

288

The Pacific Review

Subianto, L. H. (2002) Southeast Asia in the New Century: An Asian Perspective, ed.
S. C. Y. Ku, Kaohsiung: National Sun Yat-Sen University.
Tønnesson, S. (2009) ‘What is it that best explains the East Asian peace since 1979?
A call for a research agenda’, Asian Perspective 33(1): 111–35.
Tan, S. S. (2009) The Rise of China: Responses from Southeast Asia and Japan, ed.
J. Tsunekawa, Japan: The National Institute for Defense Studies.
Tay, S. (2011) Asia Alone: The Dangerous Post-Crisis Divide from America, Singapore: John Wiley & Sons.
Thayer, C. (1994) ‘Sino–Vietnamese relations: the interplay of ideology and national
interest’, Asian Survey 34(6): 513–28.
The Council of Taiwanese Chambers of Commerce in Vietnam (2011); accessed at
http://www.ctcvn.org/yncj-nry.aspx?sn=2811, 7 March 2011.
The Hanoist (2010) ‘Vietnam hedges its China risk’, Asia Times, 30 June; accessed at http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/LG30Ae01.html, 30
January 2012.
TIME (2005) ‘Lee Kuan yew reflects’, 12 December; accessed at http://www.
time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1137705,00.html, 10 February 2012.
Tow, S. (2004) ‘Southeast Asia in the Sino–US strategic balance’, Contemporary
Southeast Asia: A Journal of International & Strategic Affairs 26(3): 434–59.
Vaughn, B. and Morrison, W. (2006) China–Southeast Asia Relations: Trends, Issues,
and Implications for the United States, Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress.
Vuving, A. (2006) ‘Strategy and evolution of Vietnam’s China policy: a changing
mixture of pathways’, Asian Survey 46(6): 805–24.
Wagner, R. H. (1994) ‘Peace, war, and the balance of power’, American Political
Science Review 88(3): 593–607.
Walt, S. (1985) ‘Alliance formation and the balance of world power’, International
Security 9(4): 3–43.
Walt, S. (1987) The Origins of Alliances, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Waltz, K. N. (1979) Theory of International Politics, Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Wong, J. and Chan, S. (2003) ‘China–Asean free trade agreement: shaping future
economic relations’, Asian Survey 43(3): 507–26.
Yue, C. S. (2005) ‘ASEAN–China economic competition and free trade area’, Asian
Economic Papers 4(1): 109–47.
Zhong, W. (2010) ‘A daring departure from Deng’, Asia Times Online, 6 August;
accessed at http://www.atimes.com/atimes/China/LH06Ad02.html, 7 March
2011.

