Volume 52

Number 2

February 2015

Special Issue: Regional Contestation to Rising Powers
Guest Editors: Daniel Flemes and Steven E. Lobell

Contested leadership in international relations ........................................... 139
Daniel Flemes and Steven E. Lobell

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow or challenge?...... 146
Steven E. Lobell, Neal G. Jesse and Kristen P. Williams

SOUTH AMERICA: SOFT-BALANCING AGAINST BRAZIL
OR CONSENSUAL REGIONAL SOCIETY?
Drivers of strategic contestation: The case of South America ................. 163
Daniel Flemes and Leslie Wehner

International Politics

Contents

International
Politics
Volume 52 Number 2

February 2015

Neither balance nor bandwagon: South American
international society meets Brazil’s rising power ........................................ 178
Federico Merke

Sean W Burges

ASIA: CONTESTATIONAL APPROACHES FROM
INSTITUTIONAL STRATEGIES TO HARD-BALANCING
Contested regional orders and institutional balancing
in the Asia Pacific .................................................................................................. 208
Kai He

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia ............................ 223
Nicolas Blarel and Hannes Ebert

AFRICA: COUNTER-REACTIONS TO SOUTH AFRICA’S
ECONOMIC HEGEMONY
South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa ................................................. 239
Chris Alden and Maxi Schoeman

African agency? Africa, South Africa and the BRICS................................... 255
Timothy M. Shaw

Copyright © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
This issue is now available at www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Print ISSN 1384-5748
Online ISSN 1740-3898

Volume 52 Number 2

Revisiting consensual hegemony: Brazilian regional
leadership in question........................................................................................... 193

IP

www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/
Editor: Michael Cox, London School of Economics, UK
Managing Editor: Fiona Stephen, London School of Economics, UK
Associate Editors: Walter Carlsnaes, University of Uppsala, Sweden
Christian Reus-Smit, Australian National University, Australia
G. John Ikenberry, Princeton University, USA
International Advisory Board
Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na’im, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA, USA
Pierre Allan, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland
Pauline H. Baker, Fund For Peace, Washington,
DC, USA
Nicole Ball, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA
Ken Booth, University of Wales, Aberystwyth, UK
Chris Brown, London School of Economics, UK
Branko Caratan, University of Zagreb,
Zagreb, Croatia
Susan Eckstein, Boston University, Boston, MA,
USA
Heinz Gärtner, Austrian Institute of
International Affairs, Vienna, Austria
Joseph Grieco, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
Andreas Hasenclever, University of Tübingen,
Germany
Richard Higgott, University of Warwick, UK
Leslie Holmes, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia
P. Terrence Hopmann, Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA
Robert Hunter, The Rand Corporation,
Washington, DC, USA
Shireen Hunter, Center for Strategic and
International Studies, Washington, DC, USA
Roger E. Kanet, University of Miami,
Coral Gables, FL, USA
Charles W. Kegley Jr, The Carnegie Council for
Ethics in International Affairs, New York, USA
Olav Knudsen, Södertörns Högskola University,
Huddinge, Sweden
Charles Kupchan, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC, USA

Richard N. Lebow, Dartmouth College, Hanover,
NH, USA
Ronald H. Linden, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Andrew Linklater, University of Wales,
Aberystwyth, UK
Charles William Maynes, Eurasia Foundation,
Washington, DC, USA
Ali Mazrui, State University of New York,
Binghamton, NY, USA
Karen Mingst, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
KY, USA
Chung-in Moon, Yonsei University, Seoul,
Korea
Hideki Ohata, Waseda University, Tokyo,
Japan
Vittorio Parsi, Catholic University Milan, Milan,
Italy
Robert Pastor, American University, Washington,
DC, USA
Anne Sisson Runyan, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH, USA
Andrzej Rychard, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland
Simon Serfaty, Old Dominion University,
Norfolk, VA, USA
Peter Shearman, University of Melbourne,
Australia
Steve Smith, University of Exeter, UK
Dimitri Trenin, Carnegie Endowment, Moscow,
Russia
Richard Ullman, Princeton University, Princeton,
NJ, USA
Wolfgang Wagner, Peace Research Institute
Frankfurt, Germany
Stephen White, University of Glasgow, UK

Founding Editor: Daniel N. Nelson
Immediate Past Editor: Laura Neack
International Politics is a leading peer reviewed journal dedicated to transnational issues and global
problems. It subscribes to no political or methodological identity, and welcomes any appropriate
contributions designed to communicate findings and enhance dialogue.
If you would like to submit a manuscript or to make an informal enquiry, please contact Fiona Stephen,
Managing Editor, International Politics, ‘Ideas’ Columbia House LSE, Houghton Street, London W2AA
2AE, UK. E-mail: internationalpolitics@palgrave.com; Tel: +44 (0)207 882 2810;
Instructions to authors are available at the journal’s website www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/.

International Politics
Volume 52

Number 2

February 2015

Contents
Special Issue:
Regional Contestation to Rising Powers
Guest Editors:
Daniel Flemes and Steven E. Lobell

Contested leadership in international relations
Daniel Flemes and Steven E. Lobell

139

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow or challenge?
Steven E. Lobell, Neal G. Jesse and Kristen P. Williams

146

SOUTH AMERICA: SOFT-BALANCING AGAINST BRAZIL OR
CONSENSUAL REGIONAL SOCIETY?
Drivers of strategic contestation: The case of South America
Daniel Flemes and Leslie Wehner
Neither balance nor bandwagon: South American international society meets
Brazil’s rising power
Federico Merke
Revisiting consensual hegemony: Brazilian regional leadership in question
Sean W. Burges

163

178
193

ASIA: CONTESTATIONAL APPROACHES FROM INSTITUTIONAL
STRATEGIES TO HARD-BALANCING
Contested regional orders and institutional balancing in the Asia Pacific
Kai He

208

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia
Nicolas Blarel and Hannes Ebert

223

Contents continuedy

Contents continuedy

AFRICA: COUNTER-REACTIONS TO SOUTH AFRICA’S ECONOMIC
HEGEMONY
South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa
Chris Alden and Maxi Schoeman

239

African agency? Africa, South Africa and the BRICS
Timothy M. Shaw

255

Copyright r 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
This issue is now available at:
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Special Issue

Contested leadership in international relations
Daniel Flemesa,* and Steven E. Lobellb

a
GIGA German Institute of Global and Area Studies, Neuer Jungfernstieg 21, Hamburg 20354, Germany.
E-mail: daniel.ﬂemes@giga-hamburg.de
b
Department of Political Science, 260 S. Central Campus Drive, Rm 252, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112,
USA.
E-mail: steven.lobell@poli-sci.utah.edu

*Corresponding author.

Abstract The articles in this special issue examine the responses to the rise of new and
emerging powers including Brazil, China, India and South Africa across different regions.
Rather than focus on great powers and hegemons, the contributors address the contestation between regional powers, and secondary and tertiary states. The contributors address
three questions: What are the drivers of different strategic responses? What are the different regional responses to shifts in the distribution of material capabilities? What is the
inﬂuence of agency and structure in contested regional orders? To address these questions,
different schools are employed including realism, institutionalism, and the English school to
examine state characteristics, systemic, sub-systemic, domestic constraints and opportunities, the role of ideas and shared values, and different regional governance structures.
International Politics (2015) 52, 139–145. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.42;
published online 19 December 2014
Keywords: secondary and tertiary states; realism; institutionalism; English School

This special issue proceeds from the observation that conﬂicts over the assertion or
prevention of regional leadership will impact regional orders and the global order.
The contributors are, therefore, interested in regional responses to the rise of new powers
such as Brazil, China, India and South Africa. The leading regional role of these states
can be based on their greater military or economic potential. In the same way, their
legitimacy or representative function for a region might generate bargaining advantages.
With the heavy emphasis on the great powers and hegemons, regional power and
contestation of the secondary and tertiary states are understudied. The contributors to
this special issue of International Politics examine the motives of the secondary and
tertiary states to accept or contest the regional hegemon and its regional order. What
regional, sub-systemic and domestic level strategies do secondary and tertiary states
pursue in response to changes in the distribution of power and the new asymmetries,
and why? Speciﬁcally, the contributors assess how to characterize different strategies
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 139–145

Flemes and Lobell

in various world regions, the impact of diverse forms of domestic, systemic and
normative factors on strategic responses, and the role of regional institutions in
managing the new power realities.
The contributors to this special issue address three theoretical questions. First,
what are the drivers of different strategic responses? In reﬂecting the differences
between realist, English school and institutionalist approaches, the contributors
examine state characteristics, and systemic and sub-systemic constraints and
incentives, ideas and shared values, and regional governance structures. Can regional
resistance be best explained by combining domestic factors such as regime type,
public opinion, or the inﬂuence of interest groups with the self-help mechanisms that
occur in anarchic systems? Are middle powers’ leaders driven by thicker patterns of
identity and culture within their societies? Do common governance institutions
dominantly shape the foreign policies of secondary states?
Second, how can one characterize the different regional responses to changes in the
distribution of material capabilities? These questions seek to evaluate the descriptive
value and conceptual clarity of the most dominant types of strategic responses. What
are the distinctive features of strategies that fall between – or beyond – the extremes of
balancing and accommodation? What frameworks exist to compare such strategies?
And how can we effectively observe such phenomena in the real world?
Third, what is the inﬂuence of agency and structure in contested regional orders?
Are systemic constraints of the global and regional economy shaping secondary and
small states’ behaviour? And how do these forces interact with domestic agents in
shaping foreign policy adaptations to new regional asymmetries?
The positions of regional powers located between the centre and periphery of the
current world system and at the nexus of international and regional politics means
that they have particularly complex foreign policy strategies. Thus, complex strategic
approaches are also necessary in order to respond to the rise of these powerful states.
The reform of the Security Council of the United Nations has failed, not least because
of the lack of acceptance in the candidates’ regions. In general, empirical case studies
suggest lower degrees of acceptance of regional powers’ leadership claims in the
neighbouring states than at the global level.
In order to analyse this contested dynamic, this special issue of International
Politics will focus on regional contestation and identify factors that motivate
secondary powers and tertiary states to accept or contest regional powers’ leadership
claims. Secondary powers have a particular signiﬁcance in the context of regional
contestation because they have the most inﬂuence and impact on the regional
polarity. We can deﬁne a secondary state’s position in the regional hierarchy based
on relative material, institutional and discursive resources, with material resources
being the easiest to quantify. One feature of secondary powers is that the most
important reference point of their foreign policies is the regional power. Moreover,
the regional power is the only state in the locale with extensive presence and agendasetting capacity at the global level.
140

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 139–145

Contested leadership in international relations

Is leadership acceptance by secondary and tertiary players a precondition for the
representation of regional interests by the regional power at the global level? Is
regional acceptance or at least acquiescence a necessary precondition for the rise of
regional powers in the global hierarchy and for their transformation into great
powers? In cases where regional acceptance is signiﬁcant, which is assumed by the
majority of the contributors to this special issue, secondary players will expect a
reward from the regional power for their leadership acceptance asking: (i) for the
payment of the political costs of regional cooperation such as the construction of
democratic and participative regional institutions; (ii) for the payment of economic
costs of regional cooperation including structural funds and domestic market access;
and (iii) for the provision of public goods like regional stability and infrastructure by
the regional power. The strategic choice of secondary powers will be inﬂuenced by
the readiness of the regional power to pay and provide these regional public goods.
For instance, in the Africa section Timothy M. Shaw analyses the causes of many
African states’ ambivalence about South Africa’s role as a ‘BRICS state’. Shaw
argues from the perspective of these smaller regional countries stressing that South
Africa’s economic growth comes with social and ecological costs, which are often
paid by its neighbours. The author disproves the expression of the South African
‘developmental power’ focussing on Pretoria’s challenges of governance and the
uneven distribution of public goods veriﬁed through various comparative indicators
from capacity building to transparency and human development. The symbolic that
African secondary states pay for South Africa’s growth is expressed by the
continuing migration into South Africa.
Another key factor that impacts secondary players’ acceptance of the primary
powers’ explicit or implicit leadership claim is the dominant mode of conﬂict
management in the locale. Further variables tackled by the authors of this volume are
the resources, interests and perceptions of foreign policy. To capture the relational
dimension of these variables, the bilateral relations between regional and secondary
powers as well as between regional and external great powers will be analysed. In the
Asia section, Nicolas Blarel and Hannes Ebert present an analysis of the strategy of
nuclear contestation in South Asia since 1947, which reveals the signiﬁcance of
relative power resources, mutual perceptions and great power involvement.
Blarel and Ebert demonstrate that nuclear contestation in South Asia operates
under three speciﬁc conditions: (i) the secondary power anticipates the interference of
a systemic great power – the United States – with signiﬁcant stakes in the deescalation of the crisis, a strategy which the authors label ‘trilateral compellence’;
(ii) the secondary power exploits the latent risk of nuclear escalation by using nonstate actors to maximize its negotiation and deterrence leverage; and (iii) external
powers engage in ‘pivotal deterrence’ in order to inﬂuence the contestation strategy
chosen by the secondary power. Blarel and Ebert conclude that these conditions
generate a situation of a ‘stability-instability paradox’, in which interstate war has
been replaced by calculated risk-taking and sub-conventional warfare.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 139–145

141

Flemes and Lobell

The most obvious reason to contest a regional power’s leadership claim is the
policy behaviour of the regional power itself. But this behaviour does not to pose a
vital threat to the secondary power as in the case of India and Pakistan. Two
contributions to this volume address regional powers’ strategic approaches towards
their regions. In the South America section, Sean Burges revisits Brazil’s regional
strategy of consensual hegemony. He argues that the greatest obstacle for regional
acceptance as well as for Brasilia’s capacity to lead and leverage the region is its
reluctance to accept measures that might restrict national autonomy.
Although the consensual hegemony approach allowed Brazil to establish an
ideational project and a leading position in South America, it failed to provide
concrete leadership goods and, therefore, weakened Brazil’s regional position.
Burges argues that the relative contestation by South American secondary powers is
rooted in a contradictory approach that views Brazilian diplomats pushing away
suggestions of assertive leadership while more concrete action is quietly taken by
other regionally engaged sections of the Brazilian state.
In the Africa section, Chris Alden and Maxi Schoeman discuss the ‘symbolic
hegemony’ of South Africa in Africa. They show that the state-led effort of an
‘African Renaissance’ to restructure continental institutions, which was complemented by commercial expansion by well-ﬁnanced South African corporations, has
been only partially realized. Even though the offensive economic strategy of public
and private South African companies is often criticized as sub-imperialism in
neighbouring states, the case for South African hegemonic dominance over the
continent is challenged by its material weakness and uneven record of foreign policy
successes. Despite this shortcoming, Pretoria is continually ‘rewarded’ with leadership positions in international groupings such as BRICS, G20, and nearly consecutive terms on the UN Security Council. Alden and Schoeman conclude that this
constitutes symbolic representivity and poses a continuing set of foreign policy
dilemmas for South Africa.
Besides the foreign policy approach of the hegemon, the dominant patterns of
interaction shape secondary powers’ responses to their rising neighbours. The
conditions for conﬂict and cooperation within regional orders differ in many aspects
from world order politics. For instance, regional cooperation processes such as the
African Union, the Union of South American Nations and the South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation can serve as power bases or limit the leaders’ foreign policy
options as secondary players try to constrain the rising powers by refusing to grant
them acceptance and legitimacy. These secondary powers can claim leadership in
certain issue areas beyond the region and represent potential cooperation partners for
external powers. The former scenario might enable them to project power globally. The
latter extends their room to manoeuvre in bargaining with regional powers. Secondary
powers play a key role with regard to regional acceptance.
For different reasons, Pakistan opposes India’s leadership; Venezuela undermines
Brazil’s regional power status; and Nigeria refuses to follow South Africa. A lack of
142

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 139–145

Contested leadership in international relations

regional acceptance can be expressed through claims of (sub)regional leadership by
secondary powers. In this regard, Nigeria is labelled as guarantor of sub-regional
stability. In addition, South Africa’s historical legacy of apartheid is often instrumentalized by policy makers of African secondary states to delegitimize its leadership role. Pakistan is described as India’s rival and a counterbalancing force in South
Asia, especially with a view to the nuclear dimension of the hostile relation and the
Kashmir conﬂict. And Venezuela is referred to as a regional middle power in
South America, with an emphasis on its ‘petropolitics’ and its alternative regional
integration project, the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas.
In summary, the Indian-Pakistani constellation of contested leadership is marked
by conﬂict, whereas the contested leadership dyads in South America and subSaharan Africa oscillate between competition and cooperation. China’s revival as the
primary power in Asia, ﬁnally, resulted in multiple foreign policy adaptations by
states such as Japan, India and the Southeast Asian nations and sparked the debate
about renewed balancing alliances in Asia.
In their article on drivers of strategic contestation, Daniel Flemes and Leslie
Wehner demonstrate that in regions characterized by relative stability such as South
America, secondary powers rely mainly on soft balancing mechanisms in responding to their regional power. Whereas Brazil’s foreign policy behaviour is the main
driver to contest the country’s power, the choices of secondary powers on the
speciﬁc expression of soft balancing are shaped widely by domestic drivers. Flemes
and Wehner verify the assumption that domestic actors have much more inﬂuence
in foreign policy in environments of peace and stability than in conﬂictive regions,
where the foreign policy elite tends to exclude domestic interests for the sake of the
survival of the state.
In general, secondary powers command limited foreign policy options in view of
the hard power of regional states. In outlining state strategies, the two most common
concepts in International Relations theory (IRT) are balancing and bandwagoning. In
cases of contested leadership marked by conﬂict, we might expect secondary powers
to pursue counterbalancing strategies, whereas in cases of contested leadership
characterized by patterns of cooperative regional relations bandwagoning seems
more likely. Although the literature often portrays states’ alignment decisions as a
dichotomy between balancing and bandwagoning, these are only the two most
extreme polar strategies a weaker state can choose.
The contributors identify various middle-range strategies for weaker states to
avoid making an obvious choice that lie between the two extremes of balancing and
bandwagoning; it is theoretically and empirically important to distinguish middlerange strategies from the extreme polar opposites. Labels for strategies vary largely
and need to be analysed through novel analytical frameworks. The authors of this
volume seek to identify the most dominant forms of counter-hegemonic strategies
across the three considered regions, and ask whether traditional IRT concepts can be
adopted to these regions.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 139–145

143

Flemes and Lobell

In the Asia section, Kai He proposes the middle-range strategy of institutional
balancing for exploring the case of the Asia Paciﬁc. He argues that China’s ascent
intensiﬁes the institutionalization of security in the Asia Paciﬁc because China’s
rise has led to a competition among different regional orders, including the US-led
bilateralism versus ASEAN-centred and China-supported multilateralism. In
addition, the deepening economic interdependence has encouraged powerful
actors to rely on institutional balancing strategies to pursue security after the Cold
War. The author optimistically concludes that the institutionalization of security in
the Asia Paciﬁc will create conditions for the coexistence of regional orders
contributing to a relatively peaceful environment for states to compete without
military conﬂict.
What explains variation in how secondary powers respond to rising powers in
different world regions has been reﬂected upon by various IRT schools. The
following articles present the most recent models ranging from Neoinstitutionalist
and Neoclassical Realist approaches to Constructivist theory, and explore their
explanatory power within Asia, Africa and South America.
In this regard, Federico Merke analyses the responses to Brazilian regional power
from the perspective of international society and the English School of IRT. Merke
stresses the values and institutions shared by Brazil and its neighbours and he argues
that these offer the foundations for a distinct regional international society in South
America. Therefore, Merke concludes that strategic reactions by states such as
Venezuela or Chile towards Brazil are not shaped by material, but instead by
common norms, ideas and historical experiences.
From the opposite perspective, Steven Lobell, Neal Jesse and Kristen Williams
in their conceptual inroad into the special issue outline a model that examine
systemic and sub-systemic constraints and opportunities on secondary and tertiary
states. They ask how engaged in the region is the global hegemon, how many
regional and extra-regional states are in the region, and which states are waxing
and waning and by how much. Such a model can explain general tendencies
towards accommodation, resistances and neutrality. To account for the speciﬁc
foreign policy strategies of secondary and tertiary states would require domestic
and unit level variables, and the authors leave it to the area specialists to provide
such information.

About the Authors
Daniel Flemes is Schumpeter Fellow of the Volkswagen Foundation at the GIGA
German Institute of Global and Area Studies in Hamburg. He received his PhD in 2005
from the University of Hamburg. After a visiting fellowship at Georgetown University
in Washington DC, he is currently a visiting professor at Rio de Janeiro State
University (UERJ), Brazil. His latest publications include ‘Network Powers: Strategies
144

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 139–145

Contested leadership in international relations

of Change in the Multipolar System’ (Third World Quarterly) and Regional Leadership in the Global System: Ideas, Interests and Strategies of Regional Powers (Edited
Volume, Ashgate).
Steven E. Lobell is Professor of Political Science at the University of Utah (PhD,
UCLA). Lobell’s recent books include Neoclassical Realism, the State, and Foreign
Policy (Cambridge University Press, 2009) with Norrin M. Ripsman and Jeffrey W.
Taliaferro; Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons (Stanford University Press, 2012),
with Kristen P. Williams and Neal G. Jesse, eds.; and The Challenge of Grand
Strategy (Cambridge University Press, 2012), with Jeffrey W. Taliaferro and Norrin
M. Ripsman, eds. Lobell has published journal articles in Security Studies, International Studies Quarterly, International Interactions, Review of International
Studies, Political Science Quarterly, Journal of Strategic Studies, International
Relations of the Asia Paciﬁc, International Politics, Comparative Strategy, Chinese
Journal of International Politics, International Journal and World Affairs.

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 139–145

145

Original Article

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow
or challenge?
Steven E. Lobella,*, Neal G. Jesseb and Kristen P. Williamsc
a

Department of Political Science, 260 S. Central Campus Drive, Rm 252, Salt Lake City,
Utah 84112, USA.
E-mail: steven.lobell@poli-sci.utah.edu
b
Department of Political Science, Bowling Green State University, 117 Williams Hall, Bowling Green,
Ohio 43403-0220, USA.
E-mail: njesse@bgsu.edu
c
Department of Political Science, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, Massachusetts
01610, USA.
E-mail: kwilliams@clarku.edu
*Corresponding author.

Abstract In this article we examine when and why secondary and tertiary states select
a strategy that does not entail following the lead of the rising states. To address these
questions we outline a simple model that examines systemic and sub-systemic (regional)
constraints on and opportunities for secondary and tertiary states: how engaged in the
region is the global hegemon, how many rising (and extra-regional) states are in the
region, and which states are waxing and waning and by how much. These three characteristics create different opportunities for and constraints on secondary and tertiary
states, which in turn inﬂuence the set of strategy choices of these states as they respond to
the regional hegemon. Our model cannot account for the speciﬁc foreign policy strategies
that secondary and tertiary states select. Such a model would require domestic and individual level variables. We leave it to the area specialists and experts in the following
articles in the volume to introduce these variables and explain the speciﬁc strategies used.
Instead, based on our model we can explain general tendencies toward accommodative
strategies, resistance strategies and neutral strategies. It is important to note that secondary
and tertiary states can use a mix of different strategies toward regional and global hegemons, such as resisting primary threats and accommodating secondary threats. Moreover,
secondary and tertiary states are often engaged in multiple games – a strategy might
appear to be costly and suboptimal at one level but reasonable and optimal at another
level. Finally, in selecting a strategy secondary and tertiary states factor the systemic, subsystemic and domestic costs of the alternative strategies.
International Politics (2015) 52, 146–162. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.50
Keywords: secondary and tertiary states; global and regional hegemon; accommodation
strategies; resistance strategies; neutral strategies

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

Introduction
When and why do secondary and tertiary states select to support, follow or challenge
the regional rising states, such as Brazil, India, China and South Africa?1 In response
to these questions, realists suggest that secondary and tertiary states are likely to
bandwagon with the regional hegemon rather than balance against it; liberals contend
that secondary states will bind regional hegemons within international institutions,
through interdependence, or by the special peace among democratic states; and
constructivists maintain that secondary states will create new regional identities such
as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the ASEAN Plus Three
or advance a distinct regional international society.2
To address these questions we outline a simple model that examines
global/systemic and regional/sub-systemic constraints and opportunities on
secondary and tertiary states: (1) how engaged in the region is the global
hegemon?; (2) how many rising states (both regional and extra-regional) are in
the region?; and (3) which states are waxing and waning and by how much?
For instance, in Africa, the United States is a disengaged hegemon, South Africa
is a waning regional hegemon and both Nigeria and China are waxing (potential)
regional and extra-regional players. In Latin America, the United States is a
semi-engaged hegemon, and Brazil is a regional hegemon, with China playing a
role. Finally, in Asia, the United States is an engaged hegemon, and Russia, India
and China are regional hegemons. These three characteristics create different
opportunities and constraints for secondary and tertiary states, which in turn
inﬂuences the range of strategic choices for these states as they respond to the
rising states.
Our model cannot account for the speciﬁc foreign policy strategies that secondary
and tertiary states select. Such a model would require domestic and individual unitlevel variables (Barnett and Levy, 1991). We leave it to the area specialists and
experts in the following articles in this special issue to introduce these variables and
to explain why speciﬁc strategies were used. Moreover, our model does not explain
non-power variables. Again, we leave it to the area experts to discuss these forces.
For instance, in South America, Federico Merke (2015, this special issue) maintains
that a rising Brazil has pursued a strategy of concertación or a regional institution
that blends hegemony/great power management and a culture of diplomacy.
Instead, based on our model, we can explain general tendencies and broad patterns
toward accommodative strategies (such as bandwagoning, binding and bonding),
resistance strategies (balancing, balking) and neutral strategies (hedging or fence
sitting) (Cooper and Flemes, 2013). It is important to note that secondary and
tertiary states can use a mix of different strategies toward regional and global
hegemons, such as resisting primary threats and accommodating secondary threats
(on what is known as omni-balancing see David (1991) and Ayoob (1998)).
Moreover, these strategies can change over time given shifts in the level of
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

147

Lobell et al

hegemonic engagement and changes in the relative power of the global hegemon
and/or rising states. In addition secondary and tertiary states are often engaged in
multiple games in that a security strategy might appear to be costly and
suboptimal at one level (that is, against the global hegemon, regional hegemon
or domestic opponents) but reasonable and optimal at another level (for an
explanation of complex threat identiﬁcation see Lobell (2009)). Finally, in
selecting a speciﬁc security strategy secondary and tertiary states will factor
the global/systemic, regional/sub-systemic and domestic costs of the alternative
strategies.
This article consists of several sections. Recognizing the different types of states
in the international system, we begin by providing deﬁnitions of secondary and
tertiary states as related to global and regional hegemons. The next section begins
with a brief discussion of the role of nested games and multiple games, followed by
a discussion of the various security strategies that secondary and tertiary states can
utilize in responding to global and regional hegemons: accommodation, resistance
and neutrality. The constraints on and opportunities for secondary and tertiary
states, and the costs of these as related to their strategy options, are examined in the
section that follows. In order to assess the constraints and opportunities states
encounter, we consider three factors: (1) hegemon’s level of engagement in the
region; (2) number of rising states in the region; and (3) the states that are waxing
and waning.

Deﬁning Secondary and Tertiary States
David R. Mares (1988) builds on Kenneth Waltz’s (1979) structural realist theory
regarding states’ position in the international system. He notes that ‘we need a
deﬁnition of position which highlights the relationship among states in a system
characterized by a highly unequal distribution of resources’. Moreover, ‘Since a
state defends its interests vis-à-vis other states, capability [which is relative in the
international system] must be deﬁned in terms of an ability to act in defense of
one’s own interests. Positions in the system are deﬁned by clusters of states,
distinguished by differences in capabilities’ (Mares, 1988, p. 456). Given this,
Mares argues that there are four (hierarchical) positions that can be distinguished in
the international system. The ﬁrst position, or those states at the top of the
hierarchy, is the great powers. They are in ﬁrst position ‘because the balancing
in the system will revolve around them. International systems, therefore, are
deﬁned by the number of great powers, that is, multipolar, bipolar, hegemonic’. In
the second position are secondary powers, which are states that ‘can disrupt the
system, but not change it, through unilateral action’. Middle powers are in the third
position – states ‘that neither can affect the system individually’ but ‘have enough
resources so that in an alliance with a small enough number of other states that they
148

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

are not merely “price takers”, they can affect the system’. Small powers, those in
the fourth position, also cannot affect the system individually and ‘would have to
ally in such large numbers in order to have an impact that any one small power
loses its ability to inﬂuence the alliance’ (Mares, 1988, p. 456). It is worth noting
that such a classiﬁcation mimics that of Robert Keohane (1969) and his idea that the
international system is divided into four types of states: system-determining,
system-inﬂuencing, system-affecting and system-ineffectual.3
Mares’ deﬁnitions are quite similar to terms employed by a host of scholars
for the past few decades. Annette Baker Fox (1959) writes about the position
of small powers versus the great powers in the diplomacy leading up to the
Second World War. She posits that the test of the position of a small state has
historically been ‘the capacity to resist great-power [sic] demands’ (1959, p. 3).
Importantly, Fox establishes that the success of small states vis-à-vis larger
belligerents often depended upon the structure of the system, for example the
number of competing great powers, the range of competing interests elsewhere
for the great powers and so on (1959, pp. 183–184). Robert Rothstein (1968)
builds upon some of these concepts, emphasizing that ‘small powers are
something more than or different from great powers writ small’ (1968, p. 1).
David Vital (1971) also instructs us to develop a terminology in which ‘members
of the classes of secondary and tertiary states are’ simply not deﬁned as the great
powers lacking power, but rather as something truly different (1971, pp. 15–28).
Rothstein seems to predate Mares in his focus on the ability of small states to
seek large alliances in order to create collective security. Trygve Mathisen
(1971) employs a four-fold distinction that also foreshadows Mares’ work.
Mathisen differentiates states into superpowers, former great powers (for
example, United Kingdom), new middle powers (for example, Brazil, Turkey)
and small powers. Karl Mueller (1991) asks us to consider that any deﬁnition of a
state ‘depends upon regional context’ (1991, p. 66). Discussing Europe, he
divides states into great powers, middle powers and small powers almost exactly
along the deﬁnitional lines of Mares’ use of the terms (substituting great power
for secondary power).
In summary, deﬁning differences between states and classifying them into a
single typology has eluded political scientists for decades. Scholars create their
own deﬁnitions and disagree on whether absolute or relative power is the key, the
nature of inﬂuence on neighbors and/or the system, and many others factors.
However, a common thread is a four-fold distinction. For the purposes of this
volume we shall employ Mares’ classiﬁcation into Great, Secondary, Middle and
Small, noting that these terms are system-speciﬁc (that is, that there is only a great
power at the international system level and that a ‘secondary’ power is most likely
the largest power in its region). Therefore, the terms secondary and tertiary as
applied in a regional context typically equate Middle and Small states to the terms
Secondary and Tertiary, respectively.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

149

Lobell et al

Strategies
Structure and strategy: Multiple-level games
When discussing how to deﬁne states in the previous section, we allude to the
presence of context. In other words, states are engaged in different ‘systems’ of
relationships. These systems may overlap in a hierarchical order (for example, a
middle state interacting with a global hegemon in a global system while also
interacting with a regional hegemon in a regional system), may be created by a
multitude of ‘equal’ relationships (for example, a small power surrounded by a
number of middle powers), and/or may be derived from domestic factors (for
example the leadership of a state concerned about general elections and domestic
political rivals). George Tsebelis (1990) develops the idea that a state may be
involved in multiple ‘games’ into a single framework known as ‘Nested Games’, a
model derived from Game Theory. Tsebelis establishes that it is important for an
observer to be cognizant of all the multiple games in which an actor (in this case a
state) may be involved, because the appearance of sub-optimal choice or outcome
most likely is because of a ‘disagreement between actor and observer … in which the
observer’s perspective is incomplete’ (1990, p. 7). One key reason for the difference
in actor/observer perceptions is a misreading by the observer on the importance that
the actor places into each game or arena. Robert Putnam (1988) derives a similar
framework in what he terms the ‘two-level game’ in which states interact with each
other at the international level while also engaging in an intra-national (that is,
domestic level) game with domestic actors.
In other words, the state has two or more games or arenas in which it must choose
between alternate strategies seeking to maximize beneﬁcial outcomes. The opposing
actor in each game will be different and will have its own set of strategies and
outcomes. Each game can be thought of as a different arena in which a particular
factor is the overriding concern. For example, Pakistan plays a game with the United
States that has security at its core (global anti-terrorism for the United States and
direct aid for Pakistan). Pakistan is also engaged in an international game with its
neighbor India that centers on security and border issues with nuclear deterrence
considerations a part of the game. Further, the Pakistani leadership ﬁnds itself dealing
with a complex domestic game (or games) in which multiple domestic actors have
interests unaligned with the interests of the Pakistani government and/or the United
States. Explaining Pakistan’s accommodation or resistance to the United States must
take into consideration all the games in which the Pakistani leadership participates.
The utility of such a theoretical framework is to point to the complex structure of
the relationships in which a state is engaged. A state must balance its interests, and
possible outcomes, across the multiple games. The emphasis that a state places on
one arena versus another may determine in which game they seek to maximize their
possible outcome. For example, a state may be disobedient vis-à-vis a global or
150

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

regional hegemon, even incurring costs from such behavior, because the state’s
leadership seeks to appease a domestic actor. It is important to note that the emphasis
that a state places on any game or arena is derived internally to that state and typically
is idiosyncratic. Likewise, the exact strategies, payoffs and outcomes of multiplelevel games are derived from multiple factors, some of which originate in the
international system and others that originate domestically. No single generalization
can be made about what a state will do when confronted by such a multiple game
structure, for each state must navigate its own particular and unique games. For
example, Kai He (2015, this special issue) argues that the rise of China has intensiﬁed
competition in a number of regional orders in the Asia Paciﬁc. China participates in
bilateral relations with the United States and a regional set of multilateral relations. In
the case of South America, Flemes and Wehner (2015, this special issue) examine the
different responses to Brazil’s regional hegemony by Argentina, Chile, Colombia
and Venezuela, given the United States’s less prominent presence in the region. They
demonstrate that while systemic-level factors are important, domestic factors are the
main ‘drivers’ that account for the varied responses to Brazil (including softbalancing, balking and binding).
The use of multiple-level game theory as an analytical tool in international
relations is ubiquitous and we choose not to elaborate on the broad range of such
research here. The articles in this volume explore and utilize the concept of multiplelevel games, even if they do not directly address the analysis as such, tacitly
providing explanations of state behavior that rely on this concept.

Strategies of resistance, accommodation and neutrality
States’ foreign policies can tell us much about a hegemon’s power and inﬂuence (and
the secondary and tertiary states’ perceptions of the hegemon’s intentions and
capabilities). As such, scholars have focused on various strategies available to these
states in response to the hegemon’s dominance. We consider three main categories of
strategies: accommodation, resistance and neutrality.
In terms of resistance strategies (that is, balancing, blackmail, leash-slipping and
so forth), states challenge the hegemon’s leadership and dominance. For neo- or
structural realism, because the international system is anarchic and states are
concerned ﬁrst and foremost about their security, states will balance against a state
seeking dominance, balancing internally (procure arms) and/or externally (form
alliances with other states) (Waltz, 1979, p. 118). In building on Waltz’s balance of
power theory, Stephen Walt (1987) argues that states balance against threats (rather
than capabilities only). Levy and Thompson (2010) examine the balancing behavior
(deﬁned as alliance formation) against leading land powers and sea powers. They
found that states (primarily examining the European continent) were more likely to
balance against leading land powers than sea powers. Such structural realist theories
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

151

Lobell et al

are focused on hard balancing as a strategy. Yet states can also engage in a soft
balancing strategy, using diplomacy, economic statecraft, international institutions
and international law to constrain the actions of the hegemon.4 For instance, reﬂecting
this range, according to Nicolas Blarel and Hannes Ebert (2015, this special issue),
Pakistan’s response to India, the regional hegemon, included open resistance, indirect
resistance and reluctant acquiescence. In the case of Africa, Timothy Shaw (2015, this
special issue) argues that soft-balancing against South Africa within the Southern
African region (but not the entire African continent) is occurring.
In a further reﬁnement of balancing behavior, Christopher Layne (2006) puts forth
the strategy of leash-slipping: ‘States engaging in leash-slipping do not fear being
attacked by the hegemon. Rather, they build up their military capabilities to
maximize their ability to conduct an independent foreign policy’ (2006, p. 9). Such
a strategy is not hard balancing because other states do not view the hegemon as ‘an
existential … threat’. He notes that ‘at the same time, it is a form of insurance against
a hegemon that might someday exercise its power in a predatory and menacing
fashion’ (2006, pp. 29–30).
Other strategies of resistance, as described by Walt (2005), include undermining
the hegemon’s power through attacking its legitimacy as the hegemon. States attempt
to convince others that the hegemon’s actions – in this case, the United States – are
‘selﬁsh, hypocritical, immoral, and unsuited for world leadership, and its dominance
harms them’. This strategy does not seek to challenge American power, but rather
‘resent and resist US supremacy’ (2005, p. 116). For example, Schweller and Pu
(2011) examine China’s response to US hegemony and argue that China is not
balancing against the United States at the present time but is engaging in
‘delegitimating activities’ (2011, p. 71).
In the case of blackmail, states can attempt to gain concessions from the hegemon
through the threats of ‘undesirable consequences’. Both adversaries and allies can
use this strategy. For example, Walt notes that countries might use blackmail in
attempting to convince the United States that their regime will collapse without
additional support. He cites the example of Afghan president Hamid Karzai, who
pushed America to increase support for his regime from the threat of collapse (2005,
pp. 112–115).
Using a strategy of balking, a state can ignore or refuse the hegemon’s demands.
This is a particularly effective strategy, ‘because even a country as powerful as the
United States cannot force every state to do its bidding all the time. And the more some
states balk, the more overextended the United States becomes – making it easier for
other states to balk as well’. Walt provides the example of Turkey’s refusal of allowing
the use of its airbases for the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 (2005, pp. 115–116).
With regards to accommodation strategies, states can bandwagon with the stronger
state (Waltz, 1979, p. 126).5 Concerns with regional threats, rather than threats posed
by the hegemon, may lead states to accommodate the hegemon. Whereas bandwagoning assumes utilitarian support for the hegemon regardless of one’s own different
152

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

immediate stakes in the situation at hand, accommodation may also stem from a real
sense of shared interests (Walt, 2005, pp. 110–111). Another accommodation strategy
is bonding, which refers to the use of the close relationship between the hegemon and
secondary states as a way to inﬂuence the hegemon (Walt, 2005, pp. 191–192).6
As in many cases states have both shared and conﬂicting interests with the
hegemon, they can constrain the hegemon’s power through membership in institutions. According to the logic of liberal institutionalism, international institutions can
provide the necessary conditions for states to reach cooperative agreements and
arrangements (Keohane and Martin, 1995; March and Olsen, 1998; Ikenberry, 2001).
The hegemon plays a role in creating these institutions and, as a way to maintain its
power, is willing to bind itself to these institutions. The secondary states then get a
voice and a means to inﬂuence the institution, and perhaps the behavior of the
hegemon as well (Ikenberry, 2001, pp. 51–57, 63; Walt, 2005, pp. 112–115). Walt
cautions, however, that binding the hegemon is more likely to be successful in the
economic sphere than in the security sphere given the greater interdependence in the
international trading order relative to the security order (2005, pp. 115).
In addition to resistance and accommodation strategies, a state can also pursue a
strategy of neutrality. In this case, a state chooses not to ally with other states and
instead pursues an independent foreign policy (Karsh, 1988a). The key point is that
the neutral state tries to remove itself from the security calculus of one or more
stronger neighbors. While the neutral state may provide some positive beneﬁts to
other states, even belligerent ones, it does not seek to advantage any state,
maintaining impartiality in the international or regional security system.7 Neutrality,
thus, is an unlikely strategy for states already previously allied with the hegemon.

Constraints and Opportunities
The relationships and interactions between states differently positioned in the
international system are a function of constraints and opportunities available to the
states. In this section we examine three main factors: how engaged is the global
hegemon; how many regional hegemons (or potential regional hegemons) are there
in the region; which states are waxing and waning, and by how much?
How engaged is the global hegemon?
How engaged or involved is the global hegemon in regional affairs? The hegemon’s
level of engagement or disengagement in the region is important in inﬂuencing the
permissiveness and restrictiveness of the environment, or the constraints and
opportunities for both the rising states and the secondary and tertiary states.8
The more engaged the hegemon and the more public goods it provides in the region,
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

153

Lobell et al

the fewer the opportunities for the rising states, but the more permissive the environment or the weaker the constraints and the greater range of strategies for secondary
and tertiary states (Gilpin, 1981). Alternatively, the less engaged the hegemon and
the fewer services it provides, the greater the opportunities for the rising states, but
the more restrictive the environment or the stronger the constraints and the narrower
the range of strategic choices for secondary and tertiary states.
Engagement in a region can be measured in several different ways. High
hegemonic engagement includes commitments such as sustained overseas bases
and military installations, formal military alliances and security guarantees, trade
treaties and agreements, active participation and membership in regional institutions and organizations, and direct involvement in regional policing and peacemaking.9 Low hegemonic engagement in a region entails minor or no military
installations or troop presence, no alliances and perhaps even few trade treaties,
limited involvement in regional institutions and governing bodies, and reliance on
international institutions rather than direct hegemonic participation in policing and
brokering peace agreements.10
Scholars and policy makers differ on whether (or not) high hegemonic engagement
is self-defeating and will provoke counter-balancing against the hegemon (Lieber
and Alexander, 2005; Posen, 2006). Scholars who contend that high hegemonic
engagement is counter-productive maintain that the rising states, such as Brazil,
India, China or South Africa, will counter-balance not by traditional means of hard
balancing such as alliances or domestic military buildup but rather by means of
soft-balancing that, as noted earlier, entails using international institutions,
diplomacy and economic statecraft to resist and restrain the hegemon (Pape, 2005;
Paul, 2005). In either case, we maintain that where the global hegemon is highly, or
deeply, engaged, the rising states will have less room and freedom to maneuver. For
instance, China must take US regional engagement into account when making
major military, political and economic choices. Beijing must ask whether the
actions will provoke the United States to push back (Ross, 2006). In fact, the
United States engages in soft balancing against other states. As an example, ‘In
2011 Washington coordinated action with a number of Southeast Asian states to
oppose Beijing’s claims in the South China Sea by highlighting established
international law and norms to deny China’s claim legitimacy’ (Brooks et al,
2012/2013). Similarly, according to Blarel and Ebert (2015, this special issue), in
South Asia, the United States had signiﬁcant interest in de-escalating the nuclear
competition between India and Pakistan, using a pivotal deterrence strategy to
inﬂuence the strategic choices of the regional states.
For secondary and tertiary states in such regions the implication is a more
permissive environment and a greater range of strategic options. Speciﬁcally, for
secondary and tertiary states high hegemonic engagement in the region means there
is a viable alternative player in the region to the rising state(s). In this permissive
environment, strategic responses for the secondary and tertiary states include
154

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

accommodative strategies with the global hegemon, resistance strategies to the
regional hegemon, and neutral strategies such as hedging or fence-sitting. Of course,
the secondary or tertiary state can follow the lead of the regional hegemons/rising
states too.
Where the global hegemon is less engaged and provides few public goods, the
rising states will have more opportunity to engage in political, economic and
military statecraft and without great power repercussions.11 Moreover, in buckpassing to the rising states, the regional hegemon(s) will have fewer opportunities
to free-ride on the hegemon, though as discussed below, might engage in buckpassing and free-riding on each other if there is more than one rising state in the
region. For the rising state, this might entail providing for regional public goods,
creating friendly regional organizations or bullying local states. For instance,
according to Burges (2015, this special issue), American disengagement in South
America allowed the Lula administration to act as a consensual hegemon, though
given Brazil’s limited resources, it failed to become a cooperative hegemon,
providing more of the public goods.
For secondary and tertiary states the import is a restrictive environment and less
freedom of action. Speciﬁcally, for such states, there are few alternative major
powers to the rising states in the region. The secondary and tertiary states are likely to
engage in accommodative strategies such as bandwagoning, binding and bonding
rather than resistance strategies such as balancing or balking. Resistance strategies
would mean that the secondary and tertiary states risk falling prey to the rising power,
especially given the lack of a great-power patron or hegemonic balancer.

How many rising states are in the region?
How many rising states are located in the region?12 Speciﬁcally, is the regional
distribution of power unipolar, bipolar or multipolar? The import for this special issue
is that different distributions of power will affect the opportunities and constraints for
secondary and tertiary states in the region. For instance, according to Blarel and Ebert
(2015, this special issue), the tripolar regional distribution in South Asia has led India
to ramp-up its nuclear capability against China, thereby provoking Pakistan.
For most realist IR scholars, bipolar and multipolar distributions are more stable
than unipolar distributions (Copeland, 1996; Mearsheimer, 2001). The rationale is
that if one state becomes too powerful it can impose its will and dominate the others,
thereby risking their sovereignty and survival. For Waltz (1979) the import is that
balances will recur and the equilibrium will be restored through counter-balancing
alliances or internal military buildup. Hegemonic stability, long cycle and power
transition theories maintain that hegemonic distributions are more stable. They
counter that the hegemon will provide the public goods that are necessary for stability
such as a liberal international trading order.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

155

Lobell et al

For Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS), for example,
independent of the level of a global hegemon’s regional engagement, a unipolar
regional distribution of power creates an unconstrained and permissive environment. This distribution means that the BRICS states will contend with no other
major power or BRICS balancer. Freedom of action is further enhanced if the
global hegemon is disengaged. Alternatively, bipolar and multipolar regional
distributions entail a more constrained and restrictive environment for the BRICS
states. Speciﬁcally, the BRICS states must consider the other rising powers in the
region when designing political, economic and military statecraft or risk provoking repercussions, pushback and counterbalancing. As a number of IR scholars
contend, in a multipolar distribution there might be greater opportunities than in a
bipolar distribution given the temptation of buck-passing and free-riding among
the BRICS.
For secondary and tertiary states, bipolar and multipolar regional distributions of
power are permissive environments and translate into a wider range of opportunities for accommodative strategies, resistance strategies or neutral strategies than
a unipolar distribution. In both a bipolar and multipolar distribution, the secondary
states can play the BRICS states off of each other by threatening to defect or join
the other side, as the secondary states did to the United States and the Soviet Union
during the Cold War (that is, the tail wagging the dog). If there is an engaged
global hegemon this creates further alternatives and opportunities. In contrast, in a
unipolar regional distribution, there are few alternatives for secondary states,
especially if the global hegemon is disengaged (Brooks and Wohlforth, 2008;
Ikenberry et al, 2011). In this restrictive environment, the range of alternative
strategies for secondary states is narrow.

Which states are waxing and waning, and by how much?
In considering which states are waxing and waning, and by how much, three trends
matter. Speciﬁcally, the questions arise as to whether the global hegemon is on the
rise or decline; whether the global hegemon is increasing or decreasing its
engagement in the region; and whether the BRICS states, for example, are waxing
or waning in the region. These trends will affect the security strategies of the local
states in the region. It is also important to consider the perception of the secondary
and tertiary states of these trends.
In general, when the hegemon and/or BRICS states are waxing, there is
opportunity for secondary and tertiary states to utilize a strategy of accommodation. When the hegemon and/or BRICS states are waning, there is opportunity for
secondary and tertiary states to engage in strategies of resistance and neutrality.
As noted earlier, as there is a nested game, or multiple games, being played by
different types of states, the three trends will matter. There is, in essence, an
156

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

interaction effect as the international system (and speciﬁcally the region) is
shifting, or changing. As Mares (1988, p. 460) notes about change, ‘Change must
come from the actions of a great power responding to the fact that the regional
hegemony game is a subgame of the worldwide balance-of-power game’.
Consequently, it is important to consider the balance of power at the international
system level as well as the regional balance of power, and the shifts that may be
occurring, that inﬂuence the constraints and opportunities for secondary and
tertiary states. For example, at the global/systemic level, a waning global
hegemon and a waxing BRICS will mean a narrower range of strategies for the
secondary and tertiary states. With the potential number of alternatives to the
BRICS’ power declining, the secondary and tertiary states will retreat from
erstwhile accommodative strategies with the global hegemon. Given the trend,
they will likely reject resistance strategies to the BRICS and even neutral
strategies such as hedging or fence-sitting. The outcome might be following the
lead of the BRICS.
At the regional/sub-systemic level, a waning or waxing regional hegemon will also
shape the secondary state’s range of strategic choices. As discussed above, a
distribution of regional power shifting from unipolar to bipolar or multipolar will
entail a more permissive environment and a wider range of options for secondary
states. Alternatively, a distribution of regional power shifting from bipolar/multipolar
to unipolar will mean a more restrictive environment and fewer strategic options.
Alden and Schoeman (2015, this special issue) argue that South Africa’s waning
standing among Western states creates more freedom of movement for secondary and
tertiary competitors in Africa.

Conclusion
This article focused on the general strategies, as well as the constraints and
opportunities available to secondary and tertiary states in regions in which a global
hegemon and rising states are present. In order to assess the constraints and
opportunities, and hence strategies available to these secondary states, it is important
to determine the shifts (if occurring) in the level of the hegemon’s engagement in the
region as well as whether states, such as the BRICS, are waxing or waning in the
region. Of course, while these systemic factors (both at the international system level
and regional balance of power) matter, any speciﬁc foreign policy decision as to
which strategy a secondary and tertiary state will pursue is contingent on domestic
and individual unit-level factors. Thus our model does not account for the speciﬁc
strategies that these states will pursue. The articles in this special issue examine these
variables and explain the choice of the speciﬁc strategy or strategies in the case
studies that follow.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

157

Lobell et al

About the Authors
Steven E. Lobell is Professor of Political Science at the University of Utah (PhD,
UCLA). Lobell’s recent books include Neoclassical Realism, the State, and
Foreign Policy (Cambridge University Press, 2009) with Norrin M. Ripsman and
Jeffrey W. Taliaferro; Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons (Stanford University
Press, 2012), with Kristen P. Williams and Neal G. Jesse (eds.); and The Challenge
of Grand Strategy (Cambridge University Press, 2012), with Jeffrey W. Taliaferro
and Norrin M. Ripsman (eds.). Lobell has published journal articles in Security
Studies, International Studies Quarterly, International Interactions, Review of
International Studies, Political Science Quarterly, Journal of Strategic Studies,
International Relations of the Asia Paciﬁc, International Politics, Comparative
Strategy, Chinese Journal of International Politics, International Journal, and
World Affairs.
Neal G. Jesse is Professor of Political Science at Bowling Green State University. He
received his PhD from UCLA in 1996. His research on Britain, Ireland, electoral
systems, foreign policy and ethnic conﬂict has appeared in journals such as Electoral
Studies, International Political Science Review, International Studies Quarterly,
Political Psychology, New Hibernia Review/Iris Éireannach Nua, and Representation. Books include Ethnic Conﬂict: A Systematic Approach to Cases of Conﬂict
(Congressional Quarterly Press, 2010), Identity and Institutions: Conﬂict Reduction
in Divided Societies (SUNY Press, 2005), both co-authored with Kristen P. Williams,
and Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons: co-edited with Kristen P. Williams and
Steven E. Lobell (Stanford University Press, 2012). In 2006, Dr Jesse was the
Hallsworth Visiting Professor of Political Economy at the University of Manchester
(United Kingdom).
Kristen P. Williams is Professor of Political Science at Clark University (PhD,
UCLA). Her research interests include IR theory, nationalism and ethnic conﬂict, and
gender and war. She is the author of journal articles, chapters in edited volumes, and
several books, including Despite Nationalist Conﬂicts (Praeger, 2001); Ethnic
Conﬂict: A Systematic Approach to Cases of Conﬂict (Congressional Quarterly
Press, 2010), and Identity and Institutions: Conﬂict Reduction in Divided Societies
(SUNY Press, 2005) co-authored with Neal G. Jesse; and Women, the State and War:
A Comparative Perspective on Citizenship and Nationalism (Lexington, 2007) and
Women and War: Gender Identity and Activism in Times of Conﬂict (Kumarian
Press, 2010) co-authored with Joyce P. Kaufman. Most recently she published
Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons: co-edited with Steven E. Lobell and Neal G.
Jesse (Stanford University Press, 2012), and Women at War, Women Building Peace:
Challenging Gender Norms, co-authored with Joyce P. Kaufman (Kumarian Press,
2013).
158

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

Notes
1 Portions of this article are excerpted from Kristen P. Williams, Steven E. Lobell, and Neal G. Jesse
(eds.) (2012) Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons: Why Secondary States Support, Follow, or
Challenge, by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Jr University. All rights reserved. With the
permission of Stanford University Press, www.sup.org. For background information on rising powers,
see Zakaria (2009); Kupchan (2012); Nau and Ollapally (2012); Willams et al (2012).
2 ASEAN was founded in 1967 by Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand, and
formed an additional grouping, ASEAN Plus Three (ASEAN and China, Japan and South Korea). See
ASEAN (2012).
3 Note also that Keohane’s deﬁnition implies an emphasis on the international system as the key
framework for understanding state action. Mares’ deﬁnition does not necessarily imply such an
emphasis.
4 See also Layne (2006), Pape (2005), Paul (2004), and Paul (2005). For a critique of soft balancing see
Brooks and Wohlforth (2005), Lieber and Alexander (2005), and Pape (2005).
5 See also Schweller (1994). Nabers (2010) examines the ‘hegemonic discourse’ that determines whether
followers will, in fact, follow (accommodate) the leader, using the case of China and Japan within the
East Asian region.
6 See also Ikenberry (2001, pp. 62–63).
7 For good discussions of neutrality as a foreign policy see Karsh (1988b), Keatinge (1984), Chay and
Ross (1986). For recent work on neutrality, see, for example, Beyer and Hofmann (2011), Devine
(2011), and Agius (2011).
8 For a discussion of permissive and restrictive environments, see Taliaferro et al (2012).
9 What we are calling ‘high engagement’ is sometimes referred to as deep engagement or forward
engagement. See, for example, Brooks et al (2013), Brooks et al (2012/2013).
10 Low engagement can also be understood as selective engagement or offshore balancing. For works on
selective engagement and offshore balancing, see Gholz et al (1997), Layne (2006), Posen (2013) and
Art (2003).
11 Mares (1988, pp. 457–458) focuses on intra-alliance behavior between the hegemon, regional (middle)
and secondary (lesser) powers, utilizing game theory. He argues that ‘In a multi- or bipolar system, a
middle power which confronts a threat to its sovereignty from one great power will seek an alliance
with the challenger’s rival(s) to offset the initial power disparities it confronted. But if the other great
powers accept their rival’s primacy in a region (that is, it is a regional hegemon), middle powers in that
region will ﬁnd eliminated the possibility of balancing one threatening power with a rival great power.
Because a weak state can only confront a stronger state without an alliance only at great risk, weak
states (including our middle power) in a regional hegemony will tend to bandwagon with the regional
hegemon … ’.
12 On regional sub-systems see Binder (1958), and Kerr (1971).

References
Agius, C. (2011) Transformed beyond recognition? The politics of post-neutrality. Cooperation and
Conﬂict 46(3): 370–395.
Alden, C. and Schoeman, M. (this special issue) South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa.
International Politics, (this special issue).
Art, R.A. (2003) A Grand Strategy for America. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
ASEAN (2012) Overview: ASEAN plus three cooperation. 23 October, http://www.asean.org/news/item/
asean-plus-three-cooperation.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

159

Lobell et al

Ayoob, M. (1998) Subaltern realism: International relations theory meets the third world. In: S. Neuman
(ed.) International Relations Theory and the Third World. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 31–54.
Barnett, M.N. and Levy, J.S. (1991) Domestic sources of alliances and alignments: The case of Egypt,
1962–73. International Organization 45(3): 369–395.
Beyer, J.L. and Hofmann, S.C. (2011) Varieties of neutrality: Norm revision and decline. Cooperation and
Conﬂict 46(3): 285–311.
Binder, L. (1958) The Middle East as a subordinate international system. World Politics 10(3): 408–429.
Blarel, N. and Ebert, H. (this special issue) Nuclear contestation in South Asia. International Politics,
(this special issue).
Brooks, S.G. and Wohlforth, W.C. (2005) Hard times for soft balancing. International Security 30(1):
72–108.
Brooks, S.G. and Wohlforth, W.C. (2008) World Out of Balance: International Relations and the
Challenge of American Primacy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brooks, S.G., Ikenberry, G.J. and Wohlforth, W.C. (2012/2013) Don’t come home, America: The case
against retrenchment. International Security 37(3): 7–51.
Brooks, S.G., Ikenberry, G.J. and Wohlforth, W.C. (2013) Lean forward. Foreign Affairs 92(1):
130–142.
Burges, S. (this special issue) Revisiting Brazil’s consensual hegemony in South America: Brazilian
regional leadership in question. International Politics, (this special issue).
Chay, J. and Ross, T.E. (eds.) (1986) Buffer States in World Politics. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Cooper, A.F. and Flemes, D. (eds.) (2013) Special issue: Foreign policy strategies of emerging powers in a
multipolar world. Third World Quarterly 34(6): 943–1144.
Copeland, D.C. (1996) Neorealism and the myth of bipolar stability: Toward a new dynamic realist theory
of major war. Security Studies 5(3): 29–89.
David, S.R. (1991) Explaining third world alignment. World Politics 43(2): 233–256.
Devine, K. (2011) Neutrality and the development of the European Union’s common security and defence
policy: Compatible or competing? Cooperation and Conﬂict 46(3): 334–369.
Flemes, D. and Wehner, L. (this special issue) Drivers of strategic contestation in South America.
International Politics, (this special issue).
Fox, A.B. (1959) The Power of Small States: Diplomacy in World War II. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Gholz, E., Press, D.G. and Sapolsky, H.M. (1997) Come home, America: The strategy of restraint in the
race of temptation. International Security 21(4): 5–48.
Gilpin, R. (1981) War and Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
He, K. (this special issue) Contested regional orders and institutional balancing in the Asia Paciﬁc.
International Politics, (this special issue).
Ikenberry, G.J. (2001) After Victory: Institutions, Strategic Restraint and the Rebuilding of Order after
Major Wars. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ikenberry, G.J., Mastanduno, M. and Wohlforth, W.C. (2011) International Relations Theory and the
Consequence of Unipolarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Karsh, E. (1988a) International co-operation and neutrality. Journal of Peace Research 25(1): 57–67.
Karsh, E. (1988b) Neutrality and Small States. New York: Routledge.
Keatinge, P. (1984) A Singular Stance: Irish Neutrality in the 1980s. Dublin, Ireland: Institute of Public
Administration.
Keohane, R.O. (1969) Lilliputians’ dilemma: Small states in international politics. International
Organization 23(2): 291–310.
Keohane, R.O. and Martin, L.L. (1995) The promise of institutionalist theory. International Security 20(1):
39–51.
Kerr, M. (1971) The Arab Cold War: Gamal ’Abd al-Nasir and His Rivals, 1958–1970. New York: Oxford
University Press.
160

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Why do secondary states choose to support, follow, or challenge?

Kupchan, C.A. (2012) No one’s World: The West, the Rising Rest, and the Coming Global Turn.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Layne, C. (2006) The unipolar illusion revisited: The coming end of the United States’ unipolar moment.
International Security 31(2): 7–41.
Levy, J.S. and Thompson, W.R. (2010) Balancing on land and at sea: Do states ally against the leading
global power? International Security 35(1): 7–43.
Lieber, K.A. and Alexander, G. (2005) Waiting for balancing: Why the world is not pushing back.
International Security 30(1): 109–139.
Lobell, S.E. (2009) Threat assessment, the state, and foreign policy: A neoclassical realist model. In: S.E.
Lobell, N.M. Ripsman and J.W. Taliaferro (eds.) Neoclassical Realism, the State and Foreign Policy.
New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 46–54.
March, J.G. and Olsen, J.P. (1998) The institutional dynamics of international political orders. International Organization 52(4): 943–969.
Mares, D.R. (1988) Middle powers under hegemony: To challenge or acquiesce in hegemonic enforcement. International Studies Quarterly 32(4): 453–471.
Mathisen, T. (1971) The Functions of Small States in the Strategies of the Great Powers. Oslo, Norway:
Scandinavian University Books/Universitetsforlaget.
Mearsheimer, J.J. (2001) The Tragedy of the Great Powers. New York: W.W. Norton.
Merke, F. (this special issue) Neither balance nor bandwagon: South America meets Brazil’s rising power.
International Politics, (this special issue).
Mueller, K.P. (1991) Strategy, asymmetric deterrence, and accommodation: Middle powers and security in
modern Europe. PhD dissertation, Princeton.
Nabers, D. (2010) Power, leadership, and hegemony in international politics: The case of East Asia. Review
of International Studies 36(4): 931–949.
Nau, H.R. and Ollapally, D. (eds.) (2012) Worldviews of Aspiring Powers: Domestic Foreign Policy
Debates in China, India, Iran, Japan, and Russia. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pape, R.A. (2005) Soft balancing against the United States. International Security 30(1):
7–45.
Paul, T.V. (2004) Introduction: The enduring axioms of balance of power theory and their contemporary
relevance. In: T.V. Paul, J.J. Wirtz and M. Fortman (eds.) Balance of Power: Theory and Practice in the
21st Century. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 1–28.
Paul, T.V. (2005) Soft balancing in the age of U.S. primacy. International Security 30(1): 46–71.
Posen, B.R. (2006) European Union security and defense policy: Response to unipolarity? Security Studies
15(2): 149–186.
Posen, B.R. (2013) Pull back. Foreign Affairs 92(1): 116–128.
Putnam, R. (1988) Diplomacy and domestic politics: The logic of two-level games. International
Organization 42(3): 427–460.
Ross, R.S. (2006) Balance of power politics and the rise of China: Accommodation and balancing in East
Asia. Security Studies 15(3): 355–395.
Rothstein, R.L. (1968) Alliances and Small Powers. New York and London: Columbia University Press.
Schweller, R.L. (1994) Bandwagoning for proﬁt. International Security 19(1): 72–107.
Schweller, R.L. and Pu, X. (2011) After unipolarity: China’s visions of international order in an era of U.S.
decline. International Security 36(1): 41–72.
Shaw, T. (this special issue) African agency? Africa, South Africa & the BRICS. International Politics,
(this special issue).
Taliaferro, J.W., Ripsman, N.M. and Lobell, S.E. (eds.) (2012) The Challenge of Grand Strategy: The
Great Powers and the Broken Balance between the World Wars. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Tsebelis, G. (1990) Nested Games: Rational Choice in Comparative Politics. Berkeley and Los Angeles,
CA: University of California Press.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

161

Lobell et al

Vital, D. (1971) The analysis of small power politics. In: A. Schou and A.O. Brundtland (eds.) Small States
in International Relations. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Waltz, K.N. (1979) Theory of International Politics. New York: Random House.
Walt, S.M. (1987) The Origins of Alliances. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Walt, S.M. (2005) Taming American Power: The Global Response to U.S. Primacy. New York
W.W. Norton.
Willams, K.P., Lobell, S.E. and Jesse, N.G. (eds.) (2012) Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons: Why
Secondary States Support, Follow or Challenge. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Zakaria, F. (2009) The Post-American World and the Rise of the Rest. New York: W.W. Norton.

162

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 146–162

Original Article

Drivers of strategic contestation: The case of
South America
Daniel Flemesa,* and Leslie Wehnerb
a

GIGA German Institute of Global and Area Studies, Neuer Jungfernstieg 21, 20354 Hamburg, Germany.
E-mail: Daniel.ﬂemes@giga-hamburg.de
b
University of Bath, Claverton Down Campus, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom.
E-mail: lw750@bath.ac.uk
*Corresponding author.

Abstract This article analyzes what the drivers of contestation of secondary powers visà-vis the regional power are, differentiating therein between structural, historical, behavioural and domestic such drivers. We argue that in regions characterized by relative stability where major interstate violent conﬂicts are unlikely, as is the case in South America,
secondary powers rely mainly on soft-balancing mechanisms vis-à-vis the regional power.
Whereas Brazil’s foreign policy behaviour is key to South American secondary powers
being induced to contest the country’s powerhood, the choices that the foreign policy elites
of those secondary powers make regarding what the speciﬁc expression of soft balancing is
to be are inﬂuenced by certain domestic groups. Empirical examples are given of how
Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Venezuela as secondary powers unfold these domestic drivers, which shape their different ways of soft balancing Brazil. The article thus explains why
some secondary powers rely more on institutional binding, others on economic statecraft, or
buffering, while others contest by offering and building alternative leadership proposals.
International Politics (2015) 52, 163–177. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.45;
published online 12 December 2014
Keywords: secondary powers; regional powers; politics of contestation; foreign policy
strategies; Brazil; South American states

Introduction
This article investigates the systemic and domestic drivers underpinning the
accommodative strategies of contestation that secondary powers employ vis-à-vis
regional powers (see Lobell et al, 2015, special issue). It analyses the variance in the
strategic responses of secondary powers to the regional power in regions experiencing low levels of conﬂict. The theoretical argument presented elaborates on the
interplay between the opportunities available to secondary actors, systemic and
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Flemes and Wehner

sub-systemic forces by unpacking the motives and dynamics that drive the diverging
responses of Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Venezuela – countries that rely on the
enactment of soft-balancing behaviour towards Brazil. These countries are secondary
powers, deﬁned as the second most powerful states in the regional hierarchy, whose
position is determined by their relative material and/or ideational capabilities
(Flemes, 2009; Ebert et al, 2014).
The article advances the argument that hostile approaches – in the form of hardbalancing behaviour – are not part of the secondary powers’ strategies in regions where
major interstate wars are unlikely to occur due to the existence of a climate of relative
stability. Instead, secondary powers’ status positions are linked to playing the role of soft
balancer (Wehner, 2014) vis-à-vis a regional power in those regions where rivalry is
replaced by competitive patterns. Thus, soft balancing is not a revisionist strategy designed
to reconﬁgure the regional order; rather, it only aims to hamper and constrain the further
rise of the regional power (see Shaw, 2015, this special issue). The purpose of soft
balancing is to even out or ameliorate the existing asymmetric distribution of power, and to
frustrate the most powerful actor’s fulﬁlment of its foreign policy goals by increasing its
costs of action (see Lobell et al, 2015, this special issue; Pape, 2005; Paul, 2005).
Soft balancing includes a pool of discursive and institutional instruments, such as
the formation of limited diplomatic coalitions so as to constrain the superior power
(Flemes, 2011, p. 406 ff.). ‘Buffering’ aims to extend weaker states’ room to
manoeuvre vis-à-vis stronger states (Greenﬁeld, 1983). It also involves the use of
economic means – that is, economic statecraft – by strengthening economic ties
between those peers questioning the legitimacy of unilateral policies (Saltzman,
2012). ‘Entangling diplomacy’ refers to the use of the rules and procedures of
international institutions to inﬂuence the primary state’s foreign policy choices (Paul,
2005, p. 57). ‘Binding’ strategies aim to restrain stronger states through the
concluding of institutional agreements (Ikenberry, 2003).
South American secondary powers’ soft-balancing might be driven by different
factors. On this basis, foreign policy theory scrutinizes the balance between existing
domestic and systemic drivers. These encompass structural, historical, behavioural and
domestic drivers of contestation, yet the most generalizable characteristic of a state’s
international behaviour is still its relative position in the international system (Zakaria,
1992, p. 482). Thus, we show that the international and regional systems tend to
narrow the choices of secondary powers to contest the regional power. However,
secondary powers are still responsive to domestic groups. The secondary powers’ room
to choose its best possible strategy and still allow the inﬂuence of domestic groups can
be observed in these states’ selection of the policy area to contest the regional power.
We also show that domestic politics can triumph over systemic and regional forces
whenever the environment surrounding these states’ relations is low conﬂict and peace
driven, though it still shows competition between state actors.
Secondary powers have a two-sided systemic position. On the one hand, they
formulate their foreign policy under the condition of factual, perceived and/or
164

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Drivers of strategic contestation

anticipated inferiority to the primary power, and on the other, likewise regarding their
superiority to the other states of the region (Ebert et al, 2014). This article assumes
that if a region consists of one primary and more than one secondary power, then
the secondary powers’ relative systemic positions do not deviate considerably from
each other. Thus, the relative position of each is not the most decisive factor in
the apparent variation in regional secondary powers’ chosen strategies, though the
regional distribution of power might narrow the range of alternative options
available. Implicit in this assumption is the idea that sub-regional systems show
similar dynamics to those of the international system, as they are ultimately
embedded in that all-encompassing structure (Jesse et al, 2012, pp. 8–9).
Thus, domestic actors have the greatest impact on foreign policy in times of peace
and stability (Ripsman, 2009, p. 186). In a security-abundant environment, the costs
of allowing domestic actors to contribute to the making of foreign policy are low and
the foreign policy executive (FPE) will hence be more willing to make concessions to
domestic groups. Put different, this responsiveness to powerful domestic groups’
choices may explain the variance of secondary powers’ responses, speciﬁcally in
terms of the tactics that are employed as part of the soft-balancing mechanisms.
The remainder of the article proceeds as follows: First, the underlying causes of
secondary powers’ contestation are analysed, moving from hard to soft balancing; in
this section the structural and historical drivers of contestation in the South American
region are presented. Further, the article also pays attention to the regional power’s
foreign policy behaviour as being key to inducing the contestation of secondary
powers, a claim that is subsequently illustrated through taking up the case of Brazil.
Second, the domestic factors triggering contestation and explaining the variance in
the ways that secondary powers soft balance regional powers are also developed, and
are then connected to brief empirical examples from Argentina, Chile, Colombia and
Venezuela – secondary powers all contesting Brazil’s rise. Finally, the article
analyses the validity of the theoretical argument in light of the cases presented.

Drivers of Secondary Powers’ Contestation
Structural and historical drivers
Regional uni-, bi- and multipolarity may stimulate secondary powers to pursue
different forms of contestation (see Lobell et al, 2015, this special issue; Flemes and
Wojczewski, 2011; Ebert et al, 2014). A unipolar security cluster is likely to make
secondary powers contest the dominance of a certain state, whereas under conditions of regional multipolarity it might be difﬁcult to identify a single appropriate target of contestation. However, a road to multipolarity unfolding may trigger
competition for predominance, as secondary powers attempt to acquire the necessary capabilities to be able to match the regional power. In situations of regional
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

165

Flemes and Wehner

bipolarity – in which one of the existing secondary powers develops capabilities that
surpass those of the rest of the secondary powers, done with the purpose of matching
the power of the regionally predominant state – contestation is two-dimensional.
First, the secondary powers tend to constrain the accession of the dominant
secondary power to regional ‘powerhood’. Second, the existing regional power will
also unfold strategies to hamper the dominant secondary power’s transition to
regional power, such as coordinating with other secondary powers or becoming
directly cooperative with the new challenger in order to constrain any potential
negative effects for the regional power from these developments.
Strategies of contestation can be driven by historical experiences of conﬂict, and
also by their legacies. Historical drivers must be seen as directly connected to the
behavioural drivers of contestation, as secondary powers interpret historical experiences in light of the current relationship between given states (Hwang, 2003).
Secondary powers that have been victims of the regional power’s aggression in the
past may not accept the latter’s contemporary claim to leadership. Negative historical
experiences and unresolved conﬂicts are likely to give rise to impressions of rivalry,
which become part of the collective memory of the secondary power (He, 2008).
Hence, threat perceptions held by secondary powers manifest in their chosen security
strategies. Alternatively, military and defence cooperation between the regional and
the secondary power in terms of exchanges of personnel or joint manoeuvres hint at a
certain degree of mutual trust.
The type of regional polarity and the security order in which the relationships
between Brazil and the South American region’s secondary powers are embedded
have not changed signiﬁcantly during the last decade. What changed is the US
presence in South America. The US’ priorities in other regions because of the war on
terror gave enough room for Brazil to extend its leadership in South America despite
the United States still showing a degree of engagement as global hegemon on this
region (see Lobell et al, 2015, this special issue). Moreover, historical drivers of
contestation are not key in this regional setting. Consequently, the major policy shifts
on the part of the secondary powers with regard to Brazil in the last decade are not
connected to any signiﬁcant historical or structural drivers; instead, it is the regional
power’s chosen foreign policy behaviour that may be the key to understanding the
grounds for others’ contestation in South America.

Foreign policy behaviour triggering contestation: Brazil’s actions
The contestation strategies of the secondary powers can be caused by the chosen
foreign and security policy behaviour of the primary power. Whereas the dependence
of the secondary power on the primary power makes strategic contestation less likely,
a direct security threat posed to the secondary state by the primary power is the
strongest driver of contestation. The regional power can threaten the secondary
166

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Drivers of strategic contestation

power’s core interests, such as territorial integrity and natural resources. Primary
powers can also actively engage in intra-regional coalitions or military alliances with
adversaries of the secondary power, either intentionally or involuntarily resulting in
the isolation of the latter (Arquilla and Fuller, 1996). In the same way, the primary
power’s special relationships with those extra-regional great powers seen as foes by
the secondary power are likely to trigger the latter’s contestation (Alecu de Flers and
Regelsberger, 2005). In this case, the secondary power’s reaction will be inﬂuenced
by the difference between its own and the primary power’s threat perception with
regard to the inﬂuence of the extra-regional power in question (Press-Barnathan,
2006, p. 308). In addition, secondary states are likely to contest in cases where the
primary power abandons the ‘rule-based order and act[s] unilaterally on a global
scale’ (Ikenberry, 2003, p. 5).
Moreover, passive behaviour on the part of a regional power can also trigger
politics of contestation. Hence, it is assumed that an implicit or explicit claim to
leadership must be substantiated as part of the rising power’s regional strategy. If the
most powerful state does not at least partially provide public goods (see Alden and
Schoeman, this special issue), secondary powers will tend to contest the perceived
use of the region as a power base for the rising power’s global ambitions.
The more types of regional public goods that the regional power may provide, the
less intense the politics of contestation on the part of the secondary power will be.
The regional power can avoid contestation by: (i) providing public goods such as
relative stability and infrastructure to its region and to pay a high proportion of the
economic costs of cooperation (distributional leadership); (ii) sharing power with
secondary states by including them in regional decision-making processes through
multilateral summits, intergovernmental institutions or dual leadership patterns
(multilateral leadership); (iii) projecting norms and values based on its legitimacy
and moral authority that include the ideational beliefs of the potential followers in
order to gain their acceptance for a regional project (ideational leadership); or (iv)
guiding discussions based on inclusion, bridge political and ideological cleavages
and articulate a pluralist agenda that leads to a discourse on regional consensus
creation (consensual leadership).
For example, Brazil’s willingness to provide public goods (distributional leadership) differs according to the issue area under consideration. Brasilia is not ready to
pay the costs of economic integration of groups like the Common Market of the
South (MERCOSUR), but it is willing do whatever is necessary to secure regional
stability (Flemes and Wojczewski, 2011, p. 12). This country also provides regional
stability through its various mediation engagements and security cooperation
initiatives (see Merke, this special issue). In addition, Brazil invests in the public
goods of regional energy security and infrastructure (Initiative for the Integration of
Regional Infrastructure in South America, IIRSA).
The acceptance of Brazil’s leadership in South America also depends on its ability
to bridge political and ideological cleavages through the unfolding of an ideational
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

167

Flemes and Wehner

leadership project. In this regard, Brasilia tries to guide the states of the region
towards the shared goal of realizing a South American space. Brazil has to this end
successfully established a regional consensus on democracy, human rights, development, the eco-social market economy and regionalized responses to the challenges of
economic globalization (Burges, 2008; Flemes, 2009).
Nevertheless, the articulated discourse of justice and democracy is currently not
being put into practice – ultimately because Brazil is not building inclusive and
democratic institutions. In fact, regional groups such as the MERCOSUR and the
Union of South American States (UNASUR) led by Brazil do not have signiﬁcant
competencies. Brazil leads these institutions without making economic concessions
or transferring sovereignty to them (see Burges, this special issue). Therefore, it
currently provides multilateral leadership only to a limited degree, done through
intergovernmental summits and institutions (Flemes, 2009, p. 171).
Thus, Brazil’s low-key multilateral leadership and its selective distributional
leadership are crucial factors behind others’ contestation in a region characterized
by a low level of conﬂict. However, Brazil does not discriminate between the
relevant secondary powers in its (limited) provision of this multilateral and
distributional leadership. What in reality varies, therefore, are the secondary powers’
expectations and perceptions of Brazil’s behaviour and leadership provision.

Domestic drivers of contestation: South American secondary powers’ own
circumstances
Endogenous forces may also have an impact on the types of contestation secondary
powers unfold towards the primary power. Rose (1998, p. 161) argues that the
magnitude of the impact of these endogenous forces always depends on ‘the state
apparatus and its relation to the surrounding society’. The relative autonomy of the
FPE from the inﬂuence of domestic actors is also an important factor shaping the type
of foreign policy strategies that a state chooses to enact. In fact, theoretically the
relative autonomy of the government is expected to be more important than the type
of regime is (Ripsman, 2009, p. 171). Thus, the more autonomy that a FPE has from
domestic groups, the fewer concessions it has to make in the process of extracting the
necessary resources to carry out security and foreign policies.
Further, the possession of state power and making concessions to domestic groups
are not without costs for the government (Taliaferro, 2007, p. 156). In this sense, the
more inﬂuential domestic players will be those with sufﬁcient power to remove
national executives from ofﬁce (whether through the ballot box or a coup d’état),
those who can act as veto players – and thus if so inclined obstruct the government’s
programmatic goals – or those who can shape how national interests are deﬁned. In
non-democratic states, potential veto players such as powerful bureaucratic actors,
religious leaders, economic elites and the military can obtain policy concessions from
168

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Drivers of strategic contestation

the executive (Ripsman, 2009, p. 185). In a democratic state, the legislature – either
as a whole or through its key legislative committees on foreign affairs – might be a
key veto player that is able to channel public opinion, including through harnessing
the power and inﬂuence of single-issue interest groups and/or the media.
Therefore, changes of government brought about by elections, preferences for
protecting relevant economic interests as well as those of the military and certain
foreign policy groups, the stipulations of parliament, and the demands of public
opinion may all impact the way in which a secondary power contests or cooperates
with the regional power in the context of regional affairs. Neoclassical realists argue
that foreign policy choices also depend on the FPE’s perceptions of relative power,
and thus not simply on absolute material resources (Rose, 1998, p. 147). Consequently, (mis)perceptions regarding the regional distribution of power and polarity
can drive a state’s chosen strategy (see Blarel and Ebert, 2015, this special issue). The
FPE might also be constrained since there is no internal consensus within it about the
most appropriate assessment of the international environment. A change of government brings new leadership and elite perceptions, which affect the international
behaviour of the state (Jervis, 1976) – especially when the new government has a
different ideological orientation from the previous one; simultaneously, however,
such change also opens up new directions in the foreign policy agenda.
Foreign policy decision makers and societal leaders in secondary states might also
respond to shifts in the relative distribution of particular capabilities – speciﬁcally, to
ones that threaten their core strategic interests. The perception of the primary state held
by the elites of the secondary state is, therefore, ‘in part a function of which component
of power is rising’ (Lobell, 2009, p. 55). Speciﬁc examples of such components might
include shifts in territorial boundaries, population, ideology and/or military or
economic power (Spiegel, 1972). For instance, economic elites may also push the state
to pursue and promote a closer relationship with the emerging power if this primary
actor’s economic growth potentially can have a positive inﬂuence on powerful
economic actors from within the secondary state. On the contrary, if the primary
regional actor pursues self-serving economic strategies that negatively affect inﬂuential
domestic coalitions in the secondary state, then the government of the latter – in
response to domestic pressures – may develop counter-policies so as to ameliorate
exclusive economic dependence on the unsupportive regional power.
An example of the inﬂuence of domestic groups in the politics of contestation is
Argentina under the presidencies of Néstor Kirchner (2003–2007) and Cristina
Fernández de Kirchner (2007–present). At ﬁrst glance, structure may explain most of
the chosen behaviour of Argentina vis-à-vis Brazil, given that they have previously
had a relationship of competitive partnership and that their long-term relationship has
evolved from one of hard to one of soft balancing (Russell and Tokatlian, 2003;
Malamud, 2011). Argentina has been soft balancing Brazil through the use of tactics
of institutional binding, speciﬁcally as a result of the creation and development of the
MERCOSUR on the basis of the two countries’ parity therein (Malamud, 2011).
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

169

Flemes and Wehner

Argentina has also supported the launch of other groups that can serve to
institutionally bind Brazil in South and Latin America, respectively, such as the
aforementioned UNASUR as well as the Community of Latin American States
(CELAC) (Wehner, 2014; Tokatlian, 2013). Further, Argentina has also relied on
buffering tactics by developing ties with peers such as Venezuela, which was fully
incorporated into the MERCOSUR in 2012. However, Argentina has developed not
only strong ideological afﬁnities with Venezuela but also a relationship based on
economic needs. Venezuela acted as lender of last resort to Argentina when the latter
experienced a severe currency crisis in 2001 and was unable to access credits from
multilateral institutions (Flemes and Wehner, 2012). Such an alliance has also been
used to reduce their asymmetric political and economic dependence on Brazil
(Simonoff, 2008, p. 49), inasmuch as domestically driven economic problems in
both countries have brought them closer together in recent years.
As a consequence of the aforementioned economic crisis of 2001, the most
pressing priority of the Argentinean government was the economic recovery and
reindustrialization of the country. To this end, Argentina adopted the defensive
economic strategy of trying to reduce its economic dependence on Brazil – its main
trade partner – in order to protect (and retain the supportive of) part of Kirchner’s
electoral base. Argentina’s favoured domestic economic coalitions from the industrial sector (producers and workers) reduced the impact of strong regional and
international actors such as Brazil, the United States and China by implementing
such measures as the controlling of trade ﬂows, the application of voluntary export
restraints and the implementation of other ad hoc forms of economic protection
(Flemes and Wehner, 2012). Brazil adopted a tolerant position on this matter, as it
had also been hit by the economic crisis (with the devaluation of its currency, the
real) and itself adopted protectionist measures for its most vulnerable economic
sectors (Guadagni et al, 2010, p. 15). However, these type of measures have since
remained in place in Argentina even after the country’s eventual recovery, expressing
in a way that economic statecraft is a key component of Argentina’s soft-balancing
strategy when it comes to Brazil.
Chile, meanwhile, has pursued a rather different path of contestation due to the
inﬂuence of domestic politics vis-à-vis Brazil’s leadership (Flemes and Wehner,
2012), despite both it and Argentina being secondary powers and consequently both
relying on soft-balancing roles (Wehner, 2014). Like Argentina, Chile listens to its
domestic economic groups – but, unlike its neighbour, it prioritizes the free trade
group that is aligned in ethos with the state interest and model of export promotion.
Thus, Chile has determined its economic goals to lie ﬁrst and foremost outside of
Latin America, apparent from its negotiating of free trade agreements (FTAs) with
the different economic hubs and powerhouses of the world (Wehner, 2011). Lately it
has pursued the same strategy in the South American region, done by following the
same path to FTAs and by supporting the Paciﬁc Alliance (created in 2012) – the
latter is a commercial trade group (Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru) that aims at
170

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Drivers of strategic contestation

increasing intra-regional trade, as much as it also seeks extra-regional trade opportunities in the Asia-Paciﬁc region (Wehner, 2014).
In the relationship with Brazil, Chile’s emphasis on FTAs represents its desire
to retain its freedom to decide with whom it negotiates FTAs; Chile rejected
Brazil’s invitation to join the MERCOSUR as a full member in 2000. This
happened despite the fact that the MERCOSUR had since its inception been
harbouring the aspiration that Chile would one day become a full member
(Wehner, 2011). Instead, Chile decided to maintain its economic autonomy and
thus chose to adopt only associate status (1996), reﬂecting a balking strategy in its
turning down of Brazil’s repeated invitations to become a full member of the
group (Lapp, 2012, p. 151). This meant that Chile could continue to avoid
economic and possibly also political dependence on the MERCOSUR (Mullins,
2006, p. 123). This regional group does not allow members to negotiate FTAs
outside of the regional platform, being part of which may have constrained
Chile’s interests – and those of its pro-market domestic economic groups. Joining
the MERCOSUR would also involve Chile having to adopt the higher tariff rates
of the group, which would also have signiﬁcant consequences for its own
domestic importers (Wehner, 2011).
Therefore, the Chilean strategy of soft balancing has been one based on the resort
to economic statecraft and buffering. Chile chose to pursue the building of economic
ties with the European Union, Japan and the United States in the early 1990s,
followed later by the rest of the Asia-Paciﬁc countries; this overall strategy of
diffusing and reducing economic and political dependences was designed to create
room for manoeuvre vis-à-vis the great and regional powers. Recently such an
approach has become even more pronounced with the creation of the Paciﬁc
Alliance, wherewith Chile, Colombia and Peru have brought Mexico into Brazil’s
sphere of inﬂuence as a potential contender to it (Wehner, 2014). Again, this strategy
balances the structural needs of the Chilean state, and additionally serves the
purposes of the domestic group of free traders – as the Paciﬁc Alliance has a
commercial vocation that also creates political consequences for the Brazil–Chile
relationship. Finally, Chile has also relied on institutional binding mechanisms by
giving support to the creation of the UNASUR and CELAC, and also by leading the
security cooperation in the former (along with Argentina). Yet, Brazil has given the
space to Argentina and Chile to lead this issue area, as it matches with its own
security agenda. Nevertheless, Brazil has been reluctant to engage in the CELAC,
whereas Chile and Argentina have welcomed such an initiative as a non-binding
forum that constrains Brazil and places it and Mexico under the same institutional
umbrella (see Tokatlian, 2013, p. 28).
Unlike Argentina and Chile, Colombia has had a passive relationship with Brazil –
traditionally it bandwagons with the United States for internal security reasons,
which has given rise to distant relations with its South American neighbours as they
look on the United States playing a role in regional security matters with great
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

171

Flemes and Wehner

scepticism (Cardona, 2011). In fact, Colombia was reluctant to countenance the idea
of a UNASUR led by Brazil, as it was perceived by the country’s FPE as a platform
both espousing an anti-American rhetoric and opposed to ‘Plan Colombia’ – a set of
policies sponsored by the United States to aid the ﬁght against Colombian drugtrafﬁcking and paramilitary groups. Even though the military alliance with the United
States reﬂected in Plan Colombia was not directed against Brazil, it still by its mere
existence undermined the regional power’s geostrategic interests in South America.
Even up until Álvaro Uribe’s presidency (2002–2010), the main concern of the
Colombian administration was the war on drugs and thus foreign policy was
determined by US-backed security needs. Thus, if Colombia can be said to have
contested Brazil’s leadership, it has done it on the basis of building alliances with
third states (see Merke, this special issue) and not by cultivating a strong relationship
with this regional power (Pastrana, 2011).
However, under the Juan Manuel Santos administration (2010–present) a change
in Colombian foreign policy priorities can be observed. The continued growth of
negative public opinion and perception regarding the country’s relationship with the
United States, and of the rest of South American states with Colombia, has led the
FPE to shift the focus away from the United States and the related security agenda
towards one that includes regional, commercial and security cooperation with its
South American neighbours. However, Colombia’s involvement in South American
affairs is not only driven by its seeking of partnerships but also by its aspiration to
building up its leadership capacity (Pastrana and Vera, 2012, p. 188), which may
implicitly be detrimental to Brazil’s own project in the long run. Moreover,
Colombian domestic groups support this initiative as it is promotes a commercial
agenda based on free trade. Yet, some important and traditional groups still advocate
agriculture protectionism, especially if Colombia henceforth seeks to deepen its trade
exchange with Brazil (Pastrana, 2011, p. 11).
Further, the new Colombian FPE agenda also goes beyond allying with Brazil
alone, as domestic pro-FTAs groups have helped shaped the trade strategy of the
country’s government by prioritizing the importance of the relationship within the
Paciﬁc Alliance and the Asia-Paciﬁc region. Thus, domestic groups have also played
their part in foreign policy strategy, and have led Colombia to adopt a selective
contestation policy towards Brazil. The building of economic ties within the Paciﬁc
Alliance, and the entry into the Asia-Paciﬁc region, thus balances the importance of
the Brazilian option (Flemes and Wehner, 2012). Moreover, as advocated for by
domestic economic groups, the Paciﬁc Alliance also helps to build a leadership
capability that may enable competition with Brazil, or at least reduce the asymmetry
with it (Pastrana and Vera, 2012, pp. 209–216). In sum, Colombia initially soft
balanced Brazil by negating its leadership and by recognizing such a role for the
United States, while recently it has adopted a more proactive soft-balancing
behaviour based on economic statecraft and buffering; the latter two tactics resemble
in part Chile’s own strategy.
172

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Drivers of strategic contestation

Venezuela is a revolutionary country, being so ﬁrst under the leadership of Hugo
Chávez (1999–2013) and now continuing to be so with Nicolás Maduro (2013–
present) standing at the helm (Wehner, 2014). Venezuela harbours the ambition of
leading in the South American region. Thus, contestation is a recurrent phenomenon in
the relationship with Brazil – as part of the ongoing revolutionary process in which the
diffusion of the Bolivarian ideal will be key for building up leadership in South
America (Burges, this special issue; Flemes, 2009; Flemes and Wehner, 2012).
Venezuela’s contestation has been more salient than that of the other three
secondary powers, because it has tried to openly compete with Brazil for regional
leadership. Venezuela created an ideologically driven regional project, the Bolivarian
Alternative for the People of Our America (ALBA), in 2004 – herein Venezuela
exerts exclusive leadership and brings together left-oriented governments from
Bolivia, Cuba, Ecuador and Nicaragua. Furthermore, it has developed the ideas of a
‘South American NATO’, a regional broadcasting company (Telesur) and a
development bank (Banco del Sur) – all of which were projects not supported by
Brazil. As well, Venezuela has concluded numerous bi- and sub-regional energy
agreements with the Caribbean states (Petrocaribe), the Andean states (Petroandino)
and the Southern Cone states (Petrosur), who receive Venezuelan oil at favourable
prices (Flemes, 2009, pp. 172–176). This strategy was intended to increase the
asymmetrical economic dependence of small powers on Venezuela, thereby giving
the latter the necessary leverage to exert regional leadership.
Most of the aforementioned initiatives were possible because Chávez was able to
increase the Venezuelan government’s relative autonomy from domestic groups –
mainly the opposition, but also the country’s legislative and judicial institutions.
Domestically, the Bolivarian revolution reached a point of consolidation in 2003, and
the resource capacity of the state to pursue security and foreign policy goals increased
with the deﬁnitive re-nationalization of the oil company PDVSA in that year (Raby,
2011, pp. 163–164). Moreover, Chávez’s politics of arms acquisitions from Russia
were not only a reﬂection of how Venezuela perceived its security position vis-à-vis the
inﬂuence of Colombia and the United States in the region (Jácome, 2011, p. 3), but also
represented the making of a concession to one of its main domestic allies in the
carrying out of the revolutionary project: the armed forces.
However, Venezuela’s strategy of building up leadership in the ALBA has also
been supplemented by its attempts to increase its presence within the UNASUR, and
thus to use such a platform to institutionally bind Brazil (see Burges, this special issue).
This has also been the case for the CELAC. Venezuela was, along with Argentina and
Mexico, one of the proactive countries in the creation of this regional group, whereas
Brazil was not openly in favour of it because of competing rationales with Mexico and
Venezuela over Central America – a disputed zone of inﬂuence, and one where the
United States is also present. Brazil has hitherto mainly cast its zone of inﬂuence in
South America instead (Tokatlian, 2013). Thus, some of Venezuela’s contestation of
Brazil is based on the former’s interest of exerting leadership. However, such
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

173

Flemes and Wehner

contestation has also emerged because of the concessions the Venezuelan government
gives to those domestic groups that support the revolutionary project.
Although the new government of Maduro is currently experiencing economic and
political problems – inﬂation, public debt and the strong pressure of groups opposed
to the government – it has still tried to retain its goal of offering a leadership
alternative in South America to compete with Brazil and contest the rise of the Paciﬁc
Alliance (Wehner, 2014, Footnote 5). These internal problems currently limit the
international reach and inﬂuence of Venezuela, and also serve to dilute the
concession – transaction nexus between the country’s FPE and domestic interest
groups. The outcomes witnessed are thus associated with the increased costs that the
state now faces in giving concessions to domestic groups, and also with its
(diminished) capacity to obtain backing from key domestic groups.

Conclusion
This article has, by way of the South American context, explored from a theoretical
perspective the domestic drivers underpinning the accommodative strategies of
contestation chosen by secondary powers vis-à-vis regional powers in regional
settings with low levels of conﬂict. The analysis has also given recognition to the
importance of systemic drivers, offering in this way a balanced perspective on the
politics of contestation of secondary powers with regards to the regional power.
Structure deﬁnitely plays its part in the selection process of strategies, as secondary
powers positions are connected to the soft-balancing behaviour required in relatively
peaceful regions. However, secondary powers also enjoy a signiﬁcant degree of
agency (see Shaw, 2015, this special issue), as they choose the tactics with which to
contest regional powers according to their own interests and relative to the inﬂuence
of key domestic actors – be these members of the same government, of the legislative,
of economic interest groups, security and defence actors or agents of public opinion.
The theoretical premise of this article was investigated by unpacking the motives
and dynamics that drive the diverging strategic responses of Argentina, Chile,
Colombia and Venezuela to Brazil’s regional powerhood. Yet, understanding
contestation also depends on identifying what it is being contested by the secondary
power – which depends largely on the chosen foreign policy behaviour of the
regional power. This was explored theoretically and empirically in this work through
scrutinizing the case of Brazil. Secondary powers in South America rely on soft
balancing, but they nevertheless tend to contest Brazil in a number of different ways.
Some rely more on institutional binding, others on economic statecraft, or buffering,
while others contest by offering and building alternative leadership proposals.
However, the choice by each respective FPE to use one (or more) of these tactics
depends, as has been shown, on the inﬂuence of speciﬁc domestic groups. Thus, the
divergence in modes of contestation is due primarily to circumstances existing at the
174

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Drivers of strategic contestation

domestic level. That said, the state is ultimately still the principal actor involved in
the selection process, as it retains the freedom and leeway to prioritize one group over
another – the FPEs do this following a cost-beneﬁt rationale regarding the state’s
ability to generate the necessary resources for the fulﬁlment of its overseas goals.

Acknowledgements
We thank Mariana Carpes, Eduardo Pastrana, Carlos Romero, Roberto Russell, Juan
Gabriel Tokatlian, the participants of the IPSA/ECPR conference in Sao Paulo
(February 2011) and the 6th Regional Powers Network Conference in Rio de Janeiro
(September 2013), as well as the members of the GIGA Research Team on Foreign
Policy Strategies for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article. Initial
thoughts on the theoretical and conceptual framework of this work were previously
presented in the GIGA Working Paper no. 207, Drivers of Strategic of Contestation,
developed by the same authors of this article. Parts of the theoretical and conceptual
approach of this article have also been used in GIGA-Working Paper No. 206 ‘The
Politics of Contestation in Asia: How Japan and Pakistan Deal with their Rising
Neighbors’ by Hannes Ebert, Daniel Flemes and Georg Strüver, and we are deeply
indebted to Hannes Ebert and Georg Strüver for their intellectual contributions.
Daniel Flemes would also like to thank the Volkswagen Foundation for its generous
support of the ‘Contested Leadership in International Relations’ research project.

About the Authors
Daniel Flemes is Schumpeter Fellow of the Volkswagen Foundation at the GIGA
German Institute of Global and Area Studies in Hamburg. He received his PhD in
2005 from the University of Hamburg. After a visiting fellowship at Georgetown
University in Washington DC, he is currently a visiting professor at Rio de Janeiro
State University (UERJ), Brazil. His latest publications include ‘Network Powers:
Strategies of Change in the Multipolar System’ (Third World Quarterly) and
Regional Leadership in the Global System: Ideas, Interests and Strategies of
Regional Powers (Edited Volume, Ashgate).
Leslie Wehner is a Senior Lecturer in Politics and International Relations at the
University of Bath, UK. Previously he was a Senior Research Fellow at GIGA. His
research interests include international relations theory, foreign policy analysis, the
emergence of regional powers and regional cooperation in Latin America. He has
published on security and trade regional cooperation in South America, as well as on
theories of negotiation and role theory. His latest work has been published in Foreign
Policy Analysis and International Studies Review.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

175

Flemes and Wehner

References
Alecu de Flers, N. and Regelsberger, E. (2005) The EU and inter-regional cooperation. In: C. Hill and
M. Smith (eds.) International Relations and the European Union. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 317–342.
Arquilla, J. and Fuller, G. (1996) The intractable problem of regional powers. Orbis 40(4): 609–621.
Burges, S. (2008) Consensual hegemony: Theorizing the practice of Brazilian foreign policy. International
Relations 22(1): 65–84.
Cardona, D. (ed.) (2011) Introducción. ¿Puede tener Colombia una estrategia de política exterior? In:
Colombia: Una política exterior en transición. Bogotá, Colombia: FESCOL, pp. XI–XLI.
Ebert, H., Flemes, D. and Strüver, G. (2014) The politics of contestation in Asia. The Chinese Journal of
International Politics 7(2): 221–260.
Flemes, D. (2009) Brazilian foreign policy in the changing world order. South African. Journal of
International Affairs 16(2): 161–182.
Flemes, D. (2011) India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA) in the new global order: Interests, strategies and
values of the emerging coalition. International Studies 46(4): 401–421.
Flemes, D. and Wehner, L. (2012) Drivers of Strategic Contestation in South America. Hamburg,
Germany: GIGA German Institute of Global and Area Studies. GIGA Working Paper no. 207.
Flemes, D. and Wojczewski, T. (2011) Contested leadership in comparative perspective: Power strategies
in South Asia and South America. Asian Journal of Latin American Studies 24(1): 1–27.
Greenﬁeld, M. (1983) The buffer system in international relations. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 27(1): 3–26.
Guadagni, A. et al (2010) Argentina-Brasil: Llevando la relación a un nuevo nivel. Buenos Aires,
Argentina: CINDES and Universidad de San Andrés.
He, K. (2008) Institutional balancing and international relations theory: Economic interdependence and balance
of power strategies in Southeast Asia. European Journal of International Relations 14(3): 489–518.
Hwang, J. (2003) Rethinking the East Asian balance of power. Historical antagonism, internal balancing,
and the Korean-Japanese security relationship. World Affairs 166(2): 95–108.
Ikenberry, J. (2003) Strategic reactions to American pre-eminence: Great power politics in the age of
unipolarity, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/cia/nic2020/strategic_reactions.pdf, accessed 9
December 2013.
Jácome, F. (2011) Seguridad y Defensa en las Relaciones Venezuela-Brasil. Proceedings of the Conference
on Reacciones Estratégicas de Potencia Secundarias en Sudamérica, 1 December, Hotel Altamira
Continental, Caracas, Venezuela.
Jervis, R. (1976) Perception and Misperception in International Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Jesse, N. et al (2012) The leader can’t lead when the followers won’t follow: The limitations of hegemony.
In: N. Jesse, S. Lobell and K. Williams (eds.) Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons: Why Secondary
States Support, Follow, or Challenge. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 1–30.
Lapp, N. (2012) Resistance is util (Useful): Responses to Brazilian hegemony. In: K. Williams, S. Lobell
and N. Jesse (eds.) Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons: Why Secondary States Support, Follow, or
Challenge. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 145–160.
Lobell, S. (2009) Threat assessment, the state and foreign policy: A neoclassical realist model. In:
S. Lobell, N. Ripsman and J. Taliaferro (eds.) Neoclassical Realism, The State and Foreign Policy.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 42–74.
Malamud, A. (2011) Argentine foreign policy under the Kirchners: Ideological, pragmatic or simply
peronist. In: G.L. Gardini and P. Lambert (eds.) Latin American Foreign Policies: Between Ideology
and Pragmaticism. New York: Routledge, pp. 87–102.
Mullins, M. (2006) In the Shadow of the Generals: Foreign Policy Making in Argentina, Brazil and Chile.
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
176

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

Drivers of strategic contestation

Pape, R. (2005) Soft balancing against the United States. International Security 30(1): 7–45.
Pastrana, E. (2011) Evolución y perspectivas de las relaciones entre Colombia y Brasil. Working Paper
no. 14, http://www.plataformademocratica.org, accessed 9 December 2013.
Pastrana, E. and Vera, D. (2012) Estrategias de la política exterior de Colombia en su calidad de potencia
secundaria de Suramérica. In: E. Pastrana, S. Jost and D. Flemes (eds.) Colombia y Brasil: ¿socios
estratégicos en la construcción de Suramérica? Bogotá, Colombia: Pontiﬁcia Universidad Javeriana,
pp. 187–235.
Paul, T.V. (2005) Soft balancing in the age of U.S. Primacy. International Security 30(1): 46–71.
Press-Barnathan, G. (2006) Managing the hegemon. NATO under unipolarity. Security Studies 15(2):
271–309.
Raby, D. (2011) Venezuelan foreign policy under Chavez: The pragmatic success of revolutionary
ideology? In: G.L. Gardini and P. Lambert (eds.) Latin American Foreign Policies: Between Ideology
and Pragmaticism. New York: Routledge, pp. 159–178.
Ripsman, N. (2009) Neoclassical realism and domestic interest groups. In: S. Lobell, N. Ripsman and
J. Taliaferro (eds.) Neoclassical Realism, the State, and Foreign Policy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 170–193.
Rose, G. (1998) Neoclassical realism and theories of foreign policy. World Politics 51(1): 144–172.
Russell, R. and Tokatlian, J. (2003) El lugar de Brasil en la política exterior argentina. Buenos Aires,
Argentina: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Saltzman, I. (2012) Soft balancing as foreign policy: Assessing American strategy toward Japan in the
interwar period. Foreign Policy Analysis 8(2): 131–150.
Simonoff, A. (2008) La política exterior argentina reciente, con especial énfasis en la relación con Brasil y
Estados Unidos. In: N. Consani, A. Sepúlveda and Z. Zeraoui (eds.) Las Relaciones Internacionales de
América Latina: Argentina-Chile-México. Santiago, Chile: RiL editores, pp. 27–56.
Spiegel, S. (1972) Dominance and Diversity: The International Hierarchy. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and
Company.
Taliaferro, J. (2007) State building for future wars: Neoclassical realism and the resource-extractive state.
Security Studies 15(3): 464–495.
Tokatlian, J. (2013) ¿Cuán poderoso es Brasil? Foreign Affairs Latinoamérica 13(1): 25–31.
Wehner, L. (2011) Chile’s rush to free trade agreements. Revista de Ciencia Política 31(2): 207–226.
Wehner, L. (2014) Role expectations as foreign policy: South American secondary powers’ expectations of
Brazil as a regional power. Foreign Policy Analysis, Online ﬁrst, 3 April, doi:10.1111/fpa.12048.
Zakaria, F. (1992) Realism and domestic politics: A review essay. International Security 17(1): 177–198.

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 163–177

177

Original Article

Neither balance nor bandwagon: South American
international society meets Brazil’s rising power
Federico Merke
Universidad de San Andrés, Vito Dumas 284, Victoria, Buenos Aires 1644, Argentina.
E-mail: FMerke@udesa.edu.ar

Abstract This article examines the strategic positioning of Brazil in South America
and how South America relates to Brazil’s rising status both globally and regionally. It
does so from the perspective of international society known as the English school. This
perspective emphasizes how Brazil shares a number of values and institutions with its
neighbors that offer the foundations for a distinct regional international society in South
America. It thus challenges the materialist stance held by realism which envisages that
secondary powers either balance or bandwagon the dominant pole and afﬁrms instead that
South America’s strategies towards Brazil are more complex and nuanced than a simple
polarity standpoint suggests.
International Politics (2015) 52, 178–192. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.49;
published online 12 December 2014
Keywords: Brazil; South American international society; balance of power; bandwagon;
concertación

Introduction
Over recent years, an increasing number of International Relations (IR) studies have
turned their eyes towards the analysis of regional powers and regional contestation.
Somehow sympathetic with this ‘regional turn’, Realism has revisited the balance of
power concept, be it in the classical form of ‘hard’ balancing, or the newer versions
of ‘soft’ (Pape, 2005) or ‘institutional’ balancing (He, 2008 and 2015, this special
issue). Liberalism, instead, has examined the role of regions in providing regional
security through rules-based arrangements (Kirchner and Dominguez, 2011). Constructivism has explored the normative and ideational dimensions in the social
construction of regions and regional powers (Acharya, 2012; Rother, 2012). Last,
English school advocates have also made the case to examine international society at
the regional level (Buzan, 2012). As a result, a rich and growing literature has been
applied to understand the many complexities of contrasting regional orders, including
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Neither balance nor bandwagon

Europe (Kirchner and Sperling, 2007), Asia (Beeson, 2009; Zhang, 2011), the
Middle East (Buzan and Gonzalez-Pelaez, 2009) and Africa (Flemes, 2009).
This conceptual discussion on regions and powers has pervaded much of the
debate about power and norms in South America. In particular, there has over the
past 10 years been a rapid growth of interest in Brazil’s rising power and South
America’s reaction thereof. Yet available theories for examining Brazil’s role in the
region have left more questions than answers. Brazil has not played the powerpolitical game in the way realist theory would predict (Hurrell 1998; 2004). Neither
Brazil has played the role of benevolent hegemon providing institutional arrangements nor collective public goods in the region, as liberalism would predict. Last, the
still often conﬂictive strategic rivalries in the region suggest that South America falls
short of being a Kantian culture of anarchy accounting for the absence of balancing.
If these observations are sound, the South American pattern is puzzling and
suggests that it is not possible to explain Brazil’s rise, and South America’s response
to it, without considering how power in the region works upon a broader canvass of
political and social arrangements that diminish systemic pressures towards balancing
or bandwagon. It suggests, therefore, that balance of power is very much ameliorated
by the workings of other institutions such as collective power management,
diplomacy and international law.
This article examines the place of Brazil in South America and how South America
relates to Brazil’s rising status both globally and regionally. It does so from an English
school perspective which emphasizes how Brazil shares a number of values and
institutions with its neighbors. These values, it is argued, offer the foundations for a
distinct regional international society in South America. This argument challenges the
materialist stance held by realism which envisages that secondary powers either
balance or bandwagon the dominant pole (Lobell, Williams and Jesse, 2015 this
special issue) and afﬁrms instead that South America’s strategies towards Brazil are
more complex and nuanced than a simple polarity standpoint suggests.
The rest of the article will proceed as follows. First section brieﬂy revisits English
school’s conceptualization of international society and balance of power. Second
section examines Brazil’s place in South America and the region’s responses to
Brazil’s rise. Third section puts forward an English school explanation to understand
how Brazil relates to South America. Last section concludes by summarizing the
arguments and evaluating English school’s contributions to the study of Brazil’s
rising power in South American regional interstate society.

Balance of Power in Regional Interstate Societies: An English School
Approach
The balance of power concept has deep intellectual roots, yet it remains a contested
concept fraught with competing theoretical claims. Given space consideration, this
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

179

Merke

section will not reassess the role that this concept has played in contemporary IR
theory. It will rather introduce the balance of power as understood by international
society scholars.
English school portrays the balance of power as one of the cornerstones and
fundamental institutions of international society. Hedley Bull’s understanding of
balance of power is remarkably close to the classical, realist conceptualization
offered by Hans Morgenthau, both depicting it as a central institution that helps to
maintain the stability of international society (Little, 2006). Later conceptualizations
within the realist tradition, however, evolved in rather contrasting directions. Firstly,
balance of power is not the unintended outcome of the individual decisions made by
each of the states seeking to ensure its survival. Bull denies that there is ‘any
automatic tendency for a balance of power to arise’ (Bull, 1977, p. 111). For Bull,
states ‘are constantly in the position of having to choose between […] maintaining or
extending their international power position, and devoting these resources and
energies to other ends’ (p. 111).
Secondly, Bull’s distinction between ‘system’ and ‘society’ has important
consequences for any analysis of the balance of power. Whereas a systemic balance
of power is by deﬁnition ‘essentially competitive or adversarial’, a societal balance is
‘essentially cooperative or associative’ (Little, 2006, p. 99). Bull observes that the
presence of a common culture shared by the major states is a social condition that
facilitates contrivance and cooperation among states. Said otherwise, Bull’s conceptualization points more towards thinking the balance of power as an intersubjective arrangement between states which agree to maintain a society of states
and, therefore, restrict their conduct.
Thirdly, Bull posits a robust association between balance of power and international law. On the one hand, the existence of a balance of power is an essential
condition for the operation of international law inasmuch no power is preponderant
enough to ‘lay down the law to others’ (Bull, 1977, p. 101). On the other hand,
international law entails a normative dialogue among states wherein reciprocity lies
at the heart of this practice and thus each sate will avoid violations of international
law for fear of receiving sanctions from other states.
And fourthly, English school poses a tension between balance of power and great
power management, yet another of international society’s purported institutions.
While balance of power implies a certain amount of competition for avoiding
hegemony, great power management entails a certain amount of cooperation for
keeping up the international order. Hedley Bull remained rather silent on how these
two institutions could eventually evolve in parallel and thus he saw in the ‘anarchical
society’ the perfect oxymoron to grasp the ‘unsocial sociability’ among states.
Building on this conceptualization, this paper suggests that the propensity of any
system of states towards balance of power is a function of the type of international
society they form. Therefore, an international society witnessing growing levels of
conﬂict and instability will tend to work more in favor of balancing strategies, and,
180

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Neither balance nor bandwagon

by contrast, an international society witnessing shared norms and understandings will
tend to offer more room for joint management, diplomacy and international law.
Although there is risk of circularity in the argument – that is, balance exists because
states are in conﬂict and states are in conﬂict because they pursue balancing – one
should be able, through process tracing and detailed historical analysis, to see how
conﬂict formation is then followed by balancing behavior, or how cooperation arises
and lead to more formal arrangements. Said otherwise, balance of power and great
power management can be understood as a function of how tickly developed is an
international society. Next section explores the contours of Brazil’s rise and the
response put forward by South American regional society.

Brazil’s Rise in Global and Regional International Society
Before departing for Brasilia as US Ambassador, Thomas Shannon stated that Brazil
had already ‘emerged as a global player, a global power’ (quoted in Sotero, 2010).
Similarly, a 2011 report by the Council on Foreign Relations concluded that ‘Brazil
is on the short list of countries that will most shape the twenty-ﬁrst century’ (quoted
in Dauvergne and Farias, 2012, p. 904). Although the classiﬁcation of powers has
always been a contested terrain, and there may be no more than a hair’s breadth
between ‘regional’, ‘great’ and ‘middle’ powers, there is no doubt that Brazil has
gained global prominence.
Brazil is the largest country in South America in terms of population, GDP,
territory and defence expenditures. In the last 10 years, it has experienced a
remarkable economic growth averaging GDP growth of 4.5 per cent per year since
2002 and it is now the sixth largest GDP, the ﬁfth largest country in the world and it
is the world’s ﬁfth most populous country after China, India, the United States and
Indonesia. At the diplomatic front, Brazil has become a more active member in
United Nations, renewing yet again its longstanding claim to have a permanent seat
on the UN Security Council. At the IMF, Brazil led calls for greater voice for the
developing members, achieving a moderate re-weighting of voting shares. Brazil has
played an important role in the G20 as a bridge builder between different standpoints
and has also been the main advocate of the BRIC group as well as of the IBSA forum.
Brazil’s aspiration for increasing its power and gaining global prominence,
however, is not new. It has been, and continues to be, a fundamental dimension of
its international identity. What is relatively new, though, is the double movement
unfolded by Brazilian diplomacy, namely to build up an expanded political voice for
South America and to project itself globally as the best interpreter of the region.
Since the 1990s Brazil has taken a more assertive role to reduce conﬂict and promote
stability in South America. In his 2003 inaugural speech, Lula depicted Brazil as the
region’s ‘natural leader’ and stated that the country was ‘ready to assume its
greatness’ (quoted in Sotero, 2010). Brazil promoted, among others, the setting up
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

181

Merke

of Mercosur, UNASUR, and the South American Defence Council. It has played
important leading roles in some of the democratic crises that took place in the region,
namely in Bolivia, Ecuador, Honduras and Paraguay. It has also supported the
creation of convergence funds within Mercosur’ structure and has so far been
the main source for funding this initiative. These initiatives are telling and highlight
the ascending role that Brazil has been playing in the region during the last 10 years.
Add to this Brazil’s modern and growing defence industry, including the program to
build nuclear submarines, and the picture becomes more complete.

Neither balance nor bandwagon
With all this telling features, however, power balancing against Brazil has yet to
occur. Secondary states (for example, Argentina, Colombia or Venezuela) are not
ramping up military spending to counter Brazil’s power, nor have these countries
sought to pool their resources for counterbalancing. Take Venezuela. Between 2006
and 2009, Caracas’ military purchases placed it fourth in the developing world. This
buildup, however, is not under way to keep up with Brazil. It is aimed at a
hypothetical US invasion in which Caracas would ﬁght an asymmetrical warfare.
Venezuela’s neighbor Colombia also followed suit in its buildup, but it is far from
clear that Colombia’s purchases are a direct reaction to Venezuela’s spending or to
Brazil’s rising. Colombia’s highest priority continues to be its internal conﬂict
against FARC guerrilla. Besides, Colombia’s strategic partner has not been Brazil but
the United States. Between 2002 and 2010 Colombia’s President Alvaro Uribe made
the most of this strategic alliance. In turn, Bogotá has opposed Brazil’s bid for a
permanent seat on the U.N. Security Council.
Chile’s relation with Brazil has typically been positive and forward looking. The
often tense relations of Chile with Argentina, Bolivia and Peru have pushed the
country to seek in Brazil a reliable partner to avoid encirclement from its neighbors.
Moreover, Chile has publicly supported Brazil in its bid for a permanent seat on the
UNSC. Yet these commonalities fall short of bandwagon and have to do with tactic
convergence. Chile is wedded to a strong conception of sovereignty and autonomy in
its decision making and does not seem eager to follow Brazil’s standpoints across the
board. In turn, Brazil has not expressed keen interest in supporting Chile’s positions
vis-à-vis territorial conﬂicts with Bolivia and Peru. Yes, Chile can play the role of a
‘bad weather friend’ of Brazil, but this is not the kind of alignment Brazilian elites
have in mind when they look at the region.
Argentina, one of Brazil’s closest allies, is more a counterpoint than a counterbalance. It combines recognition and respect for Brazil’s performance with a cautious
partnership unwilling to recognize Brazil’s leadership. Given its past regional
achievements, Argentina refuses to passively accept the idea of a powerful
Brazil; therefore, it combines cooperation on certain areas (for example, trade,
182

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Neither balance nor bandwagon

nuclear energy or peacekeeping in Haiti) with some prudent distance (for example,
UN reform).
So the patterns of interaction with Brazil exhibit convergence and divergence
dynamics and therefore neither balance nor bandwagon has taken place in South
America. While power politics still does much of its work in the region, particularly
through still problematic dyads (for example, Chile-Bolivia, Chile-Peru, ColombiaVenezuela, Peru-Ecuador and Peru-Bolivia) balance of power has notably receded
since the 1980s and great power management (in the hands of Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia and Venezuela) became apparent.
Flemes and Wehner (see 2015, this special issue) tell another story informed by
neoclassical realism. They claim that the main foreign policy strategy in the region
towards Brazil is soft-balancing. They afﬁrm, however, that in relatively stable
regions, domestic drivers do shape the accommodative strategies vis-à-vis the
regional power. Hence, soft-balancing strategies depend both on systemic and
domestic drivers.
This inclusion of domestic drivers is essential to understand foreign policy and
help to explain why states similarly placed by their power may behave differently.
English school lacks a foreign policy theory. Whereas structural realism has evolved
into neoclassical realism and hence introduced domestic level variables, English
school remains largely a structural approach to international politics. Hence, an
English school rendition of South American regional society might be complemented
by other theories examining variables at the domestic level. Yet my point of concern
with Flemes and Wehner piece is not about predictors but about the outcome
variable, namely soft-balancing. There are two problems with this concept. Firstly,
balance of power theory is a systemic theory. It predicts that a systemic accumulation
of power by a potential hegemon will trigger actions in the rest of the states
to check it. We know (Paul, 2004) that balancing strategies can be external
(for example, through alliances) or internal (for example, through the buildup of
military capabilities). Whatever the strategy followed, an important overlooked
observation is that balance of power is systemic, and thus ‘it is not about dyads’
(Wohlforth, 2004, p. 218). It follows therefore that state conduct ‘unrelated to
systemic concentrations of power […] has nothing to do with balance of power
theory’ (ibid.). Surely, states in South America face multiple diplomatic disagreements among them, but these can hardly be depicted as soft-balancing, unless they
are substantially related to systemic accumulation of power.
The second problem follows logically from the ﬁrst one and has to do with what
Giovanni Sartori (1970) dubbed ‘concept misformation’. Although soft-balance
relies on non-military tools, such as economic statecraft or international institutions,
‘it aims to have a real, if indirect, effect on the military prospects of a superior
state’ (Pape, 2005, p. 36). This distinction between tools and aims is crucial. Softbalancing is not about just ‘constraining’ or ‘binding’ other state’s strategies. If this
were the case, then the only game in town in world politics would be soft-balancing
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

183

Merke

and thus it would be ‘identical to normal diplomatic friction’ (Lieber and Alexander,
2005, p. 109).
Upon these reasoning, the evidence of the South American case is telling in that
there has been no discernible alliance formation against Brazil, nor any substantial
domestic economic investment to match Brazil’s military prowess. Brazil’s status in
the region becomes clearer when compared with South Asia, for instance, where both
hard and soft balancing do take place. India and Pakistan, for instance, have been
involved in three major wars, one tacit war and frequent border skirmishes and
military standoffs. By contrast, the only war between Argentina and Brazil took place
in the 1820s. Although India–Pakistan relation is still largely a story of nuclear
contestation, military conﬂicts and identity politics, Argentina-Brazil relation is a
story of nuclear cooperation, security dialogue and (arrested) economic integration.
For a balance of power to take place, be it in a hard or a soft way, there must be ﬁrst a
perception of threat from secondary powers. In a purely materialist world, power
concentration may always be perceived as a threat. In an international society,
however, power concentration will be seen as a threat only when the major power
aspires to ‘lay down the law to others’ (Bull, 1977, p. 101). The case of South
America, again, is telling in that Brazil does not look like a threat. Compared with
China, India or Russia, Brazil has no nuclear weapons and has no plans to build them.
Compared with South Africa’s military interventions in its near abroad, Brazil has
never sent its troops for a regional peace operation in South America. Brazil is a
large, multicultural and multiracial democracy, like India, but its regional symbolic
power resembles that of South Africa. In short, my observation is not that
institutional binding, buffering and economic statecraft are absent strategies in South
America. My only suggestion is that these strategies hardly amount to soft-balancing.
In short, beyond the foregoing, often tense dyadic interactions it is difﬁcult ‘to ﬁnd
evidence of balance of power behaviour in Latin America in the post-Cold War
period’ (Barletta and Trinkunas, 2004, p. 334).
In contrast to Flemes and Wehner, Burges (see 2015, this special issue) points to
the more nuanced hegemony displayed by Brazil, ﬁrst via a ‘consensual hegemony’
during the 1990s (Burges, 2008), and now via a transition towards a ‘cooperative
hegemony’ (Pedersen, 2002) based on power-aggregation, power-sharing and
commitment capacity. Yet Brazil has been reluctant to share its power and to
delegate decision making towards regional bodies. It has also been reluctant to
become the regional paymaster providing collective publics goods such as credit, aid
or security. Brazil’s political elites ‘are wedded to traditional understandings of
national autonomy and do not consider pooling regional sovereignties into supranational bodies’. Moreover, they are ‘equally reluctant to pay the costs of regional
prominence, preferring to deal with smaller neighbours on an individual, ad hoc
basis’ (Spektor, 2011, p. 192). In short, region formation is an expensive and
burdensome undertaking and Brazil has so far been unwilling to pay the costs
associated with it. As a result, ‘Brazil has been a difﬁcult centre of power with which
184

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Neither balance nor bandwagon

to bandwagon’, says Spektor, ‘precisely because it is so unwilling to engage’ (2011,
p. 194). Therefore, ‘neighbours do not necessarily look to Brasilia for regional
leadership, and it is not clear that they think Brazil is a dependable catalyst to shape
regional order’ (Spektor, 2011, p. 195). In fact, says Leslie Bethel (2010), Brazil
seems to be punching ‘above its weight’; and Juan Tokatlian (2013) convincingly
asserts that while Brazil’s wherewithal has been growing, this does not mean that
Brazil is ‘powerful’. In fact, says Tokatlian, ‘Brazil is less powerful than presumed’
(p. 30).
Next section offers an English school perspective and lays out the contours
of an alternative explanation for understanding the fundamental patterns of
interaction in South America and how they accommodate Brazil’s rise in a distinct
manner.

In Grotius’ Footsteps: South American Concertación Meets Brazil’s Rise
South America constitutes a genuine puzzle for scholars working in the intersection
of IR with Area Studies. It exhibits a distinct pattern of region formation, showing
typical features of post-colonial peripheral regions, for example, weak states or
outward-oriented markets, but it is closer to the Western culture and values than
Africa, Asia or the Middle East. Andrew Hurrell observes (1998, p. 260) that the
region ‘provides important grounds for doubting that regional “anarchies” are
everywhere alike’ or even that we can ‘meaningfully talk of a Westphalian system
whose essence remains unchanged and whose logic applies universally’. Following
Hurrell, Charles Jones (2008) refers to South America as a ‘microcosm’ with its
memories, institutions and habitus. ‘South American republics’, he afﬁrms, ‘provide
an almost unique example of a society of states readily comparable to Europe
because of shared history and culture’ (2005, pp. 6–7). Similarly, Arie Kacowicz
(2005) deﬁnes Latin America as a ‘Grotian society’ and Cameron Thies (2008) as a
‘Lockean interstate culture’.
The main argument of this section is twofold. Firstly, it suggests that the dominant
international institution in South America is neither balance of power nor hegemony
but concertación (literally concertation). Secondly, it argues that concertación has so
far accommodated Brazil’s rise in a way that the country does not present neither a
challenge to check nor hegemony to follow. The ﬁrst part develops the idea and
practice of concertación. The second part examines Brazil’s diplomatic culture and
how it relates to concertación.
Concertación is a key practice that forms the core of diplomatic culture in Latin
America. It can be deﬁned as a loose form of (regional) international organization
based on consensus-seeking and peaceful settlement of disputes. Its normative
instrumental follows predictable lines, namely uti possidetis, non-agression, nonintervention and international arbitration.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

185

Merke

In terms of an English school perspective, concertación is an institution that can be
placed somewhere between diplomacy and great power management. Concertación
resembles great power management as it is based on the active role played by the
most powerful states in the region, and thus it is premised on a sense of hierarchy.
But concertación comes closer to diplomacy inasmuch it downplays the powerpolitical dimension and enhances the more formal, legal institutional arrangements.
As an institution, concertación does not advocate the need for transcending
sovereignty and the nation-state nor does it rely on a strong state nationalism. It has
been, and continues to be, one of the most signiﬁcant mechanisms for conducting
interstate conﬂicts within a framework of settled rules. The concept and practice of
concertación depicts Latin America as Gemeinschaft, a continental community, or a
Patria Grande, sharing a language, a religion and a homogeneous cultural trait. The
underlying assumption in this narrative is that a region possessing a thick diplomatic
culture enjoys a backdrop of trust, shared ideas and linguistic understandings that
provides the cement to avoid escalation and allows more space for prudence and
pragmatism. Arie Kacowicz (2005, p. 63) examines how concertación has limited the
recourse to interstate war and explains ‘the relatively peaceful settlement of disputes
that has characterized the international relations of the region, especially in South
America, since 1883’.
Concertación is the result of three longstanding regional patterns. Firstly, there is
the challenge posed by the cohabitation with the United States (Paradiso and Luna
Pont, 2003). The distinctive feature of this coexistence has been ‘the failure of
regional balancing’ in the Western Hemisphere (Jones, 2008, p. 85) and thus the
ascendance of the United States to a regional and global preeminence. Unipolarity,
coupled with contrasting normative standpoints regarding sovereignty and individual
rights (Grandin, 2012) left the permanent need on the side of South America to
somehow constrain US inroads in the region. Concertación thus offered a venue to
collectively convey Latin American interests at the different hemispheric/regional
gatherings. This tradition started with the Congress of Panamá, a Simón Bolivar’s
initiative in 1826, and followed a long road through diplomatic initiatives at
Contadora, Esquípulas and Rio to end up regional and domestic conﬂicts. Concertación is evidenced today in its ‘hard’ standpoint via ALBA (Bolivarian
Alternative for the Americas) in its ‘soft’ version via UNASUR (Union of South
American Nations) and in its newer, still very much informal initiative, that of the
CELAC (Latin American and Caribbean Community). These three initiatives can be
seen as clear examples of ‘institutional balancing’ as understood by He (see 2015,
this special issue) yet the target state is not Brazil but the United States.
Secondly is the challenge of modernization and development. Latin America’s
path towards modernity has been plagued by contradictions and ambiguities and has
exhibited, and continues to exhibit, a social and temporal heterogeneity. Yet beyond
these complexities in the social and political domains, the most fundamental
challenge for Latin America has been overcoming domestic and international
186

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Neither balance nor bandwagon

obstacles that impede development and emancipation. Simply put, the central stake
in Latin America continues to be development, not power or interstate security.
Therefore, the uneven development of globalized capitalism poses a more constraining dimension than the decentralized anarchic structure of international politics. As a
result, the language of ‘high politics’ is typically understood through the grammar of
development. Peripheral development, therefore, made of concertación an instrument for cooperation among South American states in the area of trade and
investment. Yes, concertación in the economic domain exhibits a substantial gap
between ideas of unity and limited achievements. As Gian Luca Gardini (2011,
p. 250) asserts, ‘Latin America is divided between a rhetorical, almost theatrical,
support for continental solidarity and integration and a strong, practical preference
for national sovereignty and interest, accompanied by a traditional aversion to supranationality’. Yet the challenge is not to answer why Latin American regional
integration is so fragile but to explain its inextinguishable strength or, as Andrés
Malamud aptly framed it, it is ‘neither failure nor success: inconsequential endurance
is what theory ought to explain’ (2010, p. 643).
And thirdly, is the legalist tradition. Legalism in South America was fundamental
in the construction of a regional society because it came to represent the very idea and
practice of Western civilization. Arnulf Becker Lorca (2006, p. 284) afﬁrms that
international law ‘played an important role […] in laying down one of the languages
through which Latin Americans have discussed and contested their identity, politics,
and place in the international world’. International law has played, and continuous to
play, a central role in structuring international relations and giving meaning to the
conﬂict of political interests among states. International law systematically provided
concertación with a language and a mechanism for the application of political
reasoning to problems of regional order and conﬂict. As a result, and in comparative
terms, ‘Latin America sustains a world record of adjudication and arbitration’
(Kacowicz, 2004, p. 199). ‘Disagreements’, says Isacson (2011, p. 63), ‘almost
never come close to violence. In the worst cases, they end up in the Hague’.
Moreover, some of today’s international norms are Latin American contributions: uti
possidetis; the ban of conquest as a valid mode of territorial possession; the limitation
to the exercise of diplomatic protection in favor of foreigners (Calvo Doctrine);
the prohibition of foreign intervention for collecting debts (Drago Doctrine);
diplomatic asylum, the ruling out of colonialism and the extension of sovereign
rights for coastal states.
In sum, South America is a regional society in which the logic of power, the logic
of capitalism and the logic of normative dialogue have all converged in the institution
of concertación. This interpretation of concertación, contentious and contestable as it
probably is, put forward three important issues in our understanding of South
American international society. Firstly, concertación is not the result of a superﬁcial,
almost theatrical sentimentalism inspired by la hermandad latinoamericana (or Latin
American brotherhood). Concertación is in part the result of material systemic
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

187

Merke

pressures, namely US hegemony and globalized capitalism. Secondly, concertación
is also the result of a diplomatic culture ﬁrmly anchored in the formalist, legalist
tradition inherited from Spain and Portugal. And thirdly, concertación is the way
South America has attempted to restrain US inﬂuence; to further economic
integration and to solve regional conﬂicts through peaceful means. These three
dimensions have been pervasive all the way down in South American international
relations and have shaped Brazil’s rise.

Brazil’s Rise in a Concerted South America
For much of its modern history, Brazil has shown a distinct diplomatic tradition made
up of institutions, ideas and patterns of behavior. Andrew Hurrell (2004, p. 7)
refers to Brazil’s ‘unspoken assumptions’ about its conduct of foreign policy,
namely the idea of Brazil as ‘geopolitically satisﬁed country’; the idea of Brazil as
having a ‘vocation for peaceful conﬂict resolution’ and, ﬁnally, the idea of Brazil
as a ‘natural mediator’. Celso Lafer (2000, p. 64) points to a ‘constructive
moderation’ and a ‘Grotius-inspired’ understanding of international affairs. Brazil is
reluctant to create bilateral tensions with any regional third party and prefers to
engage in consensus-based arrangements to mitigate conﬂict and instability. In sum,
Brazil has shown, and continues to show, a tradition of ‘non-belligerence, negotiated
solutions, multilateralism and a focus on legal standings’ (Dauvergne and Farias,
2012, p. 906).
Secondly, there is the quest for autonomy and Brazil’s consistent efforts to
enhance its independence. A particular dialogue between realism and dependence
theory yielded a blend of nationalism and developmentalism which informed Brazil’s
foreign policy for many decades and served as the intellectual support for carving out
autonomous policies across the board. Vigevani and Cepaluni (2007) have recently
sorted out this tradition by conceptualizing three strategies, namely autonomy
through ‘distance’ (explaining mainly the military period up to the 80s), ‘participation’ (accounting for Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s administration) and ‘diversiﬁcation’ (describing Lula da Silva’s years). In all these strategies, US-Brazil relations
stand out as a problematic. On the one hand, Brazil sought to enhance its autonomy
from the Western core, including the United States, as a way of promoting its
national interests. On the other hand, however, Brazil looked towards the United
States in search for recognition, investment and technology transfer. Typically,
Brazil-US relations have ‘resulted in frustrations on both sides’ and so the key words
for understanding this relations have been ‘prudent coexistence’, ‘possible collaboration’, and ‘minimal collision’ (Soares de Lima and Hirst, 2006, p. 33).
And thirdly is the quest for development. Given Brazil’s positive geopolitical
condition, the country opened up the possibility for developing ‘an ideology and
practice of modernization and national development that was largely inner-directed,
188

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Neither balance nor bandwagon

responding to domestic failures and aimed at integrating national territory, at
upholding domestic order, and at promoting economic development’ (Hurrell, 2007,
p. 100). After the II World War, Brazilian elites started to see Brazil’s dependent
development as essentially a function of the international system. Since then, the
ideology of national autonomy and development has been constitutive of Brazil’s
understandings of its place in the world. As Soares de Lima and Hirst (2006, p. 22)
claim, foreign policy in Brazil ‘has always had a strongly developmentalist
component’. This ideology played, and continues to play, the function of a narrative
drawing together, albeit uncomfortably, Left and Right wings.
When putting these continuities together, it becomes apparent how Brazil’s
diplomatic tradition reﬂects many of the norms and institutions present in the region.
Cohabitation with the United States has been a constant challenge for Brazil and the
policy dilemmas between alignment and soft-balancing have been translated in Brazil
as a recurrent tension between ‘Americanism’ and ‘Globalism’ (Pinheiro, 2004).
Brazil has consistently been conscious of its peripheral location and the need to make
of foreign policy an instrument for national development. Brazil has also embraced
the norms of concertación and legalism, developing an ethos ‘to deal with both
conﬂict and cooperation by means of diplomacy and the rule of law’ (Lafer, 2000,
p. 94). It has consistently avoided the display of hegemonic pretentions in the region
and has opted for alternative collective power management. Yes, it also played power
politics, mainly with Argentina. But hatred and dire war have been typically
excluded from the policy menu.
In sum, Brazil’s rise should be understood within the broader canvass of South
American society and in terms of Brazil’s own longstanding diplomatic culture. Both
dimensions, which are inextricably intertwined, work against hegemony and favor a
more concerted regional order. These observations, as obvious as they may seem,
have received scant attention in the literature on Brazil’s foreign policy. Simply put,
my argument is that when Brazil acts multilaterally; when Itamaraty displays its soft
power; when it abides by the law; when it quests for development; when it supports
regional integration, and when it refrains from taking the moral high ground, it is not
acting as any other rising state would act in other regions, nor it reveals a Brazil-style
exceptionalism. Instead, Brazil’s foreign policy reﬂects a longstanding diplomatic
culture that has so much characterized South America.

Conclusion: Resisting Facile Categorizations
The main argument of this article has been built upon a set of interrelated claims.
Firstly, it examined Brazil’s rise and it suggested that it has been, and will continue to
be, plagued by dilemmas and tensions. My only point to add here is simply that
Brazil’s continued rise will make more apparent its own dilemmas on how to
accommodate order and justice in South America.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

189

Merke

Secondly, it analyzed Brazil’s standing in South America and observed that Brazil
has been too self-interested to be followed and too weak to threaten its neighbors.
Andrés Malamud (2011) depicts Brazil as ‘a leader without followers’ and Sean
Burges (see this 2015, special issue) refers to a ‘quiet crisis for Brazilian leadership in
South America’. Yet it might be the case that Brazil’s underperformance is not
unique. Alden and Schoeman (this 2015, special issue) refer to South Africa’s weak
record in effective leadership, something also hinted by Blarel and Ebert (this 2015,
special issue) about India’s contested hegemony. Simply put, regional powers might
share a degree of unrealized regional hegemony (Prys, 2010).
Thirdly, it suggested that balance of power and hegemony are overrated institutions both in diplomatic and academic circles and that and English school perspective
opens up the possibility for understanding the region through the complex interplay
between international law, diplomacy and great power management which converge
on the idea and practice of concertación. From an IR perspective, South American
regional society goes beyond power politics yet it stops short of institutionalized
cooperation. Yes, there are subtle strategic rivalries working on, but a purely realist
world is not active today in South America. Governments in South America conduct
their foreign policy as if the most serious long-term threat they face is not domination
by an aspiring regional hegemon but domestic failure and external marginalization.
Simply put, Latin America’s diplomatic culture contains much more than the realists
would admit and much less than the liberals would prefer.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Gino Pauselli for his research assistance and to Andrés Malamud and
Andrew Hurrell for their helpful observations. I also thank the participants of the 6th
Regional Powers Network Conference in Rio de Janeiro, September 2013, for their
comments.

About the Author
Federico Merke is Professor of International Relations at the Universidad de San
Andrés and Researcher at the National Council for Scientiﬁc and Technological
Research, Argentina. His research interests include International Relations Theory,
international politics and security, Latin American international relations, and
Argentine and Brazilian foreign policy. He holds a PhD from the Latin American
Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO) and Master of Arts in International Studies
from University of Warwick (UK) His latest publication is ‘Foreign Policy and
Human Rights Advocacy: An Exercise in Measurement and Explanation’ in Human
Rights Review 14 (2):131–155 (2013).
190

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Neither balance nor bandwagon

References
Acharya, A. (2012) Ideas, norms and regional orders. In: T.V. Paul (ed.) International Relations Theory
and Regional Transformation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 183–209.
Barletta, M. and Trinkunas, H. (2004) Regime type and regional security in Latin America: Toward a
‘balance of identity’ theory. In: T.V. Paul, J. Wirtz and M. Fortmann (eds.) Balance of Power: Theory
and Practice in the 21st Century. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 334–349.
Becker Lorca, A. (2006) International law in Latin America or Latin American international law? Harvard
International Law Journal 47(1): 283–305.
Besson, M. (2009) Geopolitics and the making of regions: The fall and rise of East Asia. Political Studies
57(3): 498–516.
Bethel, L. (2010) Brazil: Regional power, global power. Open Democracy 8 June. http://www
.opendemocracy.net/leslie-bethell/brazil-regional-power-global-power, accessed 20 August 2013.
Bull, H. (1977) The Anarchical Society. A Study of Order in World Politics. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Burges, S.W. (2008) Consensual hegemony: Theorizing Brazilian foreign policy after the cold war.
International Relations 22(1): 65–84.
Buzan, B. (2012) How regions were made, and the legacies for world politics: An English school
reconnaissance. In: T.V. Paul (ed.) International Relations Theory and Regional Transformation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 22–46.
Buzan, B. and Gonzalez-Pelaez, A. (eds.) (2009) International Society and the Middle East: English
School Theory at the Regional Level. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dauvergne, P. and Farias, D. (2012) The rise of Brazil as a global development power. Third World
Quarterly 33(5): 903–917.
Flemes, D. (2009) Regional power South Africa: Co-operative hegemony constrained by historical legacy.
Journal of Contemporary African Studies 27(2): 153–178.
Gardini, G.L. (2011) Unity and diversity in Latin American visions of regional integration. In: G.L.
Gardini and P. Lambert (eds.) Latin American Foreign Policies. Between Ideology and Pragmatism.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 235–254.
Grandin, G. (2012) The liberal traditions in the Americas: Rights, sovereignty, and the origins of liberal
multilateralism. American Historical Review 17(1): 68–91.
He, K. (2008) Institutional balancing and international relations theory: Economic interdependence
and balance of power strategies in Southeast Asia. European Journal of International Relations
14(3): 489–518.
Hurrell, A. (1998) An emerging security community in South America? In: E. Adler and M. Barnett (eds.)
Security Communities. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 228–264.
Hurrell, A. (2004) Working with diplomatic culture: Some Latin American and Brazilian questions.
Paper prepared for ISA Meeting; March, Montreal, Canada.
Hurrell, A. (2007) On Global Order. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Isacson, A. (2011) Why Latin America is rearming. Current History 100(133): 62–67.
Jones, C. (2008) Foundations of South American International Society. Paper presented at the Boston
APSA Meeting; August, United States.
Kacowicz, A. (2004) Compliance and non-compliance with international norms in territorial disputes: The
Latin American record of arbitrations. In: E. Benvenisti and M. Hirsch (eds.) The Impact of International Law on International Cooperation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 194–215.
Kacowicz, A. (2005) The Impact of Norms in International Society: The Latin American Experience,
1881–2001. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Kirchner, E. and Dominguez, R. (eds.) (2011) The Security Governance of Regional Organization.
London: Routledge.
Kirchner, E. and Sperling, J. (2007) European Union Security Governance. Manchester, UK: Manchester
University Press.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

191

Merke

Lafer, C. (2000) Dilemmas and challenges in Brazil’s foreign policy. Estudos Avançados 14(38):
63–71.
Lieber, K. and Alexander, G. (2005) Waiting for balancing. International Security 30(1): 109–139.
Little, R. (2006) The balance of power and great power management. In: R. Little and J. Williams (eds.)
The Anarchical Society in a Globalized World. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 87–120.
Malamud, A. (2010) Latin American regionalism and EU studies. Journal of European Integration
32(6): 637–657.
Malamud, A. (2011) A leader without followers? The growing divergence between the regional and global
performance of Brazilian foreign policy. Latin American Politics and Society 53(3): 1–24.
Pape, R. (2005) Soft balancing against the United States. International Security 30(1): 7–45.
Paradiso, J. and Luna Pont, M. (2003) Paz y Guerra en la Trayectoria Latinoamericana. Universidad &
Integración 1(1): 35–81.
Paul, T.V. (2004) Introduction: The enduring axioms of balance of power theory and their contemporary
relevance. In: T.V. Paul, J. Wirtz and M. Fortmann (eds.) Balance of Power: Theory and Practice in the
21st Century. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 1–26.
Pedersen, T. (2002) Co-operative hegemony: Power, ideas and institutions in regional integration. Review
of International Studies 28(4): 677–696.
Pinheiro, L. (2004) Política Externa Brasileira, 1889–2002. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Zahar.
Prys, M. (2010) Hegemony, domination, detachment: Differences in regional powerhood. International
Studies Review 12(4): 479–504.
Rother, S. (2012) Wendt meets East: ASEAN cultures of conﬂict and cooperation. Cooperation and
Conﬂict 47(1): 49–67.
Sartori, G. (1970) Concept misinformation in comparative politics. The American Political Science Review
64(4): 1033–1053.
Soares de Lima, M.R. and Hirst, M. (2006) Brazil as an intermediate state and regional power: Action,
choice and responsibilities. International Affairs 82(1): 28–40.
Sotero, P. (2010) Brazil’s rising ambition in a shifting global balance of power. Politics 30(S1): 71–81.
Spektor, M. (2011) Brazil: The underlying ideas of regional policies. In: D. Flemes (ed.) Regional
Leadership in the Global System: Ideas, Interests and Strategies of Regional Power. Farnham, UK:
Ashgate, pp. 191–204.
Vigevani, T. and Cepaluni, G. (2007) Lula’s foreign policy and the quest for autonomy through
diversiﬁcation. Third World Quarterly 28(7): 1309–1326.
Thies, C. (2008) The construction of a Latin American interstate culture of rivalry. International
Interactions 34(3): 231–257.
Tokatlian, J.G. (2013) ¿Cuán Poderoso es Brasil? Foreign Affairs Latinoamérica 13(1): 25–31.
Wohlforth, R. (2004) Revisiting balance of power theory in central Eurasia. In: T.V. Paul, J. Wirtz and
M. Fortmann (eds.) Balance of Power: Theory and Practice in the 21st Century. Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford University Press, pp. 214–238.
Zhang, X. (2011) China in the conception of international society: The English school’s engagements with
China. Review of International Studies 37(2): 763–786.

192

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 178–192

Original Article

Revisiting consensual hegemony: Brazilian
regional leadership in question
Sean W. Burges
School of Politics and International Relations, The Australian National University, Building 22,
Haydon-Allen Building, Canberra, ACT, 2601 Australia.
E-mails: sean.burges@anu.edu.au

Abstract A central challenge confronting Brazilian foreign policy is its reluctance to
accept measures that might restrict national autonomy. This limits the extent to which
Brazil can lead and leverage the region, particularly in the face of competing visions such
as ALBA and the Paciﬁc Alliance. The issues is Brazil’s continued reliance on a consensual hegemony approach to regional relations after neighbouring countries opened
space for a more assertive leadership closer to Pedersen’s model of cooperative hegemony. Although consensual hegemony allowed Brazil to establish its project in South
America, by the end of Lula’s ﬁrst presidential term more was being demanded and the
failure to provide leadership goods weakened Brazil’s regional position. Current questioning of Brazilian leadership on the continent is found in an almost contradictory
approach that sees Brazilian diplomats pushing away suggestions of assertive leadership
while more concrete action is quietly taken by other regionally engaged sections of the
Brazilian state.
International Politics (2015) 52, 193–207. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.43;
published online 12 December 2014
Keywords: Brazil; foreign policy; Itamaraty; South America; hegemony

Introduction
During a 2007 interview, former Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso
was asked about Brazil’s continental leadership ambitions. He answered that his
administration had an ofﬁcial rhetoric of avoiding public claims to leadership: ‘This
was our rhetoric. Behind it was the idea that true leaders do not need to say they are
taking leadership’ (Cardoso and Lafer, 2007). He continued on to observe of the Lula
administration: ‘they had a kind of different discourse and the rhetoric was “we are
the leaders”, and the result was a splitting of the area’. That there was a clear change
of tone in Brazil’s approach to the region is hard to dispute. From the beginning of his
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Burges

presidency in 2003 Lula clearly voiced Cardoso’s unspoken agenda: that Brazil’s
priority was South America and that regional leadership was critical for Brazil’s
global insertion and national development (Amorim, 2013, Chapter six). Speaking in
2003, Lula explained: ‘It is important to understand that Brazil, as the largest
economy and the most industrialized country [in South America], has to be generous
in its gestures towards its partners’ (Da Silva, 2003). Other countries in the region
were asking for this leadership, particularly through provision of concrete public
goods. The problem, as Malamud (2011) points out, was that Brazil was falling short
of expectations and becoming a ‘leader without followers’. Indeed, as the Lula years
progressed, some started balancing and constraining an increasingly ambitious
Brasília (Flemes and Wehner, 2013, 2015, this special issue).
The partisan political temptation is to suggest that Brazil’s continental leadership
waned towards the end of Lula’s tenure because he deviated from Cardoso’s discrete
foreign policy style. This article argues that such an assessment is wrong. By
identifying the transition point between consensual and cooperative hegemony it will
be argued that the Lula administration experienced an inﬂection point in Brazil’s intraSouth America relations that brought the peak, albeit only partial, of the consensual
hegemony (Burges, 2008) and a subsequent call for something more closely
resembling a cooperative hegemony (Pedersen, 2002). Although the soft power
leadership intrinsic to consensual hegemony demonstrated far more traction and
potential power in South America than might be the case in other seemingly similar
situations such as South Africa in sub-Saharan Africa (Alden and Schoeman, 2015, this
special issue; Shaw, 2015, this special issue), it nevertheless still had distinct medium- and
long-term limitations as a strategy without the use of more proactive leadership tactics.
The efﬁcacy of the consensual hegemony strategy depended upon larger structural
factors. Although Brazil had restricted resources available for continental engagement
and thus needed to focus on explicitly inclusive ideas and coordination, benign neglect
of the region by the United States ampliﬁed the value of Brazil-provided soft leadership
goods. This is not to suggest that Brazil was pursuing a selﬂessly ‘benevolent’ regional
strategy (Destradi, 2010, p. 907), but that the emphasis on persuasion meant the
coercive element lay in the soft cost of non-participation implicit in abstention from
Brazilian initiatives. The approach under Cardoso was effectively leadership on the
cheap by manipulating the continental concertación ethos identiﬁed by Merke (this
special issue) and pushing it to its limits under Lula and Dilma.
The decade-long transition from Cardoso through Lula to Dilma discussed here suggests that there is an exhaustion point to consensual hegemony after which concrete
leadership goods must be delivered. Failure to adequately satisfy these demands incites
quiet resistance and soft forms of defection (Lobell et al, 2015, this special issue).
In the Brazilian case this meant push-back on Brasília’s low-cost consensual hegemony
strategy (Flemes and Wehner, 2015, this special issue). While major public conﬂicts
have been avoided, contestation of Brazil’s vision for regional order has increased,
casting doubts on the strength of its regional management capabilities.
194

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Revisiting consensual hegemony

The article begins with a review of the theory of consensual hegemony. To be
clear, it is not claimed that Brazilian diplomats consciously pursued a strategy of
consensual hegemony; the theory is an externally imposed device for explaining
Brazil’s foreign policy. The critical inﬂection point during Lula’s ﬁrst term is
examined next, arguing that neighbouring countries considered accepting Brazil’s
consensual hegemony, but wanted a more concrete form like cooperative hegemony
(Pedersen, 2002), which is examined in the subsequent section. The apparent
contradictions in Brazilian foreign policy at the end of the Lula years and the start
of Dilma’s presidency are the subject of the next two sections, focusing on Brazil’s
simultaneous rhetoric of solidarity and unwillingness to build robust regional
multilateral institutions. Tired of waiting for proactive regionally oriented leadership
from Brazil, neighbouring countries entered into a cycle of soft resistance and
defection, creating a quiet crisis for Brazilian leadership in South America.

Consensual Hegemony
The concept of consensual hegemony was developed to explain how Brazil sought to
lead South America in the 1990s and early 2000s despite its lack of hard power
resources and an unwillingness to overtly claim leadership (Burges, 2008). Although
consensual hegemony agrees with Kindleberger’s (1989, p. 11) observation that
international systems need leadership, it departs from mainstream North American
international relations approaches to both hegemony and leadership. Mainstream
emphases on coercion and domination are modulated with the work of Antonio
Gramsci, Robert Cox and Giovanni Arrighi. The starting point is Gramsci’s (1957,
pp. 154–155) observation that for hegemony to be effective and lasting it must
account for the interests and ambitions of those it encompasses. The contribution
from Arrighi (1993, pp. 149–150) is that hegemony becomes another level of power
a state achieves when it is able to frame its vision of the system in a way others see as
being in the universal interest. Cox (1987, p. 7) is used to characterize what
hegemony is: an ideologically based order that exists through a broad measure of
consent offering some satisfaction to all encompassed by it. Consensual hegemony
thus becomes an ideationally based type of order because it grows from a generated
consensus about how affairs should be ordered and managed that embeds the core
interests of the predominant party in the system’s structure (Burges, 2008, p. 71).
Focusing on the question of order, the elaboration of consensual hegemony breaks
two often interchangeable nouns – hegemon and hegemony – into individual entities.
The hegemon becomes the actor creating the over-arching order, which is known as
the hegemony. This opens space for an ideas-based leadership where the ‘hegemon’
can marshal agreement around the form of the proposed order without having
to underwrite the associated costs or forcibly impose it. Consent becomes critical
for the hegemony while coercion is found in the costs of not being involved in
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

195

Burges

either the negotiation of the order or in having access to the collective goods and
coordination provided by the system.
An important, but unexplored aspect in the original rendition of consensual
hegemony is the role wider systemic structural factors play in its pursuit and
construction. Reliance on the power of ideas introduces a signiﬁcant element of
fragility to consensual hegemony because it can either be challenged by a
competing vision or outright supplanted by application of alternative economic
or security incentives. South America of the 1990s was fertile ground for
consensual hegemony because of the sort of lack of engagement by the global
hegemon that Lobell et al (2015, this special issue) identity as being important for
creating a permissive environment for alternate approaches to order. During the
Lula years the continent was largely ignored by the United States and other
international powers in practical terms even if there did appear to be clear
engagement through hemispheric multilateralism and military cooperation.
Brazilian pursuit of a consensual hegemony was further aided by the low priority
of foreign affairs for regional governments. Domestic politics dominated as
political leaders wrestled with democratic transitions and economic crises, not
least Brazil’s 1999 devaluation and Argentina’s 2001/2002 collapse. Framed in
terms of Merke’s idea of concertación (2015, this special issue), consensual
hegemony offered a temporarily attractive frame for collaboratively preserving
regional autonomy and improving international insertion. Finally, there was no
real pressure from neighbouring countries on Brazil to be more direct in the
provision of public goods.

Shifting towards Cooperative Hegemony
Despite structural limitations and reliance upon ideational power to advance the
consensual hegemony, Brazil’s initiatives did offer some economic beneﬁts. A focus
on building intellectual acceptance of South America as a distinct geopolitical space
was used to advance ideas of intra-continental self-reliance. The most visible form
was the turn to regionalist arrangements, ﬁrst the Common Market of the South,
Mercosur, then proposals in 2000 for South American infrastructure integration to
facilitate intra-regional exchange. Immediately tangible beneﬁts were felt within
Mercosur where members Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay saw a surge in
value-added exports. Mercosur member exports to Brazil grew from USD$ 2.11
billion in 1992 to a high of $ 9.23 billion in 1998, before the devaluation of the real.
Even with the currency disruptions of early 1999, export ﬂows appeared set to
rebound from $ 6.48 billion in 1999 to $ 7.86 billion in 2000; Argentina’s economic
collapse delayed further growth. More revealing was Brazil’s absorption of 29.3 per
cent of Mercosur exports in 1992, which rose to 45 per cent of bloc-member exports
by the early 2000s (Burges, 2009, p. 98).
196

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Revisiting consensual hegemony

Brazil’s consensual hegemony project also offered economic beneﬁts for other
regional countries. Between 2002 and 2006 Peruvian exports to Brazil grew from
$217 million to $788 million, Chilean from $648 million to $2.866 billion, Bolivian
from $ 395 million to $1.15 billion and Colombian from $108 million to $248 million
(Burges, 2009, pp. 174–175). While these numbers were not overwhelmingly large, the
pattern as set out in Table 1 was that the Brazilian market absorbed a larger share of
value-added exports than global markets. Indeed, this trend strengthened during the
Lula administration as calls for more Brazilian leadership in South America grew.
More telling for Brazil were trade balance ﬁgures, which were almost exclusively
at a surplus in Brazil’s favour, except for Bolivia where natural gas imports created
a deﬁcit. When paired with the 2005 launch of new export and foreign direct
investment ﬁnancing programmes at Brazil’s National Bank for Economic and Social
Development (BNDES), there was a sense Brazil was not as economically weak as it
purported, a proposition noted by regional leaders. As Lula’s foreign minister Celso
Amorim (2013, pp. 123–127) recalls, Peruvian president Alejandro Toledo was
quick to pursue new possibilities, asking Lula about increasing Brazilian trade
and investment with Peru, but skirting the idea of joining Mercosur in favour of
a bloc-country deal. Amorim, in turn, reached back to the South American free trade
area idea he had ﬂoated when foreign minister in 1994.
Suggestions that the Lula administration might be expanding external economic
assistance took form throughout 2003. By May Lula had directed the BNDES to
make available $3 billion of export ﬁnancing not only for Brazilian goods to markets
such as Venezuela, but also for the contracting of Brazilian civil engineering ﬁrms for
infrastructure projects throughout South America. Smaller, but still symbolic acts
early in Lula’s ﬁrst term included pardoning $52 million of Bolivian debt while
simultaneously opening a $600 million credit line for that country’s infrastructure
development. Other countries took note. A visit to Quito by Amorim was prefaced
in the local newspaper El Comercio (2005a) by an anonymous Ecuadorian diplomat
noting, ‘Brazil wants to raise its area of inﬂuence in the region’, and that Ecuador was
important for Brazil’s ambitions of greater sway on the Paciﬁc coast. While
Ecuadorian analysts emphasized Brazil’s rising investment in their country and its
potential to reduce US inﬂuence, foreign minister Antonio Parra cautiously noted that
an alliance had not yet been formed (El Comercio, 2005b).
Table 1: Value-addeds as percentage of South American exports

To Brazil
To world (less Brazil)

2003
(%)

2004
(%)

2005
(%)

2006
(%)

2007
(%)

2008
(%)

2009
(%)

2010
(%)

2011
(%)

20.3
15.5

23.2
17.6

26.7
16.4

29.7
18.6

33.7
24.1

35.0
22.9

36.9
21.8

42.1
14.6

40.6
13.6

Elaborated from DATAINTAL (http://www.iadb.org/dataintal/).
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

197

Burges

A recurrent theme to bilateral meetings by Lula-era ofﬁcials was requests for
expanded Brazilian FDI, technical assistance and market access. In short, Brazil was
being asked to meet rising demands from its ‘followers’ with fungible engagement,
but responding with programmes such as the competitive import substitution
programme that had little noticeable impact. Drawing on Hugo Chávez’s cash-rich
competing model for South American leadership, countries such as Bolivia pushed
back hard on Brazil, demanding greater payoff for sustained subscription to the
consensual hegemony and using terms like ‘Brazilian imperialism’ to characterize
policies and attitudes in Brasília (Trevisan, 2005; Mesa Gisbert, 2011).
Bolivia proactively responded to its worries about Brazilian imperialism, forcefully nationalizing Petrobras gas assets on 1 May 2006. While this and similar 2008
actions in Ecuador when Correa ejected construction ﬁrm Odebrecht and refused to
honour BNDES loans for the San Francisco hydroelectric project, were clear resistance
to Brazilian leadership, they were not a wholesale rejection. Shortly after Bolivia’s
May Day nationalizations, Peruvian president Alan García summarized regional
attitudes towards Brazil: ‘We have no apprehension or fear of positive, constructive
hegemony from Brazil, which has an essential role as a promoter of the South
American Union’ (Ferreyros, 2006). García acknowledged the consensual hegemony
Brazil was erecting, but quietly suggested it provide concrete beneﬁts for others as in a
cooperative hegemony (Pedersen, 2002). In effect Garcia was diplomatically expressing the same desire for expanded Brazilian investment and proactive engagement with
institution formation that Bolivia and Ecuador were voicing more belligerently. Even
moderate states with diplomatic afﬁnity to Brazil like Chile took a similar line,
accepting the consensual hegemony as useful, but with ‘what is in it for us’ questions
about Brazilian regional leadership (Valenzuela, 2011).

Unilateral Cooperative Hegemony
The challenge facing Brazil towards the end of Lula’s ﬁrst term ﬁts the dilemma
Pedersen (2002) addresses with cooperative hegemony: why are regions formed?
A central foreign policy goal of the Lula administration was construction of a Brazilheaded South American region. Cooperative hegemony is useful here because it
allows a transition from the ideas-heavy consensual hegemony into something with
more attention to hard power, particularly economic and security capacity. Operation
of a cooperative hegemony requires the beneﬁts Brazil sought through consensual
hegemony while also addressing the collective good demands of other South
American countries.
Pedersen (2002, pp. 685–686) posits four reasons to form a cooperative
hegemony. First, it allows the cooperative hegemon to aggregate and wield regional
power, a strategy Brazil has applied regionally and globally. Second, it provides
stability for the leader and supporting states through a collective front to external
198

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Revisiting consensual hegemony

challenges while simultaneously restraining unilateral action by the dominant state.
For example, some in South America see Brazil’s rise not only as a brake on US
inﬂuence, but also as an opportunity to gain input into global governance discussions. Third, the cooperative hegemon can protect the interests of its diaspora in
the region without resort to direct coercion. Brazil has a large agricultural diaspora in
Eastern Paraguay and Bolivia, and major foreign direct investment throughout the
continent. Finally, the cooperative hegemony institutionalizes the regional power’s
ideas. This was the sharpest area of contestation with Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez,
who started his country’s Mercosur accession process by condemning the bloc’s
neoliberal ethic and by association Brazil’s approach to market economics.
These factors appear to coincide with a rhetorical solidiﬁcation and formal
institutionalization of the consensual hegemony project. The 8 December 2004
formation of CASA in Cusco, Peru and its transformation at the 2008 Third Summit
of South American Heads of State in Brasília into the Union of South American
Nations, Unasur, create a false sense that Brazilian foreign policy makers were
shifting from consensual to cooperative hegemony. The stumbling block for
Brazilian diplomats is embedded within Pedersen’s theory (2008, p. 687): ‘While
the strategy of co-operative hegemony promises beneﬁts, especially long-term
beneﬁts, it also involves costs, the most important of which is the requirement that
the regional great power share power with its neighbours on a permanent basis’. All
three major preconditions identiﬁed as necessary for cooperative hegemony – power
aggregation capacity, power-sharing capacity, commitment capacity – are found in
Brazil, as demonstrated by optimistic expectations for Mercosur and Unasur. What is
singularly lacking is the political willingness to exercise these capacities and generate
strong institutionalized regional governance structures that might restrain Brazil.
Brazil’s rational for leaving Mercosur and Unasur without real governance and
regulatory authority is captured by Vigevani and Cepaluni (2009), who argue that
Brazilian foreign policy is above all about the quest for domestic policy autonomy.
While this has taken various forms since the transition to democracy, the overriding
priority is vouchsaﬁng sovereignty and ensuring freedom to pursue policies, foreign
and domestic, seen as necessary to advance national development. This not only
immediately runs afoul of the behavioural prerequisites of a cooperative hegemony,
but also has increasingly worked to create a masked sense of hegemonism in
Brazilian foreign policy. It is in these contradictions that we ﬁnd regional
dissatisfaction with Brazilian leadership and a turn by some South American
countries towards alternative avenues for collective goods provision.

Regional Reluctance
A 2011 article by Lula and Dilma foreign policy advisor Marco Aurélio Garcia
highlights how Brazilian thinking on regionalism stands at odds with the expectations
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

199

Burges

of neighbouring countries. Garcia is speciﬁc about the importance of multilateralism
to Brazil, carefully explaining why a representative international governance system
is important for his country. Where matters get interesting is when he turns his
attention to multilateralism and the ‘South American pole’, claiming that Brazilian
foreign policy has emphasized its continental actions either through the expansion
and strengthening of Mercosur, the creation and institutionalization of Unasur, or
new types of bilateral relations within the region. Rhetorically, this is consistent with
consensual hegemony requisites of inclusion, incorporation and shared ownership,
and appears to herald something like a cooperative hegemony grounded in
substantive institutions. But Garcia’s article also points to an underlying attitude that
sees the region as subservient to and oriented around Brazil as South America’s
natural voice in the global system. As Malamud (2011) and Flemes and Wehner
(2013) point out, this attitude is not shared by Brazil’s neighbours.
Garcia’s article is accompanied by one from Cardoso’s foreign minister Luiz
Felipe Lampreia (2011) presenting ideas for Dilma’s foreign policy. First is a return
to core concepts in Mercosur, focusing Brazilian regionalism on what has worked by
emphasizing that the bloc gains are economic and should be pursued in a manner
bringing growth to all, not just Brazil. As discussed earlier, Mercosur has delivered
real and sustained economic gains for its membership, but the beneﬁts have been
lopsided. A persistent complaint from not only Paraguay and Uruguay, but also
Argentina is that the bloc is skewed towards Brazil. While Brasília has acknowledged
this, remedies beyond vague allusions to Marshall plan-like aid for Paraguay have
been limited. Even the Mercosur Structural Convergence and Institutional Strengthening Fund (FOCEM) launched speciﬁcally to address intra-bloc asymmetries has
had limited impact. The result is a dysfunctional trade bloc with Brazil and Argentina
pursuing numerous tit-for-tat trade disputes.
Recurring trade disputes between Argentina and Brazil highlight the lack of formal
Mercosur institutional structures with real decision-making and enforcement powers
(Saraiva, 2012). Thus, despite a detailed bloc dispute resolution mechanism,
Argentina and Brazil repeatedly turn to the World Trade Organization (Gonçalves,
2013). Malamud and Dri (2013, p. 234) isolate the problem in their analysis
of Mercosur’s parliament: ‘Parlasur is the ultimate example of the reluctance of
Mercosur national authorities to share sovereignty and delegate power. In spite of the
rhetoric surrounding it, the Executives did not empower an agency that could
challenge their power’. As one Brazilian diplomat observes: ‘The challenge for
Brazil is to accept that formation of a common market in the mold of the Treaty of
Asunción will bring a gradual loss of sovereignty’ (quoted in de Souza, 2009, p. 84).
Even with 51 per cent of respondents wanting a deepened Mercosur (de Souza, 2009,
pp. 81–83), the motivation is economic, ignoring thorny questions of how effective
bloc institutions might restrict Brazilian autonomy.
The sense in Mercosur that Brazil is advancing the promise of empowered
regionalism, but not ceding the necessary authority for effective transnational
200

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Revisiting consensual hegemony

institutionalization, is duplicated in Unasur. As Lampreia (2011) notes of Lula’s
ambitions to expand Cardoso’s infrastructure integration scheme to a full-ﬂedged
South American union, ‘the ambitious Unasur project to promote South American
integration is still in its initial phase and remains much more of an ambition than a
reality’. As Amorim recounts, while Venezuela and Ecuador wanted something like a
union of Mercosur and the Andean Community to form a South American bloc that
might achieve EU-style political union, Lula was taking a measured approach similar
to Chile’s by focusing on continued protection of national autonomy: ‘[the 2007 Rio
de Janeiro Unasur founding meeting] created a secretariat devoid of the powers that
the Bolivarian powers wanted to give it’ (Amorim, 2013, p. 136).

A Realist Underpinning
But if Brazil is not willing to cede real authority to organizations it cannot control
(Daudelin and Burges, 2011), why invest so much diplomatic effort in their
construction? Amorim (2011, p. 406) provides part of the answer: ‘We are trying to
build CELAC [Community of Latin American and Caribbean Nations] precisely to
bring these other countries into our environment’. The idea of pulling other countries
into Brazil’s orbit and wrapping them in consensual hegemony echoes through the
rest of Amorim’s remarks about the need to get attention and expand links. The
subtext is one of control and inﬂuence, exercised quietly and indirectly (Flemes,
2013, p. 1022). While Brazil rarely acts overtly, it does assert its desires in the region
and through regional entities. One example occurred after the Paraguayan Senate’s
politically manipulative June 2012 impeachment of president Fernando Lugo.
Reaction from Mercosur was swift and mirrored by Unasur: Paraguayan political
rights were suspended in both organizations. Although Argentina and Brazil claimed
Mercosur’s decision was unanimous, early reports were that Uruguayan president
Jose Mujica objected and was made to comply. He protested by sitting in the back
row for the photo op with his foreign minister taking his place beside Dilma and
Argentina’s Cristina Kirchner.
Mujica’s concern was that the two larger members of Mercosur were willing to
disregard bloc rules when they proved inconvenient for their own agendas. The issue
here was the Paraguayan Senate’s refusal to approve Venezuela’s entry into
Mercosur, a political and economic priority for Dilma and Kirchner. Indeed, with
bloc economic rights left intact the real sanction on Paraguay was its inability to
stymie Chávez; within weeks Venezuela was a full Mercosur member. This case of
using a regional mechanism to advance Brazilian priorities aligns both with Garcia’s
(2011) comment about the importance of renewed bilateral relations within South
America for advancing Brazil’s leadership and with former Brazilian ambassador to
Argentina José Botafogo Gonçalves’ (2013) complaints that Mercosur’s institutional
substance has been gutted. Despite the existence of bodies like Unasur and Mercosur,
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

201

Burges

Brazil’s demonstrated preference is for bilateral arrangements to deal with regional
issues. As Muggah and Diniz (2013) point out in the context of transnational crime,
Brazil’s active engagement has been through bilateral and trilateral agreements, not
continental structures or the South American Defence Council. The result is an
emerging hub and spoke system centred on Brazil, not the ﬂatter organizational
structure of a pan-regional mechanism, which returns us to the sense that Brazil is only
interested in creating regional mechanisms it can control and (quietly) bend to its will.

The (In)Direct Stick of a Masked Coercive Hegemony
The Paraguay case highlights Brazil’s willingness to act forcefully in South America
to advance its interests. The twist to this coercive policy track is that the presidency
and foreign ministry often carefully retain plausible deniability between their
strategic choices and the imposing actor. A critical element here is the impact
Brazilian companies have on the regional political economy. As Lazzarini (2011)
explains, Brazil’s privatization process was married with state-backed ﬁnancing
instruments to quietly increase, not reduce governmental inﬂuence on Brazilian
ﬁrms. In the international realm this presents in a manner redolent of dependencyinspired foreign policy policies and action.
The power of these linkages was apparent during the 2006 Bolivian postnationalization gas contract renegotiations. While Lula adopted a conciliatory tone
despite a sense Morales had betrayed his trust in an election year, state-controlled
Petrobras put enormous pressure on the Bolivian government. When initial contract
talks stalled, Petrobras examined its accounts receivables and found Bolivian diesel
payments were in arrears, resulting in a threatened cessation of supplies that would
have paralysed the country’s transportation system (EFE, 2006). Additional pressure
came with Brazil’s October 2006 discovery of offshore gas reserves. Threats from
Morales’s team to seize further Petrobras assets elicited direct opprobrium from
Amorim, who suggested Petrobras could leave Bolivia, which would ﬁnancially ruin
the country; Bolivian Energy Minister Andres Soliz resigned shortly thereafter.
Pressure from Brazil was very clear, with Energy Minister Silas Rondeau bluntly
noting: ‘If relationships between our countries … do not improve it will not be Brazil’s
fault, but the attitude of the other side’ (Bianconi, 2006). Sustained waves of economic
pressure and constant shuttle diplomacy of Lula advisors like Marco Aurelio Garcia
and Jose Dirceu had their intended effect. By 2007 Bolivia’s tone had changed, with
Morales noting that Petrobras was needed, Brazil was the regional leader, and that
hearing Lula speak was ‘a great school’ (Neto, 2007). Looking back on events, former
Bolivian president Carlos Mesa Gisbert (2011, p. 30) observed that little had changed
save a shift from a 50–53 per cent to a 60–65 per cent tax regime on gas extraction.
Similar direct pressure was applied on Ecuador in 2008. After failing to resolve
a dispute with Brazilian construction ﬁrm Odebrecht, Ecuadorian president Rafael
202

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Revisiting consensual hegemony

Correa announced he would not repay associated BNDES loans and expelled ranking
company executives. Reaction from Brazil was swift. Amorim quickly pointed out
that Ecuador must pay its debts, adding ‘I don’t want to say anything that might
sound like a threat. No threat is necessary’ (EFE, 2008). The force of this reaction
caught Correa by surprise as his government had assumed separation between the
affairs of a private Brazilian company and the Brazilian State. Rather than reducing
pressure, Brazil increased it, noting that Ecuador’s loan came through the Reciprocal
Credit Convention (CCR), an instrument used to reduce intra-continental currency
exchange costs. Referring to Brazil’s role in South America as a source of
infrastructure ﬁnancing, Amorim collectivized pressure on Ecuador and other
Bolivarian countries thinking of following Correa’s lead, noting: ‘The non-payment
of loans will have an impact on the granting of new loans for all other countries. This
is not a threat. It is a fact’ (Chade, 2008). While actual BNDES lending was not
nearly as large as Brazil suggested (Hochstetler and Montero, 2013), the sums still
mattered and the threat of losing access to an affordable credit source carried weight,
particularly as Venezuelan ﬁnancing in the region declined with the price of oil.
Bolivian economist Gonzalo Chávez offers an explanation of why Brazil
experienced such conﬂicted reactions from countries like Bolivia, Ecuador and
Paraguay: ‘On one hand, companies are eager to win and do not want to lose their
investors’ money. Then there is the Foreign Ministry, which always takes a hard-line
institutional response. Finally, there is the presidential diplomacy of Lula and his
advisors, who use political and ideological lines to communicate with neighbours’
(Charleaux, 2008). Scholars from neighbouring countries point to Lula’s personal
charm and credibility as central to keeping bilateral relations positive despite growing
charges of imperialism created by corporate conduct and diplomatic statements.
(Sant’Anna, 2009; Mesa Gisbert, 2011, p. 40). Although Brazil responded with a
steady stream of statements that it wanted to absorb more regional value-added exports
and was working to provide development assistance and expanded infrastructure
ﬁnancing, the achievements consistently fell short of expectations, keeping questions
about Brazilian imperialism alive (Flynn, 2007; Deo, 2012).
Regional responses to Brazil’s apparent unwillingness to move from consensual to
cooperative hegemony were two-fold. Ideological afﬁnities between Lula and leftist
continental leaders worked in tandem with the economic centrality of Brazil’s market
and capital to keep countries such as Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay and
Venezuela largely onside, albeit with complaint and criticism. Countries along South
America’s Western seaboard retained open and warm feelings towards Brazil, which
remained an important political, trade and investment partner, but increasingly
looked for alternatives to advance their agendas. In partial response Chile, Colombia,
Peru and extra-continental Mexico launched the Paciﬁc Alliance, an explicitly uninstitutionalized regional structure seeking to create positive economic synergies
under market conditions, not the statist approach of Brazil-driven Mercosur and
Unasur. Paraguay and Uruguay appeared to look wistfully to the Paciﬁc Alliance,
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

203

Burges

prevented from joining not just by their geographic separation, but also by Mercosur
treaty clauses that would prevent them signing the trade agreements necessary to join
the Alliance. Although tempting to label this break as ‘balancing’ against Brazil in
terms of the framework Lobell, Jesse and Williams present at the beginning of this
special issue, the almost non-existent security considerations combine with the lack
of Brazilian economic payoffs to suggest that the Paciﬁc Alliance is simply the
construction of a parallel alternative that can coexist with Brazilian leadership
through the concertación mechanisms identiﬁed by Merke (this special issue). The
important shift is that the political and economic costs of Brazilian leadership appear
to have risen beyond the credit balance available through a consensual hegemony.

Conclusion: A Case of South American Ennui
Two conclusions stem from the above analysis, one theoretical and one empirical. On
the theoretical level, the Brazilian case makes clear the limits of consensual
hegemony. A speciﬁc set of circumstances appear necessary for consensual
hegemony: a dynamic leading country full of ideas, but perhaps short on resources;
geographic isolation from the ‘core’ of the North Atlantic; a willingness by major
powers to leave affairs to regional management; and, acceptance by regional
countries of the would-be consensual hegemon’s project. This conﬂation of
characteristics sets the Brazilian case apart from other potentially similar cases such
as South Africa, Nigeria or Indonesia, but does not rule out the possibility that some
of the same consensual hegemony strategies might be employed, albeit with a need
for greater leadership good provision. What is clear is that in the 1990s and early
2000s Brazil capitalized on these circumstances to sell a vision of South America that
had some attraction, but not one so overpowering that it garnered pan-regional
selﬂess dedication to the project. Lula’s accession to power paralleled exhaustion of
consensual hegemony’s easy gains, leading to demands for something with more
fungible returns like Pedersen’s cooperative hegemony. In this sense consensual
hegemony pursuit might be likened to a period of credibility formation for a wouldbe leading state. But, this is a temporary phase. Credibility won eventually wanes if
not matched with concrete leadership goods provision.
This brings us to the implications for Brazilian foreign policy. The suggestion here
is that while the rest of the continent is unlikely to discard active participation and
collaboration with Brazil for the very reasons isolated by Merke (2015, this special
issue), Brazilian leadership and intent is being seriously questioned. The apparent
unwillingness to transit from the low ﬁnancial and political cost consensual hegemony to
something more overt and requiring major ﬁnancial and political investment creates
a signiﬁcant brake on Brazil’s ability to credibly, cooperatively and consensually
consolidate the region as its clear domain. Particularly telling is Brazil’s unwillingness to invest in South America by ceding some measure of sovereignty to regional
204

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Revisiting consensual hegemony

institutions. Of course, this assumes other countries would follow Brazil’s lead. As it
is, the decision to follow bilateral rather than multilateral avenues on such panregional issues as organized crime perpetuates a ﬁxation on national autonomy to
such a degree that others may question Brazil’s reliability as a partner.
The argument is not that Brazil is destined to be isolated and that we should turn to
approaches such as balancing and band-wagonning. Such assumptions of tension and
dissent are not warranted by the remarkably peaceful and non-violent pattern of intracontinental relations. Rather, the proposition is that expectations for regionalism in
South America and the potential of Mercosur and Unasur as EU-style transformative
factors should, as Malamud and Gardini (2012) suggest, be kept in check. This raises
the interesting question of where the region ﬁts in Brazil’s plans and, equally
interesting, to what extent the stronger emerging economies of the region loosely
collected in the Paciﬁc Alliance will continue to subscribe to the consensual
hegemony that anchored Brazil’s South American ascent.

Acknowledgements
Research for the paper was supported by Australian Research Council Discovery
Early Career Research Award grant number DE120100401. The author thanks
Zuleika Arashiro, Tracy Fenwick, Daniel Flemes, Monica Herz, Andrew Hurrell and
the participants of the PUC-Rio/GIGA Rising Powers and Contested Orders in the
Multipolar System conference for their critical feedback on earlier versions of this
article. Any errors and omissions, of course, remain the fault of the author.

About the Author
Sean W. Burges is based at the Australian National University where he is Lecturer in
International Relations with the School of Politics and International Relations and
Deputy Director with the Australian National Centre for Latin American Studies.
He is author of Brazilian Foreign Policy After the Cold War (Florida, 2009), and has
published recently on Brazilian foreign policy and development assistance in
journals such as International Affairs, Global Society, Política Externa, Austral, the
Journal of Iberian and Latin American Research, and Development Policy Review.
Burges is also a non-resident Senior Fellow of the Washington DC-based Council on
Hemispheric Affairs.

References
Alden, C. and Schoeman, M. (this special issue) South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa.
International Politics, (this special issue).
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

205

Burges

Amorim, C. (2011) Conversas Com Jovens Diplomatas. São Paulo, Brazil: Benvirá.
Amorim, C. (2013) Breves Narrativas Diplomáticas. São Paulo, Brazil: Benvirá.
Arrighi, G. (1993) The three hegemonies of historical capitalism. In: S. Gill (ed.) Gramsci, Historical
Materialism, and International Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 148–185.
Bianconi, C. (2006) Bolivia freezes plan to take Petrobras assets. Reuters 14 September.
Burges, S.W. (2008) Consensual hegemony: Theorizing Brazilian foreign policy after the cold war.
International Relations 22(1): 65–84.
Burges, S.W. (2009) Brazilian Foreign Policy after the Cold War. Gainesville, FL: University Press of
Florida.
Cardoso, F.H. and Lafer, C. (2007) Author interview. São Paulo 30 August.
Chade, J. (2008) Brasil pode suspender crédito a vizinhos. O Estado de São Paulo 3 December.
Charleaux, J.P. (2008) ‘Imperialismo’ brasileiro perocupa região. O Estado de São Paulo 23 October.
Cox, R.W. (1987) Production, Power and World Order: Social Forces in the Making of Modern History.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Da Silva, L.I. (2003) Palavras no encontro com estudantes brasileiros. Havana, 27 September, http://www
.biblioteca.presidencia.gov.br/ex-presidentes/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva/discursos/1o-mandato/pdfs-2003/
2o-semestre/27-09-2003-palavras-do-presidente-da-republica-luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva-no-encontro-comestudantes-brasileiros/download, accessed 14 October 2013.
Daudelin, J. and Burges, S. (2011) Moving in, carving out, proliferating: The many faces of Brazil’s
multilateralism since 1989. Pensamiento Próprio 16(33): 35–64.
Deo, A. (2012) Apontamentos sobre o imperialism Brasileiro nos governos Lula e FHC. Novos Rumos,
Marília 49(1): 127–138.
de Souza, A. (2009) A Agenda Internacional do Brasil: A Política Externa Brasileira de FHC a Lula. Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil: Elsevier/CEBRI.
Destradi, S. (2010) Regional powers and their strategies: Empire, hegemony, and leadership. Review of
International Studies 36(4): 903–930.
EFE (2006) Bolívia estuda punir Petrobrás por falta de diesel no país. O Estado de São Paulo 6 June.
EFE (2008) Brazil warns Ecuador of possible trade cut off. EFE News Service. 15 October.
El Comercio (2005a) Brasil no descuida sus intereses en Ecuador. 17 August.
El Comercio (2005b) Ecuador es clave en el projecto de Brasil. 18 August.
Ferreyros, C.R. (2006) Alan García declara el Perú país abierto a las inversions brasileñas. El Comercio
Peru, 14 June.
Flemes, D. (2013) Network powers: Strategies of change in the multipolar system. Third World Quarterly
34(6): 1016–1036.
Flemes, D. and Wehner, L. (2013) Reacciones estratégicas en Sudamérica ante el ascenso de Brasil.
Foreign Affairs Latinoamérica 13(4): 107–114.
Flemes, D. and Wehner, L. (this special issue) Drivers of strategic contestation in South America.
International Politics, (this special issue).
Flynn, M. (2007) Between subimperialism and globalization: A case study in the internationalization of
Brazilian capital. Latin American Perspectives 34(9): 9–27.
Garcia, M.A. (2011) Respostas da Política Externa Brasileira às Incertezas do Mundo Atual. Interesse
Nacional 4(13): 3–9.
Gonçalves, J.B. (2013) Vamos renegociar o Mercosul? Política Externa 22(2).
Gramsci, A. (1957) The Modern Prince and Other Writings, Translated by L. Marks. New York:
International Publishers.
Hochstetler, K. and Montero, A.P. (2013) The renewed developmental state: The national development
bank and the Brazil model. The Journal of Development Studies 49(11): 1484–1499.
Kindleberger, C. (1989) The World in Depression 1929–1939. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Lampreia, L.F. (2011) Agenda para a Política Externa do Governo Dilma. Interesse Nacional 4(13):
10–16.
206

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

Revisiting consensual hegemony

Lazzarini, S.G. (2011) Capitalismo de Laços: Os donos do Brasil e suas conexões. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil:
Elsevier.
Lobell, S.W., Neal, J.G. and Williams, K.P. (this special issue) Why do secondary states choose to support,
follow, or challenge? International Politics, (this special issue).
Malamud, A. (2011) A leader without followers? The growing divergence between the regional and global
performance of Brazilian foreign policy. Latin American Politics and Society 53(3): 1–24.
Malamud, A. and Dri, C. (2013) Spillover effects and supranational parliaments: The case of Mercosur.
Journal of Iberian and Latin American Research 19(2): 224–238.
Malamud, A. and Gardini, G.L. (2012) Has regionalism peaked? The Latin American quagmire and its
lessons. The International Spectator: Italian Journal of International Affairs 47(1): 116–133.
Merke, F. (this special issue) Neither balance nor bandwaggon: South America meets Brazil’s rising
power. International Politics, (this special issue).
Mesa Gisbert, C.D. (2011) Bolívia e Brasil: os meandros do caminho. Política Externa 20(2): 23–42.
Muggah, R. and Diniz, G. (2013) Securing the border: Brazil‘s ‘South America First’ Approach to
Transnational Organized Crime. Igarapé Institute Strategic Paper no. 5.
Neto, J.C. (2007) Evo Morales diz que Bolívia precisa de Petrobras. Valor Econômico 18 December.
Pedersen, T. (2002) Co-operative hegemony: Power, ideas and institutions in regional integration. Review
of International Studies 28(4): 677–696.
Sant’Anna, L. (2009) Nacionalismo de esquerda regional explora ‘imperialismo’ do Brasil. O Estado de
São Paulo 17 May.
Saraiva, M.G. (2012) Procesos de integración de América del Sur y el papel de Brasil: los casos del
Mercosur y la Unasur. Revista CIDOB d’afers internacionals (97–98): 87–100.
Shaw, T. (this special issue) African agency? Africa, South Africa and the BRICS. International Politics,
(this special issue).
Trevisan, C. (2005) ‘Império brasileiro’ emerge na Bolívia. Folha de São Paulo 22 May.
Valenzuela, R.G. (2011) Chile e a liderança sul-americana do Brasil: que estratégia preferem suas elites?
Política Externa 20(2): 57–72.
Vigevani, T. and Cepaluni, G. (2009) Brazilian Foreign Policy in Changing Times: The Quest for
Autonomy from Sarney to Lula. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 193–207

207

Original Article

Contested regional orders and institutional
balancing in the Asia Paciﬁc
Kai He
Department of Political Science, The University of Copenhagen, DK-1353 Copenhagen K, Denmark.
E-mail: hekai@yahoo.com

Abstract The rise of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) is
gradually transforming the international system from a unipolar world toward multipolarity. China’s ascent not only challenges US domination, but also intensiﬁes the institutionalization of security in the Asia Paciﬁc. On the basis of institutional balancing
theory, I argue that (i) China’s rise has led to a competition among different regional
orders, that is, the US-led bilateralism versus ASEAN-centered and China-supported
multilateralism. However, conﬂicts or wars are not inevitable since the contested regional
orders can coexist in the Asia Paciﬁc. (ii) The deepening economic interdependence has
encouraged regional powers, including the United States, China and ASEAN, to rely on
different institutional balancing strategies to pursue security after the Cold War.
International Politics (2015) 52, 208–222. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.46;
published online 12 December 2014
Keywords: ASEAN; BRICS; China; US hegemony; institutional balancing

Introduction
The rise of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) has caused a
gradual transformation of the international system from a unipolar world toward
multipolarity in international politics. China’s ascent not only challenges US
domination, but also intensiﬁes the institutionalization of security in the Asia Paciﬁc.
The proliferation of multilateral institutions has become a stunning feature of
international relations (IR) in the region after the Cold War. Challenging the
pessimistic and static views of mainstream IR theories in examining China’s rise, I
argue that mere structural imperatives of power transition cannot determine the fate
of China’s rise. Instead, we need to consider the interactions between structural
constraints and the agent’s policy choices.
On the basis of institutional balancing theory, I argue that (i) China’s rise has
intensiﬁed a competition among different regional orders, that is, the US-led bilateralism
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Contested regional orders and institutional balancing

versus ASEAN-centered and China-supported multilateralism. Wars or conﬂicts are not
inevitable since the contested regional orders can coexist in the Asia Paciﬁc. (ii) The
deepening economic interdependence has encouraged regional powers, including the
United States, China and ASEAN states, to rely on different institutional balancing
strategies to pursue security after the Cold War. The institutionalization of regional
security in the Asia Paciﬁc in turn creates a condition for the peaceful coexistence of
regional orders, which can mollify the negative impact of China’s rise.
This article has three parts. First, I brieﬂy discuss the ‘structural bias’ of the three
mainstream IR theories, realism, liberalism and constructivism, in examining the
implications of China’s rise for regional security. Second, I explore how major
states have engaged in different institutional balancing strategies, including
inclusive institutional balancing, exclusive institutional balancing and interinstitutional balancing, to pursue security and inﬂuence in the Asia Paciﬁc. In
conclusion, I argue that deepening economic interdependence and globalization
have changed the nature of power transformation in the system. Institutional
balancing will contribute to a relatively peaceful environment for states to compete
without war and conﬂict in the Asia Paciﬁc.

The Structural Bias on China’s Rise
The rise of China has ignited a great debate among IR scholars. For most realists of
different stripes, China’s rise and its challenge to the existing international system is
a worrisome trend in world politics. Power transition realists and offensive realists
share a similar view on an unavoidable conﬂict between a rising power and the
existing hegemon, although they disagree on which one, China or the United States,
will initiate a war (for example, Organski, 1958; Mearsheimer, 2010). Defensive
realists are also deeply concerned that the worsening security dilemma driven by
China’s rise may drag China and the United States into an unnecessary conﬂict,
although some scholars temporarily downgrade China’s military capabilities as well
as the associated threats toward the United States (Christensen, 2001).
Most liberals hold a relatively optimistic view on China’s rise because they believe
that China has beneﬁted greatly from liberal institutions since its economic reform in
1979 (Ikenberry, 2008). Therefore, although China may challenge US leadership and
hegemony in world politics, it will not overthrow the liberal economic and political
order, which has become an embedded spirit of the West. According to institutional
liberalism, an institution can survive by itself even after hegemony. Therefore,
China’s rise may lead to a decline of US hegemony, but not the demise of the West.
In other words, China will still be constrained by the Western liberal system even
after it reaches the top of the international hierarchy.
Constructivists are normally uncertain about the outcome of China’s rise since
they do not know ‘what China will want’ (Legro, 2007). Constructivists emphasize
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

209

He

the persuasive power of identities and norms in inﬂuencing political leaders’ ideas,
and in turn, constituting states’ behavior. If Chinese leaders hold a reformist and
status quo ideology, China will not challenge the existing system. However, if
Chinese leaders are revisionists and revolutionary in nature, China’s rise will lead to
conﬂicts and even wars in the system. Some constructivists, such as Johnston,
optimistically suggest that Chinese policymakers have been socialized or are in the
process of socialization by cooperative security norms in the system through
‘mimicking, social inﬂuence and persuasion’ mechanisms in multilateral institutions
(Johnston, 2008).

Two types of structural bias
Although these three schools of thought are theoretically insightful and empirically
relevant, they suffer two types of ‘structural bias’. First, they hold a singular and
static view of international order. When realists suggest that China’s rise will
challenge the international system and the existing order, they assume that there is
only one static order in the system. When liberals argue that China is a beneﬁciary of
the existing liberal order, they also assume one Western liberal system in the world.
For constructivists, they assume that some universal norms in one ideational system,
such as cooperative security, may shape and constitute Chinese leaders’ ideas in
particular and China’s foreign policy behavior in general.
Yet, ‘order’ is a contested concept in IR. Order can be just descriptive in nature in
that scholars treat ‘order’ as a synonym of ‘system’. Rosenau (1992, p. 11) suggests that
an analytic concept of order, or an ‘empirical order’ can ‘be located on a continuum
which differentiates between those founded on cooperation and cohesion at one extreme
and those sustained by conﬂict and disarray – i.e., disorder – at the other’. On the other
hand, scholars can claim normative meanings to ‘order’, that is, a desirable outcome of
states’ interactions. Bull (1977, pp. 3–4) deﬁned order as ‘a pattern that leads to a
particular result, an arrangement of social life such that it promotes certain goals or
values’. Similarly, Alagappa (2003, p. 39) conceptualizes order as ‘a formal or informal
arrangement that sustains rule-governed interaction among sovereign states in their
pursuit of individual and collection goals’. Seemingly, realists normally treat order more
as a fact, while liberals and constructivists view order more as a rule or a value.
However, as mentioned before, all of these three schools of thought, to a certain extent,
hold a singular and static conceptualization of order. In fact, there could be more than
one order in both international and regional systems.
For example, although the Cold War featured a bipolar international system, there
were at least two hierarchic orders in both Western and Eastern camps (Wendt and
Friedheim, 1995). In addition, based on the different natures of states’ interactions,
there are economic, political and security orders in both international and regional
systems. Last, but not least, in one region different international and regional orders
210

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Contested regional orders and institutional balancing

may coexist. As Ross (1999) suggests, although the post-Cold War world is featured
by US unipolarity, there is also a bipolar structure or order in East Asia between a
maritime power group led by the United States and a continental power cluster
centered on China.
The English school offers a pluralist view of international society, thus, there is
more than one type of international order in the global international society (Hurrell,
2007). For example, Merke (this special issue) suggests that ‘South African regional
society goes beyond power politics’ with a special practice of Concentración (also see
Burges, 2015). In the same vein, South Africa’s ‘symbolic hegemony’ in Africa is also
unique in world politics (Alden and Schoeman, 2015). Therefore, we should not hold a
singular view of regional order. In China’s case, China’s rise may challenge one type of
regional order, for example, the US-dominated bilateral security arrangement, but it
does not necessarily mean that China will threaten other regional orders at the same
time. In other words, the singular view of international and regional order in fact
exaggerates the negative impact of China’s rise to the region.
The second ‘structural bias’ lies in an overemphasis of structural constraints of the
international system on state behavior while downplaying the role of agents in
shaping the political outcome in international politics. Realists identify China as a
disturbing or revisionist factor for the existing structure. Liberals emphasize the role
of liberal institutions at the structural level in constraining China’s behavior.
Constructivists discuss how universal norms in the ideational structure can educate
Chinese leaders and socialize China’s foreign policy behavior, but they are uncertain
as to whether it can be successful or not.
It is true that a rising power will normally challenge the stability or equilibrium of
the power distribution in the system. It is also true that institutions and norms at the
structural level are indeed important in either constraining or constituting state
behavior. However, merely emphasizing the role of the structure, either material or
ideational, ignores the role of agency in shaping the ﬁnal outcome of the interaction
between the structure and the agent. As Acharya (2004) points out, even relatively
weak powers, such as Southeast Asian countries, have the capability or option to
localize universal norms in order to make them suitable for the regional reality rather
than unconditionally accepting norms from the structural level. Therefore, overlooking the role of agents in shaping the structure makes any prediction of China’s
rise arbitrary and deterministic in nature.
Historically, we have witnessed how the rising of Japan and Germany ended with
military conﬂicts during World War II. However, there are also exceptions. The
United States did not wage large-scale wars with Great Britain in the nineteenth
century, although its territorial expansion resulted in military conﬂicts with Mexico
and Spain. Prussia-Germany under Bismarck became the most powerful and
inﬂuential state in Europe without interventions by either Russia or Great Britain in
the mid-nineteenth century. Although geographical and structural factors contributed
to the relatively peaceful rise of the United States and Prussia, there is no denying
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

211

He

that their strategies, that is, the agency in the system, played an important role in
alleviating antagonisms from other countries in the nineteenth century. In explaining
Prussia’s relatively peaceful rise, Kennedy (1987, p. 189) points out that, ‘the ﬂank
powers’ [Russia and Great Britain] likelihood of intervening in the affairs of WestCentral Europe would depend heavily on what Germany itself did; there was
certainly no need to become involved if it would be assumed that the second German
Reich was now a satiated power’. Therefore, for China structural constraints are not
the only factor determining the fate of China’s rise. Instead, the Chinese and other
agents’ policy choices can also shape the ﬁnal outcome of China’s rise.

Institutional Balancing – Competition without War
Military means or traditional hard balancing is still a major balancing strategy for
states under anarchy, as we can see from the nuclear contestation between Pakistan
and India in South Asia (see Blarel and Ebert, 2015; for different state strategies,
see Lobell et al, 2015). However, I argue that the deepening economic interdependence has increased the cost for states to rely on traditional military means, such as
military alliances, in pursuing security under anarchy. Therefore states have learned
to use multilateral institutions to constrain and undermine their rivals’ power and
inﬂuences (for similar arguments, see Flemes and Wehner, 2015). In this article,
I apply institutional balancing theory to examine how China, the United States and
ASEAN employ different types of institutional balancing strategies to compete
for power and security in the Asia Paciﬁc after the Cold War (He, 2009). The
institutionalization of regional security driven by states’ institutional balancing
strategies will lead to ﬁerce competition among states through institutions, but with
a low level of violence and war.
Economic interdependence – Too costly to ignore
The deepening economic interdependence is one of the most notable features in
world politics after the Cold War. The burgeoning trade volumes among nations
and growing investments across regions have interconnected different countries
closer than ever. For example, one study of the Asian Development Bank shows
that the trade versus GDP ratio in Asia, one of the common indicators of economic
interdependence, is 62.9 per cent, which is very close to that of the European
Union at 64.3 per cent. In addition, more than half of the total trade in Asia is
conducted among Asian countries within the region (Asian Development Bank,
2008, p. 12). In the Asia Paciﬁc the export-oriented economic model not only
created the ‘four tigers’ in the 1970s–1990s, but also brought about China’s rise
until today. US information-centered technology, Japan’s abundant capital,
212

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Contested regional orders and institutional balancing

China’s workforce as well as the Asia-based market, all contribute to the economic
boom of the Asian miracle in the 1990s.
As the Asian Development Bank (2008, p. 10) report states, ‘Asia’s economies are
increasingly connected through trade, ﬁnancial transactions, direct investment, technology, labor, and tourist ﬂows, and other economic relations … Asian economies … in
some respects, are as closely intertwined as Europe’s single market’. The deepening
economic interdependence was more evident than ever after we witnessed how one
country’s ﬁnancial turmoil led to a region-wide economic meltdown during the 1997–
1998 Southeast Asian ﬁnancial crisis. Although economic interdependence is by no
means symmetric in nature, all states realize the mounting economic costs associated
with potential military conﬂicts and antagonisms among nations.
One positive impact of economic interdependence is that it encourages political
leaders to consider non-violent means to compete with one another. Competing for
power, security and prestige is still the major game in town for states under anarchy.
However, the growing economic costs of traditional balancing strategies, such as the
formation of alliances and arms races, in the context of globalization and economic
interdependence, lead states to pursue a relatively low-cost means of competing.
Institutional balancing is one new balancing strategy that states can use to realize
their realist goals in the international system.
Institutional balancing means relying on multilateral institutions to constrain and
undermine a rival’s power and inﬂuence (He, 2009). The essence of balancing is to
change the relative power between a state and its rival. Traditional balancing
emphasizes how to increase a state’s own power, either through internal balancing –
arms races or external efforts – alliances. Institutional balancing is one type of soft
balancing or negative balancing in that it focuses on how to undermine or constrain a
rival’s power in order to change the power equilibrium to a state’s own favor
(He, 2012). I suggest that deepening economic interdependence creates a strategic
condition in which states are more likely to choose a relatively low-cost, institutional
balancing strategy to pursue security under anarchy. There are three types of
institutional balancing that the United States, China and ASEAN states have applied
to constrain and undermine each other’s power since the end of the Cold War.

Inclusive institutional balancing
The ﬁrst type of institutional balancing is an inclusive institutional balancing
strategy, that is, a state can include the target state within a multilateral institution.
Relying on rule-making and agenda-setting techniques, the state can constrain the
target state’s behavior and undermine the power and inﬂuence of the target state.
In the Asia Paciﬁc, the ASEAN states have employed this inclusive institutional
balancing strategy to constrain and undermine China’s behavior through various
multilateral institutions, such as the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), the ASEAN
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

213

He

Plus Three (APT) and the East Asian Summit (EAS). The ARF, established in 1994,
is an outgrowth of the annual ministerial-level meeting between ASEAN and its
dialogue partners. As the only security-oriented dialogue forum in the region
including all great powers, ARF plays a vital role in building conﬁdence and
alleviating uncertainty among states in the post-Cold War era. However, one of the
key reasons for the ARF to include China, a potential threat to the region, is to use the
rules and norms of the institution to constrain China’s behavior.
For example, at the ﬁrst ARF meeting in 1994 China refused to discuss the
sovereignty disputes over the South China Sea within a multilateral format, although it
reiterated China’s peaceful intentions in settling the disputes (Tasker, 1992, p. 9).
However, after the 1995 Mischief Reef incident the ASEAN states consolidated their
common policy on the South China Sea by issuing a strong joint statement against
China. China was later forced to agree to discuss the disputes on the basis of recognized
principles of international law, including the 1982 Law of the Sea. Later during the
ARF and China–ASEAN dialogs China modiﬁed its assertive behavior in the South
China Sea disputes and engaged instead in setting up a code of conduct and joint
development with the ASEAN states. In 2002, China and ASEAN signed a Declaration
of Conduct (DOC) in the South China Sea, in which both sides promised to ‘resolve
their territorial and jurisdictional disputes by peaceful means’, and ‘exercise selfrestraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate or escalate disputes’
(ASEAN, 2002). In 2003, China signed the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation to further
alleviate ASEAN’s suspicions over the South China Sea disputes.
This analysis is not to argue that ASEAN’s inclusive institutional balancing will
change China’s foreign policy behavior, especially on the South China Sea issue.
However, the ARF setting, especially the dialogue agendas on conﬁdence building
and preventative diplomacy, has successfully softened China’s behavior in the South
China Sea since 1995. Although China is still unwilling to resort to legalistic means,
such as the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, or the International Court of
Justice, to resolve relevant disputes, it has modiﬁed its bilateralism-based negotiation
principle and participated in discussions of the South China Sea disputes within the
ASEAN setting. It should be noted that the 2002 DOC is signed between China and
all 10 ASEAN members, not just between China and the 4 claimants of ASEAN
members (Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei) in the South China Sea
disputes. Obviously, it was ASEAN’s intention as a group to use its institutional
weight to collectively press China on South China Sea disputes.
One puzzling issue other scholars may ask is why China is willing to be
constrained by the rules and institutions formulated by ASEAN. From China’s
perspective ASEAN’s institutional balancing is deﬁnitely not desirable, but it is the
best among the worst. Despite the fact that joining ASEAN-based institutions,
especially the ARF, will limit the freedom of action of China, especially in the South
China Sea dispute, the potential beneﬁt still outweighs the cost. First, China can
break the diplomatic isolation imposed by the West after the Tiananmen Incident in
214

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Contested regional orders and institutional balancing

1989 through participating in ASEAN-oriented multilateral institutions. Second,
through discussions and interactions in multilateral institutions China can alleviate
regional suspicions over its military and economic ascent, especially from regional
powers (Foot, 1998).
In addition, China adopted an ASEAN-ﬁrst diplomacy in the ARF in order to
undermine US domination and inﬂuence in the region. From the beginning of the
ARF, China stood on the side of ASEAN and ﬁrmly supported ASEAN to be in the
‘driver’s seat’ in regional multilateral architectures. China’s backing of ASEAN’s
centrality in regionalism is by no means altruistic. Instead, China intended to use
ASEAN-dominated regionalism to tame US inﬂuence in the region. Compared with
legalistic institutional building and binding arrangements promoted by the United
States and other Western countries, China is more comfortable with ASEAN’s
loosely organized regionalism. In addition, ASEAN’s multilateral diplomacy and
institutional building effects provide a perfect political tool for China to challenge the
dominant role of US alliance-based bilateralism in the Asia Paciﬁc.
Since 2010, China’s assertiveness in the South China Sea has rekindled regional
concerns over the implication of China’s rise as well as the effectiveness of ASEAN’s
institutional balancing strategy. Although China was involved in a series of diplomatic
standoffs with Vietnam and the Philippines over the South China Sea, ASEAN failed to
issue a joint statement at the 2012 ASEAN Ministerial Meeting because of intraASEAN divisions on the South China Sea disputes. This failure is the ﬁrst time in
ASEAN’s 45-year history. It is reported that China’s diplomatic efforts behind the
scenes directly led to divisions among the ASEAN states (Sutter and Huang, 2013).
It is still too early to evaluate the success or the failure of ASEAN’s institutional
balancing strategy toward China in the South China Sea disputes. Although China’s
behavior is certainly more assertive than before, other countries’ provocations should not
be ignored (Johnston, 2013). In 2013, Wang Yi, China’s new Foreign Minister, stated
that China is willing to negotiate a legally binding Code of Conduct (COC) with ASEAN
to alleviate the tensions in the South China Sea. However, he also warned that any
provocation from other claimants will face serious consequences from China’s retaliation
(Xinhua News, 2013). It is clear that China sincerely cares about the diplomatic pressures
from ASEAN’s institutional balancing since China does not want to be perceived as the
‘trouble maker’ in the South China Sea disputes. However, China does not intend to be
the only party constrained by the COC rules. How to use institutions to constrain both
China and other claimants’ behavior in the South China Sea is a serious challenge for
ASEAN’s institutional balancing strategy in the next decade or so.

Exclusive institutional balancing
Besides inclusive institutional balancing, states can also employ exclusive
institutional balancing to alienate the target state from an institution and rely on
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

215

He

the cohesion of the institution to impose pressures on the target state. Both
ASEAN and China, indeed, adopted this exclusive institutional balancing against
US pressure and threats in the post-Cold War era. The 1997–1998 economic crisis
taught Asian countries two lessons. First, the deepening economic interdependence in the region has intertwined economies of Asian countries together. One
country’s economic problem can easily spill over to others. Second, the United
States’ lukewarm attitude during the crisis met a region-wide resentment regarding
US hegemony.
Differing from its active actions in rescuing Mexico from the 1994 economic
crisis, the United States appeared indifferent toward Asian countries’ sufferings
during the crises. Not only did the United States insist on imposing conditions on the
ﬁnancial packages from the World Bank and the IMF, the former also rejected
Japan’s proposal of establishing an Asian Monetary Fund, seen as Asia’s self-help
effort addressing the ﬁnancial turmoil (Webber, 2001; Stubbs, 2002).
Therefore, regional resentment toward US arrogance and indifference directly led
to the establishment of the APT in 1998 (Bowles, 2002). The APT originally aimed
at promoting regional economic cooperation and coordination between Southeast
Asian countries and three East Asian states, China, Japan and South Korea. Later, the
APT gradually becomes one of the major architectures of Asian regionalism. Since
the United States is excluded from the APT, the APT is an exclusive institutional
balancing strategy for Asian countries, especially China and ASEAN, in undermining US inﬂuence in the region.
For China, the APT provides an institutional setting to play a more active and
decisive role in leading Asian regionalism. In the 2001 APT summit, Premier Zhu
Rongji suggested, ‘efforts should be made to gradually carry out dialogue and
cooperation in the political and security ﬁelds’ (Zhu, 2001). According to Zhang
Yunling, Chinese authorities have the following ambitious objectives for APT:
a concerted voice in international affairs; a regional parliamentary committee;
defense ministers’ meeting and East Asian security cooperation council; and joint
action on cross-border issues (cited by Cheng, 2001, p. 432). It is clear that China
intends to upgrade the APT to a comprehensive multilateral institution in Asia that
pointedly excludes the United States and other Western countries.
Besides the APT, China also initiated the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) as another exclusive institutional balancing tool to cope with US pressure in
the region. The SCO is originally a military conﬁdence-building mechanism through
which China and its Central Asian neighbors may reduce troops in the border
regions. Since 2003, China has started to inject economic cooperation into the SCO
agenda in order to transform the SCO into a comprehensive multilateral organization.
Although the SCO claims that it does not target any third party, the exclusion makes
the United States uncomfortable. Especially, after the Afghanistan invasion, both
Russia and China were urging some SCO countries to close US bases. Moreover,
Iran, Mongolia, India and Pakistan all showed interest recently in joining in the SCO.
216

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Contested regional orders and institutional balancing

As an Indian diplomat points out, sooner or later, the SCO will frustrate the US
global strategy and become a nightmare to NATO (Bhadrakumar, 2006).
It is still hard to evaluate the effectiveness of China’s exclusive balancing strategy
through the APT and the SCO because of the power struggle and internal politics
within these institutions. For example, although China proposed to deepen regional
cooperation under the APT framework, some ASEAN states, such as Singapore and
Indonesia, and Japan were worried about China’s domination in the APT as well as
alienation of the United States from the region. Therefore, Japan and some ASEAN
states strongly resisted China’s ‘deepening’ plan for the APT. Instead, they proposed
further ‘expansion’ of the APT. In 2005, an enlarged version of the APT, ‘EAS’, was
established after admitting three new members, India, Australia and New Zealand.
Although the APT and EAS coexist, China’s inﬂuence in the EAS is apparently
diluted by the new members in the EAS.
Similar internal politics also occurred inside the SCO though the institutional
competition is mainly between China and Russia. As one Russia specialist points out,
the relationship between Russia and China is just an ‘axis of convenience’, in which
both countries harbor deep security suspicions toward one another (Lo, 2009). In the
eyes of Russian leaders, the SCO is China’s diplomatic tool to penetrate Russia’s
sphere of inﬂuence in Central Asia. In the eyes of Chinese leaders, Russia’s
domination of the SCO is the last thing China wants to see. Therefore, there are
some potential tensions between the two nations on the future direction of the SCO.
For example, Russia supported further enlargement of the SCO, such as to admit
India and Pakistan, so that China’s attention can be dragged away from Central Asia.
China, on the other hand, preferred a limited and exclusive setting of the organization
so that China can promote its economic and military cooperation agendas in the SCO
(Chung, 2004). Although the SCO has not expanded to admit any new members
since 2001, the potential competition between Russia and China may inﬂuence the
future cohesion and development of the SCO.

Inter-institutional balancing
The third type of institutional balancing is inter-institutional balancing. It suggests
that states can use one institution to challenge the relevance and the role of another
institution. In other words, one state can support institution A as a means to
undermine the inﬂuence of institution B if institution B does not ﬁt its security or
economic interests.
In the Asia Paciﬁc the proliferation of multilateral institutions has created
overlapping and mingling institutional architectures in both security and economic
arenas (Lee, 2012). For example, the APT members are also the founding members
of the current EAS, which admitted Russia and the United States as two new
members in 2011. Besides, there is an institution called ASEAN Plus Six, an interim
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

217

He

organization between the APT and the EAS, in which the ‘Six’ refers to the three
original East Asian countries, China, Japan and Korea, and the three 2005 members,
India, Australia and New Zealand. Both China and some ASEAN countries
supported the APT framework because the APT can provide them more inﬂuence
and voices in regional affairs. However, for the external powers, such as the United
States, Australia and India, they prefer the EAS because they can potentially play a
more important role in a broad setting of the institution. The inter-institutional
balancing between the APT and the EAS will be one of the major features of Asian
regionalism in the future.
For economic cooperation there is a ‘spaghetti bowl’ of free trade agreements
among states in the Asia Paciﬁc (Bhagwati, 2006). For example, ASEAN signed a
free trade agreement with China in 2002 and some ASEAN countries have also
signed or are in the process of negotiating bilateral free trade agreements with the
United States. Since 2009, the United States has started to promote the Trans-Paciﬁc
Partnership (TPP) in the region which includes some ASEAN states, such as
Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei and Vietnam. China and other developing economies
cannot join the TPP because of its more selective high standards on economic
liberalization for its members. For example, it includes provisions to ‘protect labor
rights and environmental standards, reform state-owned enterprises, and strictly
protect intellectual property, and boldly eliminates tariffs’ (Hiebert and Hanlon,
2012). Therefore, it is argued that the TPP is more suitable for developed economies
instead of developing nations.
In order to balance the economic pressure from the United States and the TPP,
ASEAN launched an ASEAN-centered institution to promote trade liberalization and
economic cooperation in 2012. The formation of the Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership (RCEP) is based on the ‘ASEAN plus Six’ framework, which
includes the original members of the EAS but not the United States. As the RCEP
does not include the United States, it is clearly a counterbalancing measure against
the US-led TPP. Once the RCEP was announced in August 2012, China registered its
strong support (Das, 2013). It is foreseeable that the competition between the RCEP
and TPP will intensify in the near future if both China and the United States pour
their diplomatic and strategic energies into these institutions. For middle and small
powers, such as the ASEAN states, the inter-institutional competition between the
RCEP and TPP may create more opportunities than challenges since they can take
advantages of the competition to grab the most economic interests they otherwise
cannot get from both the United States and China.
In the military- and security-related sphere, there are also some overlapping
institutions between the track-one and track-two institutions. For example, the ARF
parallels the Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia-Paciﬁc (CSCAP) in that
the CSCAP serves as a track-two institution for the ARF. The reason for calling
CSCAP a track-two institution is the fact that the participants of CSCAP are mainly
from academia or think tanks. Some ofﬁcials or former diplomats can also attend the
218

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Contested regional orders and institutional balancing

conference but in their private capacities. The purpose of the CSCAP is to provide a
parallel and informal environment for scholars and practitioners to discuss more
sensitive issues on regional security. However, the effectiveness of the track-two
institutions has been in debate (Simon, 2002; Capie, 2010).
Besides the ARF and CSCAP pair, in 2002 the Shangri-La Dialogue (SLD)
organized by the Institute of International Strategic Studies entered the interinstitutional balancing game in regional security. The SLC invited defense ministers
and military representatives from the Asia-Paciﬁc countries to engage in discussions
on regional security and defense issues in Singapore. Differing from the ARF and
CSCAP, which are mainly run by ofﬁcials from the Foreign Ministries, the SLD was
dominated by defense and military ofﬁcials (Capie and Taylor, 2010). On the one
hand, the SLD seems a healthy complement of the ARF in that it focuses on more
compelling issues in regional security. On the other hand, the establishment of the
SLD is also rooted in the frustration of the West regarding the talk-shop feature of the
ARF in addressing regional security. Therefore, the inter-institutional competition
between the ARF and the SLD is manifested as a balancing game between ASEAN
and China on the one side and the United States and other Western powers on the
other. To further fuel the competition and regain its dominance in regional security,
ASEAN initiated a defense-oriented institution – ASEAN Defense Ministers Meeting-Plus (ADMMP) – in 2010, which provides another forum for defense ofﬁcials in
the Asia Paciﬁc to exchange views on regional security. It is clear that ASEAN,
especially Indonesia, intends to build a new framework for security consultation and
cooperation in the Asia Paciﬁc around ASEAN. It will be interesting to observe
whether the ADMMP will steal the thunder of the SLD in the inter-institutional
balancing dynamics in the Asia Paciﬁc.

Conclusion
The rise of the BRICS has gradually transformed the international system from
unipolarity to a multipolar world. Although China’s rise may challenge the dominant
role of US military alliances in regional security, it is not destined to overthrow the
existing security order. Instead, China’s support for ASEAN-oriented multilateralism
signiﬁes a possible coexistence of different regional orders, such as bilateralism and
multilateralism, in the Asia Paciﬁc.
Through examining how China, ASEAN and the United States engage in different
types of institutional balancing in the Asia Paciﬁc, I argue that deepening economic
interdependence has changed the way states compete under anarchy. Instead of solely
relying on military means, states are more likely to use institutions to pursue their
realist interests under anarchy. It is not to suggest that wars and conﬂicts are obsolete
in world politics. Depending on how states perceive their threats as well as how they
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

219

He

calculate the cost and beneﬁt associated with military actions, they may still go to war
with one another.
If China continues on its institutional way to pursue security and if other countries
sustain their institutional response to China’s challenge, the rise of China and the
transformation of the regional system may be more peaceful than widely perceived.
There is no denying that there will be intense struggles and competitions inside and
between institutions. However, as Winston Churchill used to argue, ‘to jaw-jaw is
always better than to war-war’. Institutional balancing may not lead to perpetual
peace in the Asia Paciﬁc, but it will create a relatively peaceful environment for states
to compete without military conﬂict and war.
Institutionalization of world politics is by no means the only phenomenon in the
Asia Paciﬁc. The further integrated European Union, the dynamic African Union and
the proliferation of international institutions in Latin America have connected the
whole world closer than ever. It does not mean that a perpetual peace is forthcoming.
Nor is a deadly conﬂict inevitable. Instead, the world will enter a new phase of
contested regional orders, in which states are more likely to use institutional means to
pursue security through constructive competitions.

About the Author
Kai He is an Associate Professor in the Department of Political Science at the University
of Copenhagen. He was a recipient of the 2009–2010 Princeton-Harvard China and the
World Program Postdoctoral Fellowship. He is the author of Institutional Balancing in
the Asia Paciﬁc: Economic Interdependence and China’s Rise (Routledge, 2009) and the
co-author of Prospect Theory and Foreign Policy Analysis in the Asia Paciﬁc: Rational
Leaders and Risky Behavior (Routledge, 2013). He has published widely with articles in
European Journal of International Relations, Review of International Studies, Security
Studies, International Politics, The Paciﬁc Review.

References
Acharya, A. (2004) How ideas spread: Whose norms matter? Norm localization and institutional change in
Asian regionalism. International Organization 58(2): 239–275.
Alagappa, M. (ed.) (2003) The study of international order: An analytical framework. In: Asian Security
Order: Instrumental and Normative Features. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 33–69.
ASEAN (2002) Declaration on the conduct of parties in the South China Sea, http://www.asean.org/asean/
external-relations/china/item/declaration-on-the-conduct-of-parties-in-the-south-china-sea, accessed
6 June 2012.
Asian Development Bank (2008) Emerging Asian Regionalism. Manila, the Philippines: Asian Development Bank.
Bhadrakumar, M. (2006) China, Russia welcome Iran into the fold. Asian Times 18 April, http://www
.atimes.com/atimes/China/HD18Ad02.html, accessed 8 August 2008.
220

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Contested regional orders and institutional balancing

Bhagwati, J. (2006) Why Asia must opt for open regionalism on trade. Financial Times 3 November,
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/9ba8569c-6ae0-11db-83d9-0000779e2340.html#axzz2mWPgOuqs,
accessed 6 June 2012.
Bowles, P. (2002) Asia’s post-crisis regionalism: Bringing the state back in, keeping the (United) states
out. Review of International Political Economy 9(2): 244–270.
Bull, H. (1977) The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Capie, D. (2010) When does track two matter? Structure, agency and Asian regionalism. Review of
International Political Economy 17(2): 291–318.
Capie, D. and Taylor, B. (2010) The Shangri-La Dialogue and the institutionalization of defence
diplomacy in Asia. The Paciﬁc Review 23(3): 359–376.
Cheng, J. (2001) Sino-ASEAN relations in the early twenty-ﬁrst century. Contemporary Southeast Asia
23(3): 420–451.
Christensen, T. (2001) Posing problems without catching up: China’s rise and challenges for U.S. security
policy. International Security 25(4): 5–40.
Chung, C. (2004) The Shanghai co-operation organization: China’s changing inﬂuence in Central Asia.
The China Quarterly 180(1): 989–1009.
Das, S. (2013) The Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership as a tool to contain China: Myth or reality? East Asia Forum,
http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2013/06/08/the-trans-paciﬁc-partnership-as-a-tool-to-contain-chinamyth-or-reality/, accessed 7 July 2013.
Foot, R. (1998) China in the ASEAN regional forum: Organizational processes and domestic modes of
thought. Asian Survey 38(5): 425–440.
He, K. (2009) Institutional Balancing in the Asia-Paciﬁc: Economic Interdependence and China’s Rise.
London; New York: Routledge.
He, K. (2012) Undermining adversaries: Unipolarity, threat perception, and negative balancing strategies
after the Cold War. Security Studies 21(2): 154–191.
Hiebert, M. and Hanlon, L. (2012) ASEAN and partners launch regional comprehensive economic
partnership. Critical Questions, 7 December, http://csis.org/publication/asean-and-partners-launchregional-comprehensive-economic-partnership, accessed 5 May 2013.
Hurrell, A. (2007) On Global Order: Power, Values, and the Constitution of International Society. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ikenberry, G.J. (2008) The rise of China and the future of the West: Can the liberal system survive?
Foreign Affairs 87(1): 23–35.
Johnston, A. (2008) Social States: China in International Institutions 1980–2000. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Johnston, A. (2013) How new and assertive is China’s new assertiveness? International Security 37(4):
7–48.
Kennedy, P. (1987) The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers. New York: Random House.
Lee, S. (2012) The Evolutionary Dynamics of Institutional Balancing in East Asia. EAI Working Paper no.
21, Seoul, South Korea.
Legro, J. (2007) What China will want: The future intentions of a rising power. Perspectives on Politics
5(3): 515–534.
Lo, B. (2009) Axis of Convenience: Moscow, Beijing, and the New Geopolitics. Washington DC:
Brookings Institution Press.
Mearsheimer, J. (2010) The gathering storm: China’s challenge to US power in Asia. Chinese Journal of
International Politics 3(4): 381–396.
Organski, A. (1958) World Politics. New York: Knopf.
Rosenau, J. (1992) Governance, order, and change in world politics. In: J. Rosenau and E. Czempiel (eds.)
Governance Without Government: Order and Change in World Politics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 1–29.
Ross, R. (1999) The geography of peace. International Security 23(4): 81–118.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

221

He

Simon, S. (2002) Evaluating track II approaches to security diplomacy in the Asia-Paciﬁc: The CSCAP
experience. The Paciﬁc Review 15(2): 167–200.
Stubbs, R. (2002) ASEAN plus three: Emerging East Asian regionalism. Asian Survey 42(3): 440–455.
Sutter, R. and Huang, C. (2013) China gains and advances in South China Sea. Comparative Connections,
January, http://csis.org/ﬁles/publication/1203qchina_seasia.pdf, accessed 7 July 2013.
Tasker, R. (1992) Facing up to security. Far Eastern Economic Review 6 August, p. 9.
Webber, D. (2001) Two funerals and a wedding: The up and downs of regionalism in East Asia and AsiaPaciﬁc after the Asia crisis. The Paciﬁc Review 14(3): 339–372.
Wendt, A. and Friedheim, D. (1995) Hierarchy under anarchy: Informal empire and the East German state.
International Organization 49(4): 689–721.
Xinhua News (2013) Chinese FM: Confrontation not conducive to solving South China Sea issues, http://
news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2013-06/27/c_132492885.htm, accessed 7 July 2013.
Zhu, R. (2001) Strengthening East Asian cooperation and promoting common development, statement by
Premier Zhu Rongji of China at the 5th 10+3 Summit, Bandar Seri Begawan, http://www.fmprc.gov.cn,
accessed 6 June 2006.

222

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 208–222

Original Article

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South
Asia
Nicolas Blarela and Hannes Ebertb,*
a

Lecturer of International Relations at the Institute of Political Science at Leiden University, Pieter de la
Court Building, Wassenaarseweg 52, 2333, AK Leiden The Netherlands.
b
GIGA German Institute of Global and Area Studies, Neuer Jungfernstieg 21, 20354 Hamburg, Germany.
E-mail: hannes.ebert@giga-hamburg.de
*Corresponding author.

Abstract India’s claims for regional hegemony have regularly been contested since its
independence in 1947. The self-proclaimed emerging power is locked in an enduring rivalry
with the South Asian secondary power, Pakistan. This article outlines the evolution of
Pakistan’s contestation since independence and seeks to demonstrate how, when and
why Pakistan adapted its foreign policy toward India. While the goals of Pakistan’s
contestation remained constant, its means varied at two points in post-independence history.
From 1947 to 1971, territorial disputes combined with a nascent nationalism drove the
secondary power’s foreign policy elite to engage in war and open resistance, and the
divergent domestic political ideologies of both countries complicated conﬂict resolution.
With Pakistan’s devastating war defeat in 1971, direct means of contestation were no
longer an immediate option, and a period of reluctant acquiescence ensued. The alleged
involvement of Pakistani intelligence proxies in a crisis in Jammu and Kashmir in
1987 marked the beginning of a renewed phase of resistance, though now through indirect
means of nuclear coercion and subconventional warfare. This form of contestation has
increasingly manifested itself in bilateral crises with high potential of escalation and primarily targeted symbols of India’s South Asian hegemony, including its political and commercial centres in Delhi and Mumbai in 2001 and 2008 respectively or India’s diplomatic
representations in Afghanistan. The article concludes that the current conditions of regional
contestation in South Asia, most importantly the persistent revisionist versus status-quo
domestic agendas, the presence of growing nuclear arsenals, and multi-tiered Asian rivalry
constellations, undermine prospects for conﬂict resolution and complicate modelling future
strategic behaviour in the region.
International Politics (2015) 52, 223–238. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.44;
published online 19 December 2014
Keywords: secondary powers; rising powers; politics of contestation; asymmetric
conﬂict; nuclear deterrence; India-Pakistan relations

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Blarel and Ebert

Introduction
India is increasingly considered as an important player at the global level, yet its
regional hegemony has regularly been contested since its independence in 1947.
Contestation has primarily come from its most proximate South Asian rival, Pakistan.
In raw material terms (population, economic resources, military manpower and
equipment), India dominates in every respect. However, despite the clear imbalance
between the two powers, Pakistan has persisted in its efforts to contest India’s
regional hegemony. What were the motivations behind this contestation? Through
which means did Pakistan seek to challenge the Indian hegemon over time?1
Pakistan’s capabilities and strategies are pivotal to understanding the prolongation
of this conﬂict. While Islamabad openly contested India’s regional supremacy in the
ﬁrst three decades following independence and initiated frequent crises and wars, it
suddenly halted after its decisive military defeat of 1971. However, this acquiescence
of India’s military superiority was hardly an acceptance of the new status quo and an
adoption of an alignment or bandwagoning strategy. In fact, Pakistan started to
contest India’s hegemony again by the late 1980s. The Pakistani government sought
to counter-balance the ever-increasing dyadic asymmetry with India by acquiring
nuclear weapons as a ‘great equalizer’ in the South Asian asymmetric power relations
and by resorting to militant proxies.
This article examines how, when and why Pakistan’s contestation has changed
from 1947 to present. Depending on the regional and international contexts, the
perception of its own internal material capabilities, and the outcomes of the conﬂicts
with its Indian neighbor, Pakistan’s strategy of contestation has evolved and taken
different forms. Pakistan’s behavioral repertoire can be ranged along a continuum
that alternated from open resistance to India’s hegemony to (reluctant) acquiescence
of the asymmetric structure of the existing regional system (see Figure 1), based on
the continuum of responses to (regional and global) hegemony presented in Williams
et al (2012, p. 14). To different degrees, domestic, regional and systemic constraints
and opportunities urged Pakistan’s foreign policy executive (FPE) to adopt and to
revise its strategies over time (Lobell et al, 2009).
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. We begin by presenting a
historical background that looks at how and why Pakistan ﬁrst openly contested
Indian regional hegemony and then opted for a more neutral strategy following the
outcome of the 1971 conﬂict with India. In the second section, we discuss the
changing conditions in the late 1980s that led Pakistan to resume its balancing
behavior, albeit in an indirect fashion. We then investigate three bilateral crises that
Open Resistance

Indirect Resistance

Reluctant Acquiescence

1947-1971

1987-present

1971-1987

Hard
Balancing

Bandwagoning

Figure 1: Pakistan’s strategies vis-à-vis India from 1947 to today.
224

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia

occurred in 1999, 2001 and 2008, and outline their implications for the evolution and
future of Pakistan’s strategy of resistance. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of
the ﬁndings of balancing behavior in South Asia, and the avenues for further research
on regional contestation.

From Open Resistance to Reluctant Acquiescence: 1947–1987
Since the partition of the subcontinent in 1947, Pakistan has openly challenged India’s
regional supremacy. The most important driver of Islamabad’s contestation was a
territorial dispute. Since partition, the Pakistani elite has unwaveringly sought to control
over the valley of Kashmir by military force. The Kashmir dispute in the context of
partition is crucial in order to understand the prolonged antagonism. In the overall
absence of alternative sources for social cohesion, connecting the territorial dispute over
Kashmir with the fundamental quest for a sustainable national identity in that period has
inextricably and invariably linked Pakistan’s domestic politics with its foreign policy
making, turning the contestation of India’s hegemony into a raison d’état to protect the
state’s integrity (Basrur, 2010, p. 6). At the time of independence, the two parties
opposing British rule, the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League, failed to
negotiate a workable compromise over a uniﬁed India and were induced to accept the
concept of partition. However, partition involved two categories of states. The ﬁrst
category was known as the states of British India, under direct rule, and the second
comprised of the 532 nominally independent ‘princely states’, including Kashmir,
which had some autonomy but were in fact controlled by the British in the domains of
defense, foreign affairs and communications. In August 1947, these princely states were
free to join India or Pakistan but could not choose to become independent. Based on
their geographical position and their religious composition, these states had to choose
which new country they would join. The Kashmir situation was complicated by the by
the fact that it combined a Muslim majority population (around 80 per cent), a border
with Pakistan, and a Hindu ruler (Ganguly, 1997, pp. 15–28).
Given that Kashmir was both contiguous to the new state of Pakistan and had a clear
Muslim majority, Pakistani leaders expected Kashmir to be annexed to it. Furthermore,
the incorporation of Kashmir was interpreted as an important legitimization of
Pakistan’s state-building strategy seeking to unite Muslims from the Subcontinent.
The ideological basis for the belief that Pakistan must redeem the territory it had lost
during partition in 1947, referred to as the ‘Two Nation Theory’, also became the
fundamental pillar of its revisionist claim. In his Lahore Declaration of March 1940 to
support the idea of an independent Pakistan, the erstwhile head of the Muslim League
Muhammad Ali Jinnah felt it was more prudent for the minority Muslims to have their
own separate nation where they could live peacefully according to their faith and belief
(Khan, 1950). At the level of Pakistan’s domestic politics, the Kashmir territorial
dispute therefore immediately affected the core principles and the legitimacy of its
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

225

Blarel and Ebert

state-building project and is crucial to understand the choice for different generations of
Pakistani decision-makers to openly challenge India.
For the 1947–1971 period, Pakistan pursued a traditional strategy of political and
military resistance, which was made possible by external balancing and Anglo-US
military support. This open challenge of Indian regional hegemony became too costly
after 1971, following the military defeat against India and the dismemberment of the
country into two new political entities.2 This exogenous shift led Pakistan to adopt a
reluctant acquiescence of Indian regional hegemony until the late 1980s. The
nuclearization of the subcontinent and the insurgency in Kashmir reinvigorated
Pakistani decision-makers into contesting India’s regional position, although now in
an indirect fashion. This section will discuss these historical periods.

1947–1971: Nationalism, open resistance and war
The newly independent Pakistani state faced an immediate strategic dilemma. Its
unwavering motivation to directly contest the territorial status quo in South Asia was
confronted with a clear military and economic asymmetry. Following the partition of
British India, the dominion of Pakistan only had a ﬁfth of the Union of India’s
population and a fourth of its size. India was a more inﬂuential state with all the
attributes of a dominant regional power. However, contrary to popular perception,
India’s regional military hegemony was far from obvious, especially in the eyes of
Pakistani decision-makers. While the bureaucracies, industries, resources and lands of
British India were proportionately divided based on their size and population, Pakistan
received nearly half of the British Indian Army (Jalal, 1990). The Pakistani military also
had an exaggerated perception of its relative strength vis-à-vis India, especially in terms
of military capabilities and competence (Cohen, 2005, p. 103). This gave Pakistan the
inaccurate impression that it could openly contest Indian supremacy and initiate two
wars with the expectation of obtaining Kashmir by force (Ganguly, 2001, pp. 7–8).
The ﬁrst conﬂict over Kashmir in 1947–1948 must be understood through the
diverging legal and political interpretations of the circumstances that were discussed
earlier. In early October 1947, there was a tribal rebellion in the Poonch region,
southwest of Srinagar, the capital of Kashmir. The tribesmen were quickly supported
and led by Pakistani soldiers who entered Kashmir. The Maharaja had no other
solution but to appeal to India for assistance (Dasgupta, 2002, pp. 42–52). However,
Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru imposed one main precondition before
intervening: the Maharajah had ﬁrst to accept to accede to India. A document titled
the ‘Instrument of Accession’ was sent to the last British Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten.
Mountbatten accepted the Maharajah’s call for help in a letter that also ambiguously
implied that ‘the question of the state’s accession should be ﬁnally settled by a
reference to the people’ after the military issue with Pakistan (deﬁned as the
‘intruder’) had been resolved (Mountbatten, 1947).
226

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia

Islamabad had a very different interpretation of the events, insisting on the fact that
Pakistan only ofﬁcially intervened in Kashmir to put an end to the Maharajah’s
repression of a popular uprising in October 1947 and only after prior Indian
involvement. Pakistan did not consider itself as an aggressor state. After the
conditions were met, India airlifted its soldiers into Srinagar. Although the Indian
army managed to save the city, the tribesmen had taken over a third of Kashmiri
territory. The conﬂict lasted until January 1949 when the UN sponsored a ceaseﬁre.
To push the Pakistanis out of ‘Pakistani-occupied’ Kashmir, Nehru decided to refer
the dispute to the UN Security Council in January 1948 (Ganguly, 2001, p. 19). The
ﬁrst war fought against India, which Pakistan perceived as the regional hegemon at
least partly justiﬁed Pakistani optimism about its relative position, for it left Pakistan
in control of about a third of the old princely state of Jammu and Kashmir (even if
failed to take Srinagar and the Vale as it had originally intended).
In addition, Pakistan considered India as the aggressor state and quickly realized that
international mediation through a divided UN had not explicitly favored India.
Pakistan’s conﬁdence was further enhanced by its subsequent membership in the Cold
War alliance system initiated by the United States. It became a member of the South
East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) in 1954 and the Central Treaty Organization
(CENTO) in 1955. This enabled Pakistan to acquire American tanks and ﬁghter
aircrafts (Haqqani, 2013, pp. 56–122; McGarr, 2013, pp. 16–25). Pakistan also began
to receive direct political support from China starting in 1959, following the failure of
Sino-Indian negotiations on their territorial dispute (Garver, 2001, pp. 187–215). As a
result, territorial gains in 1948 and favorable international alliance opportunities
initially gave the Pakistani leadership the impression that it could openly contest
India’s regional dominance and to envisage territorial revisionist goals.
Following India’s weak performance in its 1962 conﬂict with China, Pakistan was
emboldened to attempt another military venture (Ganguly, 2001, pp. 31–50). There
was a ﬁrst military clash in early 1965 along the poorly delineated border near the
Western state of Gujarat, in the Rann of Kutch desert. The Pakistani military had
operated a limited probe to test India’s armed reaction. The test proved to be
successful as India chose not to escalate the conﬂict and referred the case to
international courts. The lack of Indian resolve further encouraged Pakistan’s
revisionist ambitions (Ganguly, 2001, p. 41; McGarr, 2013, pp. 301–308). However,
‘Operation Grand Slam’ was not as successful as the ﬁrst Kashmir war and the result
of the more than three weeks of ﬁghting led to a military stalemate. The post-war
agreement signed in Tashkent in January 1966 mostly conﬁrmed the 1948 division of
Kashmir. While Pakistan did not get new territorial concessions, it managed to stop
the Indian counter-offensive in the outskirts of Lahore. Following the conﬂict,
Pakistan lost US military support due to a weapons embargo that was imposed on
both India and Pakistan (McGarr, 2013, pp. 324–326). The second conﬂict offered
little clear insights to Pakistani policy-makers about the conventional military
balance between the two countries. Furthermore, the two conﬂicts had been limited
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

227

Blarel and Ebert

to the Western border and gave little information about how a full-scale two-front
conﬂict might unfold. Because of the remaining uncertainty, Pakistani leaders
thought they could continue to try to directly counter-balance India’s regional
hegemony.

1971–1987: Democracy, asymmetry and reluctant acquiescence
The situation dramatically changed in the early 1970s. As the United States
re-engaged Pakistan in order to build bridges with China, India’s position became
uneasy. To counter the political realignments in the region, India equally opted for a
strategy of external balancing and signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation
with the USSR in August 1971. Feeling conﬁdent about its military and diplomatic
position, India took advantage of the violent civil war unfolding in East Pakistan by
assisting the movement for an Independent Bangladesh (Bass, 2013; Raghavan,
2013). Yet again, the Pakistani military, emboldened by US (and Chinese) political
and military support, struck ﬁrst by attacking northern Indian airbases in the hope of
decisively debilitating India’s Air Force capabilities.3 However, this time, the
conventional military balance was overwhelmingly in India’s favor: India had
effectively a 2:1 superiority on the Eastern front (Gill, 2003). The brief war ended
with the creation of the state of Bangladesh on the Eastern front, while the war on the
Western front remained limited.
In 1971, a victorious India was in a strong military and political position to negotiate
a new accord with Pakistan over the Kashmir border. The existing 1948 border became
the Line of Control (LoC) through the Simla Agreement (Ministry of External Affairs,
1972). Because of the decisive military defeat and the loss of East Pakistan, Islamabad
ceased to openly contest India’s regional military and political supremacy, which was
further reinforced by India’s nuclear test in 1974.The ﬁrst democratically elected
government under Prime Minister Zulﬁqar Ali Bhutto turned its attention to domestic
reforms and revisionist ambitions in Kashmir became a secondary objective for almost
two decades (Ganguly, 2001, p. 72). Pakistani decision-makers also concluded from
the 1971 war that external military support was not sufﬁcient or completely reliable to
offset India’s disproportionate military advantage.
Until the mid-1980s, the structure of the South Asian regional system was
undoubtedly unipolar, with India standing as the strong regional power and Pakistan
as a secondary state (Riencourt, 1982, p. 433). By the mid-1980s, India’s military
capabilities signiﬁcantly exceeded those of Pakistan.4 However, while Pakistan was
considerably weakened and could no longer resist Indian actions and goals in the
region, it chose not to opt for an accommodative behavior. One of the main
explanations for this refusal to bandwagon is the continued grievance vis-à-vis the
Kashmir territorial dispute. Another explanation is the Pakistani military leadership’s
need to sustain the rivalry with India to justify higher defense budgets (Haqqani,
228

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia

2005, pp. 92–93). To counterbalance the increasing military asymmetry, Pakistan
also began a quest in the 1970s for a nuclear weapons capacity, which it reportedly
obtained by the mid-1980s.5 As a result, Pakistan’s more passive behavior from 1971
to the late 1980s can be more accurately deﬁned as reluctant and temporary
acquiescence of India’s hegemony (comparable to what Lobell, Jesse and Williams
describe in this special issue as ‘neutrality’).

Renewed Regional Resistance, 1987–Present
1987–1999: Kashmir crisis, nuclear weapons and the strategy of indirect
resistance
Two important events in the late 1980s modiﬁed the regional situation and reshaped
Pakistan’s strategy of resistance to India’s regional hegemony. First, by the mid1980s, Pakistan crossed the threshold of weapons-grade uranium production and
produced enough ﬁssile material for a nuclear weapon (Khan, 2012, pp. 139–206).
Pakistan notably received assistance from China. Beijing reportedly provided
Pakistan with centrifuge equipment, warhead designs and missile systems (Paul,
2003). As it continued to advance its uranium-enriching program, it is believed that
Pakistan had acquired the capability of carrying out a nuclear test by 1987.
Since the Indo-Pakistani conﬂict of 1971, India had a conventional military
superiority over its adversary. This military imbalance was correlated with almost 30
years of relative absence of major conﬂicts. By the late 1980s, the acquisition of
nuclear weapons (whether covert or not) actually reversed this military balance and
emboldened the Pakistani leadership to resume its revisionist territorial goals (Kapur,
2007, pp. 115–140). The emerging asymmetry had become ‘truncated’ (Paul, 2006).
Pakistan’s acquisition of the ‘great equalizer’ encouraged a change of strategy vis-àvis the regional hegemon. As Pakistan’s strategic elite became more conﬁdent of
their country’s limited nuclear capability, it began to perceive the arsenal as a shield
against India's conventional capabilities (Kapur, 2007, p. 9). Pakistan’s asymmetric
nuclear posture – where nuclear weapons are considered credible war-ﬁghting
instruments (even to respond to conventional military attacks) – uniquely deterred
conﬂict initiation and escalation from the part of India (Narang, 2010).
Second, an insurgency erupted in 1987 in Kashmir against the Indian government.
Unlike past Kashmir crises, which were partially fomented by Pakistan, the
insurgency was ﬁrst and foremost an internal uprising against the economic and
political domination of New Delhi. The insurgency’s outbreak can be linked to the
outcome of the 1987 elections that triggered a vicious cycle of open popular deﬁance
and state repression (Ganguly, 1997, pp. 98–100). Elements in Pakistan, backed by
nuclear weapons capabilities, saw this new internal crisis as an opportunity to
weaken India and to operate a proxy war (at little cost) bogging down huge Indian
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

229

Blarel and Ebert

military and ﬁnancial resources. The Pakistani army, and especially the Directorate
for Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), shared its insurrectional expertise and networks
from Afghanistan with Kashmiri groups such as Hizb-ul-Mujahedeen (Swami,
2007).6 Some Pakistan-based groups also joined newly armed Kashmiri militias
such as Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT). Pakistan has since then armed, trained and given
sanctuary to these organizations and used them as tools of asymmetric warfare to tie
down large numbers of Indian soldiers in Kashmir.

1999–present: Contested South Asian hegemony, pivotal deterrence and
trilateral compellence
The combination of nuclear weapons capabilities and the build-up of proxy
capabilities laid the ground for Pakistan’s indirect resistance. When Pakistan
successfully conducted its ﬁrst public nuclear weapon tests in May 1998 in direct
response to India’s second nuclear tests, it took only one more year for its army to
engage in open military confrontation against India. The 1999 Kargil crisis
introduced a period of instability followed by two other crises that triggered fears of
nuclear escalation, the India–Pakistan standoff in 2001–2002 and the Mumbai crisis
in 2008.7 These crises revealed two new dimensions that became dominant in the
secondary power’s strategy to achieve its revisionist goals under the condition of
nuclear symmetry and increasing great power involvement in the region. First, the
Pakistani FPE exploited the latent risk of nuclear escalation by using non-state actors
to maximize its negotiation and deterrence leverage. Second, Islamabad sought to use
the increasing involvement of China and the United States to advance its interest and
engaged in ‘multiple nested games’ (for a discussion of multiple nested games, see
Lobell et al, 2015). These multiple nested games substantially increased the options
for contestation. Overall, these conditions generated a novel situation in which
hard-balancing strategies dominating the period before 1971 have been replaced by
calculated and indirect forms of resistance composed of nuclear risk-taking and
subconventional warfare.8
The 1999 Kargil crisis constituted a watershed as it took place after the ofﬁcial
nuclearization of the subcontinent and because it escalated into a violent military
conﬂict (although concentrated and limited). In fact, a conﬂict over the entire
Western border between India and Pakistan as it took place in 1965 never
materialized despite increased conventional capabilities in both armies. Nuclear
deterrence was the main explanation for the relative restraint that both countries
demonstrated thus far. The Pakistani military arguably took into account the nuclear
dimension when beginning their spring and summer incursion across the Indian
border, around the city of Kargil. Pakistan’s military aim for carrying out the
intrusions was based on the exploitation of the large gaps that existed in the Indian
surveillance and defense capabilities in the sector and on the assumption that India
230

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia

would not escalate the conﬂict because of fear of nuclear retaliation. Pakistan hoped
to impose a new territorial fait accompli. Without any declaration of war, India
responded by a full-scale war and pushed back the Pakistani intruders by June 1999.
While Pakistan did not obtain its territorial objectives, nuclear weapons encouraged
its military to re-engage in direct military confrontation with the regional hegemon.
The 1999 crisis also demonstrated how strategic interactions between the primary
and the secondary power are increasingly played out in multiple nested games and, in
particular, triangular strategic relations in a nuclearized South Asia. The main motive
that prompted the Pakistani leadership to engage in such a high-risk operation was to
regain international and in particular US attention to resolve the Kashmir dispute.
It hoped US involvement would force India to the negotiation table and that
third-party mediation would enable Pakistan to negotiate from a position of relative
strength and ultimately resolve the conﬂict on terms favorable to Islamabad
(Chakma, 2012, p. 561).
The crisis in fact induced American intervention into successive regional crises.
Washington’s substantial ‘deterrence diplomacy’ and ‘crisis management’, however,
did not favor the secondary power in Kargil (Mitra, 2011, p. 194). India had equally
sought to mobilize Washington’s support to advance its interest and succeeded by
systematically compelling the United States to exert pressure on the Pakistani army,
which Washington quickly saw as being mainly responsible for triggering the crisis.
As a result, the Clinton administration explicitly tilted toward India. Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif’s decision to pull out of Kashmir was essentially driven by behind-thescenes pressure through the Clinton administration to defuse the crisis and to bring
the confrontation to a quick conclusion (Ganguly and Hagerty, 2005, p. 188;
Chakma, 2012, p. 556).
China has also played a signiﬁcant (if secondary) role in Indo-Pakistani crises.
From Islamabad’s perspective, Beijing is perceived as the discreet and – in stark
contrast to the United States – reliable ‘all-weather friend’ that also provides support
for critical projects such as its nuclear arsenal.9 Yet, Beijing shares with the United
States an obvious interest in avoiding nuclear escalation and in containing Pakistanbased militant outﬁts that also affect its own security. The Chinese leadership has
thus adopted complex policies toward the two adversaries. It has neither supported
nor encouraged the Kargil intrusion and has quietly coordinated diplomatic responses
with the United States (Chari et al, 2007, p. 219). Leading Pakistani policy-makers
ﬂew to Beijing for support and returned with empty hands. As Michae Krepon points
out, ‘China may well be Pakistan’s “all-weather friend,” but when very dark storm
clouds gather over the subcontinent, Beijing has stood shoulder to shoulder with
Washington in counseling restraint’ (Krepon, 2011, p. 21).
The Pakistani military drew two conclusions from the Kargil experience: ﬁrst, the
use of conventional force had become an ineffective instrument of contestation, and,
second, it needed to more successfully exploit third-party involvement to advance
its interests. As a consequence, the 2001–2002 crisis was this time triggered by
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

231

Blarel and Ebert

non-state militant actors – which were reportedly backed by Pakistani intelligence –
that attacked the Indian parliament. The crisis revealed that the dominant focus of
contestation shifted away from challenging the territorial status quo of the postindependence era (1947 to mid-1980s) and the struggle over Kashmir (mid-1980s to
late 1990s) to the primary goal of contesting India’s claims of regional hegemony in
South Asia. A multidimensional competition over regional power status became the
core of Pakistan’s revisionism, most prominently played out in Afghanistan as a key
theater of Indian inﬂuence (Fair, 2012, pp. 250–251).
India’s trilateral compellence was relatively less successful in 2001–2002.
Washington recognized Pakistani-backed militants’ responsibility for the crisis, but
refused to take a hard stance against Islamabad whose cooperation it dearly needed
for its anti-Taliban operations in Afghanistan (Chari et al, 2007, p. 193). This time,
Washington navigated through the crisis as the ‘preponderant pivot’ by pressuring
and incentivizing both parties at different times, including through the strategic
sharing of intelligence information (Yusuf, 2011, p. 20). It urged Islamabad to take
stronger action against militant outﬁts and Delhi to halt its military offensive
(Chakma, 2012, pp. 564–570). As a result, Washington balanced both adversaries’
interests and managed to de-escalate tensions. China again quietly coordinated with
the United States and publicly called for caution – Pakistani attempts to gain more
overt support again largely failed (Chari et al, 2007, p. 219).
The Mumbai crisis of 2008 occurred in the context of a peak of the US tilt toward
India that culminated in the 2008 India-US nuclear agreement (Mitra, 2011, p. 194).
As Washington refused to grant Pakistan a similar agreement, mistrust between both
countries intensiﬁed to the extent that Washington was perceived as a greater threat
to the Pakistani nuclear arsenal than the arch rival India (Carranza, 2007; Express
Tribune, 2012). Pakistan’s trilateral compellence in Mumbai hence revealed a
paradox for its contestation, since it relied on crisis prevention by the same country
that it perceived as a threat to its sovereignty and, in particular, its nuclear weapons
program - a strategic ambiguity with deep socio-historical roots (Chari et al, 2007, p.
217). The Mumbai crisis also revealed that facing such a sensitive context, the United
States refused to exert early and critical pressure against Pakistan even in a phase of
historically cordial Indo-US relations (Yusuf, 2011). The Bush government hence
predominantly played the role of an information broker and shaped its pivotal
interventions cautiously to not favor one particular player nor to create conditions for
escalation (Nayak and Krepon, 2012).10 Combined with the presence of nuclear
weapons, great power alliance politics hence further truncated the dyadic power
asymmetry.
To summarize the changing conditions for contestation in the South Asian post1998 sub-regional system, the United States after it had been relatively absent in the
1990s has become an increasingly engaged extra-regional player post-9/11, and India
is a waxing regional hegemon with China becoming increasingly active. This
development has increased Pakistan’s perceived threat from Indian dominance and
232

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia

created opportunities to externally balance Delhi through alignments with both its
immediate neighbor China, and the global hegemon, the United States. Third-party
deterrence diplomacy has become a potential strategic asset and an integral part of the
secondary power’s planning and decision-making. Pakistan has thus gradually
replaced traditional dyadic deterrence with what can be called a ‘trilateral compellence’ strategy that seeks to anticipate external interference and exploit it for its
advantage from Kargil onwards (Ganguly and Wagner, 2004, pp. 499–501).
Trilateral compellence implies that when triggering a crisis, the secondary power
addresses both the adversary and the third-party simultaneously (Chari et al, 2007,
pp. 193–201; Basrur, 2009, pp. 90–93). The nuclear arsenal serves as a quasiblackmailing means to compel the third party to intervene and de-escalate the crisis in
favor of the compellent state. Yet, the growing great power engagement has not
automatically created a more permissive environment for Pakistani contestation (for a
theoretical elaboration of this argument, see Lobell, Jesse and Williams in this special
issue). This systemic development actually offered additional strategic opportunities
to both adversaries and both engaged in ‘trilateral compellence’. Until present,
Pakistan has to compete with India for third-party support to advance its national
interests.

Conclusion
In this article, we discussed Pakistan’s motivations to challenge India’s regional
hegemony as well as its shifting contestation strategies. The ﬁndings are summarized
in Table 1. It is important to ﬁrst emphasize that Pakistan’s motivations have
remained constant over the entire time period. As discussed in the ﬁrst section,
Pakistan had domestic incentives to maintain its irredentist claims in Kashmir.
Pakistan also considered that it was perpetually threatened by its neighbor and
therefore looked for different ways to deter any possible Indian aggression either
through external balancing (US and Chinese support) or internal balancing (the
development of nuclear weapon capabilities). Pakistani strategists, especially in the
armed forces, have interpreted the accommodative strategies of other regional powers
such as Nepal, Sri Lanka or Bhutan as having limited their freedom of action.
Because Pakistan was the most proximate challenger to India, it refused any
acceptance of the status quo (Cohen, 2002, p. 42; Schaffer, 2011, p. 285).
Initially, Pakistan openly resisted India’s regional hegemony and felt conﬁdent
enough to directly engage India (Scenario A). This military adventurism was not the
result of a rational assessment of the existing material balance of force between the
two countries. In fact, the threat assessment was ambiguous and incomplete as the
outcomes of the two localized conﬂict along the Western border in 1947/8 and 1965
were not decisive, Pakistan received external support from the United States and
China, and an assertive military had a strong say in Pakistan’s foreign policy
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

233

Blarel and Ebert

Table 1: Summary of ﬁndings
Strategy

Drivers

Scenario A
(1947–1971):
‘Open
Resistance’
Scenario B
(1971–1987):
‘Reluctant
Acquiescence’
Scenario C
(1987–
present):
‘Indirect
Resistance’

Systemic (extraregional) conditions

Domestic conditions
Regional (dyadic/
relative) conditions

Foreign
policy
executive

Favorable (US, China
support)

Unclear

Permissive (military
capabilities)

Unconstrained

Unfavorable (decline
of US support)

Unfavorable (clear
military
asymmetry)

Restrictive (military
Constrained
capabilities,
problems of internal
cohesion)
Mixed (nuclear
Divided
capabilities, militant
groups, political
instability)

Mixed (US military aid Mixed
but no political
(conventional
support against
asymmetry but
India)
nuclear
capacities)

decision-making. As a result, domestic political incentives and an inaccurate reading
of the regional, international and dyadic conditions led Pakistan to embark in an
ambitious and ultimately sub-optimal policy of open resistance, which led to its
ultimate defeat and dismemberment following the 1971 conﬂict.
Following the exogenous shock of 1971, Pakistan no longer perceived to have the
material capabilities to openly challenge India. This led to a change of Pakistan’s
contestation strategy, but not of its goals. Hence we identiﬁed this period as a phase
of ‘reluctant acquiescence’ of India’s regional hegemony (Scenario B). During this
phase, the territorial claims over Kashmir and the threat of Indian power were still
present in the mind of Pakistani decision-makers. When he learned that India had
begun to develop its nuclear program, Zulﬁqar Ali Bhutto (who was Foreign Minister
at the time) famously declared in 1965 that Pakistan ‘will eat grass or (leaves), even
go hungry, but we (Pakistan) will get one of our own [atom bomb] … We [Pakistan]
have no other Choice!’11 The defeat of 1971 further encouraged the development of
Pakistan’s nuclear program. As Pakistan became an effective nuclear weapons state
by the late 1980s, a concurrent exogenous shock happened in the Valley of Kashmir.
The insurgency provided Pakistan’s FPE with a structural opportunity to swamp
down Indian forces at a limited cost by providing material and political support to
militants. This led to the present phase of ‘indirect resistance’ (Scenario C).
The following 25 years, Pakistan pursued its revisionist agenda through a new
strategy of contestation, mixing subconventional warfare and nuclear coercion. After
almost 30 years of relative peace on the border, the development of a nuclear shield
emboldened Pakistan to launch an operation to seize territory in Kargil. As India
234

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia

ultimately managed to push back the inﬁltrated Pakistani troops beyond the line of
control, it is not clear if Pakistan will attempt any other direct military operations.
Pakistan has increasingly relied on militant proxies to inﬂict damage in Kashmir but
also in New Delhi (2001–2002) and Mumbai (2008). It is also not yet obvious what
Pakistani decision-makers have learned from these crises. We argue that the
combination of nuclear capabilities with revisionist ambitions of a contesting
secondary power complicates attempts at modeling expected strategic behaviors,
and calls for a discussion of new explanatory approaches.
The Pakistani case is also imbricated into a series of multi-tiered Asian rivalries
that muddle any modeling of a clear and long-term balancing behavior. Finally, the
fragmented nature of the decision-making process in Pakistan, which is composed of
multiple actors (Pakistani military, ISI, civilian government, business community,
civil society and militant organizations) who all have their own agendas and strategy
preferences vis-à-vis India and their own domestic constituencies, will further
complicate the identiﬁcation of a coherent Pakistani strategy in the short term.
Pakistan’s policies toward India’s regional dominance are hence an illustrative
example of how secondary powers engage in nested games among different actors
and across multiple levels, as outlined by Lobell, Jesse and Williams (2015), and
future research should develop methods to unfold these overlapping and sometimes
contradictory trends.

About the Authors
Nicolas Blarel is a lecturer in international relations at the Institute of Political
Science at Leiden University. He received his PhD from Indiana University. He also
holds an MA from Sciences-Po, Paris. He has worked for the French Foreign
Ministry's policy planning staff and the French Embassy in Washington D.C., as well
for other governmental and non-governmental policy institutions in France, the
United States, and India. Blarel just published a book at Oxford University Press
titled The Evolution of India's Israel Policy: Continuity, Change and Compriomise
since 1922.
Hannes Ebert is a PhD candidate at the University of Hamburg and works as a
research fellow at the GIGA German Institute of Global and Area Studies. He
conducts research on rising powers and fragile and conﬂict-affected states in South
Asia. He holds a Master of Science in International Relations Theory from the
London School of Economics and completed his undergraduate studies at Freie
Universitaet Berlin and the Graduate Institute Geneva. He has been a visiting
doctoral student at the Department of Politics and International Relations, Oxford
University. Previously, Ebert worked with think tanks in Germany, India, Pakistan
and the United Kingdom, and has been a programme coordinator and research
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

235

Blarel and Ebert

associate with Harvard University’s Center for European Studies as well as an
external policy analyst with the German Federal Foreign Ofﬁce’s policy planning
staff. His work has been published in Third World Quarterly, Strategic Analysis and
Chinese Journal of International Politics.

Notes
1 For a more detailed discussion on regional hegemony and the role and strategy of secondary and
tertiary states, see Williams et al (2012).
2 Following partition, the newly independent state of Pakistan had a Western and Eastern wing separated
by 1600 kilometres of Indian territory. East Pakistan became the independent state of Bangladesh
in 1971.
3 While the military embargo was still in vigor, the United States provided Pakistan with military
provisions through Jordan, Turkey and Iran. For a detailed account of the illegal weapons transfer, see
Bass (2013, pp. 291–302).
4 Its total military expenditure in 1985 was US$8921 million against Pakistan’s US$2957 million (see
International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1999).
5 The impression that the United States was not a reliable military and political ally in times of crisis, the
loss of East Pakistan and the Indian nuclear test of 1974 convinced Prime Minister Zulﬁqar Ali Bhutto
of the need to acquire a nuclear deterrent (see Khan, 2012).
6 The ISI is the premier Intelligence service of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, operationally
responsible for ensuring national security and providing intelligence assessments to the Government
of Pakistan.
7 This article will not delve into the empirical details of the different South Asian security crises of the
last 20 years, but will instead focus on their theoretical implications for the study of Pakistan’s strategic
behavior. For more detailed accounts of these standoffs, see Chari et al (2007); Ganguly and Hagerty
(2005); Narang (2010).
8 The following part builds on Blarel and Ebert (2013).
9 A high-proﬁle nuclear deal in June 2010, for example, arguably followed the goal of establishing a
counterweight to the Indo-US agreement and, similar to past nuclear material and technology transfers,
to further balancing India (see Joshi, 2011; Paul, 2003).
10 For a discussion of the concept of ‘pivotal deterrence’, see Crawford (2003).
11 Quoted in Khan (2012, p. 87).

References
Basrur, R. (2009) Minimum Deterrence and India’s Nuclear Security. Singapore: NUS Press.
Basrur, R. (2010) Domestic Politics and Systemic Constraints in Pakistan’s India Policy. Bradford:
Bradford University. PSRU Brief no. 60.
Bass, G. (2013) The Blood Telegram: Nixon, Kissinger, and a Forgotten Genocide. New York: Knopf.
Blarel, N. and Ebert, H. (2013) Militancy, great powers, and the risk of escalation in South Asia’s nuclear
crises. Asien 127: 70–79.
Carranza, M. (2007) From non-proliferation to post-proliferation: Explaining the US–India nuclear deal.
Contemporary Security Policy 28(3): 464–493.
Chakma, B. (2012) Escalation control, deterrence diplomacy and America’s role in South Asia’s nuclear
crises. Contemporary Security Policy 33(3): 554–576.
236

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Explaining the evolution of contestation in South Asia

Chari, P.R., Cheema, P. and Cohen, S. (2007) Four Crises and a Peace Process: American Engagement in
South Asia. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Cohen, S. (2002) India, Pakistan and Kashmir. Journal of Strategic Studies 25(4): 32–60.
Cohen, S. (2005) The Idea of Pakistan. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Crawford, T.W. (2003) Pivotal Deterrence: Third-Party Statecraft and The Pursuit of Peace. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Dasgupta, C. (2002) War and Diplomacy in Kashmir, 1947–48. Delhi: Sage Publications.
Fair, C. (2012) The US–Pakistan relations after a decade of the war on terror. Contemporary South Asia
20(2): 243–253.
Ganguly, S. and Hagerty, D. (2005) Fearful Symmetry: India-Pakistan Crises in the Shadow of Nuclear
Weapons. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Ganguly, S. (1997) The Crisis in Kashmir. Washington DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press.
Ganguly, S. (2001) Conﬂict Unending: India-Pakistan Tensions Since 1947. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Ganguly, S. and Wagner, R. (2004) India and Pakistan: Bargaining in the shadow of nuclear war. Journal
of Strategic Studies 27(3): 479–507.
Garver, J. (2001) Protracted Contest: Sino-Indian Rivalry in the Twentieth Century. Seattle, WA:
University of Washington Press.
Gill, J. (2003) An Atlas of the 1971 India-Pakistan War: The Creation of Bangladesh. Washington DC:
National Defence University.
Haqqani, H. (2005) Pakistan: Between Mosque and Military. Washington DC: Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.
Haqqani, H. (2013) Magniﬁcent Delusions: Pakistan, the United States, and An Epic History of
Misunderstanding. New York: Public Affairs.
Hoodbhoy, P. (2012) Pakistan’s rush for more bombs – Why? Express Tribune 29 January,
http://tribune.com.pk/story/328922/pakistans-rush-for-more-bombs–why/, accessed 9 September 2013.
International Institute for Strategic Studies (1999) The Military Balance 1999–2000. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Jalal, A. (1990) The State of Martial Rule: The Origins of Pakistan’s Political Economy of Defence.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Joshi, S. (2011) The China-Pakistan nuclear deal: A realpolitique fait accompli. NTI, 11 December,
http://www.nti.org/analysis/articles/china-pakistan-nuclear-deal-realpolitique-fait-accompli-1, accessed
21 August 2013.
Kapur, S. (2007) Dangerous Deterrent: Nuclear Weapons Proliferation and Conﬂict in South Asia.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Khan, L. (1950) Pakistan, the Heart of Asia: Speeches in the United States and Canada, May and June
1950. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Khan, F. (2012) Eating Grass: The Making of the Pakistani Bomb. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Krepon, M. (2011) Crises in South Asia: Trends and potential consequences. In: N. Cohn and M. Krepon
(eds.) Crises in South Asia: Trends and Potential Consequences. Washington DC: The Henry L.
Stimson Center, pp. 1–29.
Lobell, S., Ripsman, N. and Taliaferro, J. (2009) Neoclassical Realism, the State, and Foreign Policy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McGarr, P. (2013) The Cold War in South Asia: Britain, the United States and the Indian Subcontinent,
1945–1965. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India (1972) Simla agreement July 2, 1972, http://www
.mea.gov.in/in-focus-article.htm?19005/Simla+Agreement+July+2+1972, accessed 3 September
2013.
Mitra, S. (2011) Politics in India: Structure, Process and Policy. London: Routledge.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

237

Blarel and Ebert

Mountbatten, L. (1947) Reply from Lord Mountbatten to Maharajah Sir Hari Singh dated 27 October
1947. Legal Document no. 115, http://www.kashmir-information.com/LegalDocs/115.html, accessed
12 January 2013.
Narang, V. (2010) Posturing for peace? Pakistan’s nuclear postures and South Asian stability. International Security 34(3): 38–78.
Nayak, P. and Krepon, M. (2012) The Unﬁnished Crisis: US Crisis Management after the 2008 Mumbai
Attacks. Washington DC: Stimson Center.
Paul, T.V. (2003) Chinese-Pakistani nuclear and missile ties and the balance of power. The Nonproliferation Review 10(2): 1–9.
Paul, T.V. (2006) Why has the India-Pakistan rivalry been so enduring? Power asymmetry and an
intractable conﬂict. Security Studies 15(4): 600–630.
Raghavan, S. (2013) 1971: A Global History of the Creation of Bangladesh. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Riencourt, A. (1982) India and Pakistan in the shadow of Afghanistan. Foreign Affairs 61(2): 416–437.
Schaffer, T. (2011) After the U.S.-India strategic dialogue: Not visionary, but solid. Brookings Institution
Upfront. 21 July, http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/up-front/posts/2011/07/21-us-india-schaffer,
accessed 3 September 2013.
Swami, P. (2007) India, Pakistan and the Secret Jihad: The Covert War in Kashmir, 1947–2004.
Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Williams, K., Lobell, S. and Jesse, N. (2012) Beyond Great Powers and Hegemons: Why Secondary States
Support, Follow or Challenge. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Yusuf, M. (2011) Banking on an outsider: Implications for escalation control in South Asia. Arms Control
Today 41(5): 20–27.

238

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 223–238

Original Article

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa
Chris Aldena,* and Maxi Schoemanb

a
Department of International Relations, London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton
Street, London W2AA 2AE, UK.
E-mail: j.c.alden@lse.ac.uk
b
Department of Political Sciences, University of Pretoria, Private bag X20, Hatﬁeld 0028, South Africa.
E-mail: maxi.schoeman@up.ac.za

*Corresponding author.

Abstract South Africa’s position on the African continent is widely seen to be one of
dominance and leadership. No longer subject to the international opprobrium, postapartheid South Africa launched a visionary campaign built around the notion of an
‘African Renaissance’ to restructure continental institutions in line with its interests.
This state-led effort was complemented by an aggressive commercial expansion by wellﬁnanced South African corporations to break into previously inaccessible markets across
the continent. This populist depiction of South Africa is largely echoed in the scholarly
literature on South African foreign policy towards Africa. But careful analysis of the
South African foreign policy experience both in Africa and more broadly, suggests that
these images are only partially realised at best and that they ignore a host of structural
problems and outcomes. In particular, the case for South African hegemonic dominance
over the continent is challenged by its material weakness and uneven record of foreign
policy successes. Despite this, Pretoria is continually ‘rewarded’ with leadership positions
in international groupings, such as BRICS, G20 and nearly consecutive terms on the UN
Security Council. We argue that this constitutes symbolic representivity and poses a
continuing set of foreign policy dilemmas for South Africa and an international community as South Africa struggles to fulﬁl its hegemonic role in Africa.
International Politics (2015) 52, 239–254. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.47;
published online 19 December 2014
Keywords: secondary powers; regional powers; politics of contestation; foreign policy
strategies; South Africa; Africa and BRICS

Introduction
South Africa’s position on the African continent is widely seen to be one of
dominance and leadership. No longer subject to the international opprobrium
accompanied apartheid, after the democratic transition in 1994 a politically
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

Alden and Schoeman

unfettered South Africa launched a visionary campaign built around the notion of an
‘African Renaissance’ to restructure continental institutions in line with its interests.
This state-led effort was complemented by an aggressive commercial expansion by
well-ﬁnanced South African corporations to break into previously inaccessible
markets across the continent. Even the South African media and telecommunications
companies, SABC’s Africa division, M-Net and MTN, sought to capture the African
airwaves and audiences through their investments in the continent. All in all, the
stage was being set for the exercise of substantive South African structural power
over the rest of the African continent.
This is a populist depiction of South Africa that is largely echoed, albeit in
somewhat different forms, in the scholarly literature on South African foreign policy
towards Africa. For instance Daniels et al (2008) present the evidence for a South
African ‘invasion’ of the continent, while Ahwiring and McGowan (1998)
speak about South Africa as a ‘benign hegemon’ operating in Africa. Dlamini’s
unabashed celebration of a ‘Pretoria-Abuja Axis’ continental hegemony contrasts
with critical theorists who underline the role that Thabo Mbeki’s government
played as a purveyor of neo-liberalism, a kind of ‘comprador’ for Western capitalism
in Africa (Taylor et al, 2002; Dlamini, 2013). Other academics see in South
African foreign policy the makings of a ‘middle power’ serving as an interlocutor
between North and South or, alternatively, Africa and the rest of the world (Lee and
Hamill, 2001; Schoeman, 2003). Indeed, South Africa’s elevation in 2009 and 2010
as Africa’s only member of the G20 and BRICS seemed to conﬁrm its unique
status (Alden and Schoeman, 2013). But careful analysis of the South African
foreign policy experience both in Africa and more broadly, suggests that these
images are only partially realised at best and that they ignore a host of structural
problems and outcomes. In particular, when examined critically, the case for South
African hegemonic dominance over the continent is challenged by a number of
issues. Among them are:
●

●

●

South Africa’s weak material basis of power on the continent. This is reﬂected in
anaemic domestic economy confronting a host of deep-seated structural problems
and reinforced by its relative economic decline in comparison with much of the
rest of continent where it now has less that 25 per cent of sub-Saharan Africa’s
GDP (versus over 50 per cent in 1994) (Alessi, 2013).
A limited ability to translate many of the key features of South Africa’s putative
economic, ﬁnancial and military preponderance over the rest of Africa into solid
foreign and economic gains in cases as diverse as Cote d’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and most recently the Central African Republic.
Beyond the classic ‘power fungibility’ dilemma raised above, the failure of South
Africa to successfully exercise inﬂuence over other African regimes which
deliberately act against its core interests, best represented by the case of Robert
Mugabe in Zimbabwe where Pretoria had substantive economic leverage at its

240

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa

disposal but also visible in Swaziland where South African economic dominance
is even greater.
Despite this weak record of effective leadership, Pretoria is continually ‘rewarded’
with leadership positions in international groupings, such as BRICS, G20 and nearly
consecutive terms on the UN Security Council. Far from being a reluctant hegemon,
South African history is marked by a drive to fulﬁl an ambition predicated on its
‘manifest destiny’ as Africa’s leader (Alden and Schoeman, 2013).
All of this helps shed light on the paradox of South African continental leadership,
that is to say that despite its declining material base and uneven record, it is held by
the international community to be worthy of leadership while among African
governments its credentials are viewed with concern and even at times suspicion.
This symbolic representivity of the region introduces substantive constraints on
South Africa’s ability to lead and has induced a number of strategies by the
government aimed at off-setting these limitations. These are manifested variously as
a preference for unobtrusive foreign policy actions and consensus-building strategies
that underscore collective African support. Managing the tension between hegemonic intent, sublimated nationalism and consciously displaying policies as panAfricanism is in fact the essence of contemporary practice of South African foreign
policy in Africa (Nathan, 2005). And in those cases where South African foreign
policymakers neglect to take serious account of African perspectives, as was
demonstrated in the case of Nigeria in 1995 and Libya in 2011, the cost is measured
in wholesale condemnation of its right to lead the continent.
Moreover, South Africa’s solution to its material shortcomings has been to do so
through the framework of partnership (or ‘bandwagoning’) with external powers,
initially with reference to the G8 and New Economic Partnership for African
Development (NEPAD) but more recently seeking out South partners to fulﬁl its
historic mission to lead the continent. The establishment of the South African
Development Partnership Agency will serve to strengthen and deepen partnerships
with leading donor countries to fund South Africa’s ambitious development goals for
the continent. When called upon to lead, the South African instinct is to seek out
external power resources to resolve the myriad of dilemmas confronting it in
exercising leadership.
The argument of this article therefore is that, outside of a small number of states
that form part of its ‘near abroad’, South African hegemony is neither complete in its
material form, nor has it demonstrated consistent ability to exercise leadership even
where it has the means available. But the key feature that is inhibiting South African
foreign policy is less a material one as such but rather resides in the realm of the
structured characteristics of its designation as a regional leader. In short, it is a
product of international needs for African representation on the global stage,
together with its own ambitions, rather than any regional consensus on South
African leadership and this fact is reﬂected in Northern-led initiatives such as the
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

241

Alden and Schoeman

G20, as well as more recent Southern initiatives such as the invitation to join BRICS.
The implications of this for South Africa’s ability to fulﬁl the basic requirements of
hegemonic power – providing public goods such as security or exercising ﬁnancial
management of the system – are consequential for its own standing, as well as that of
the African continent. In particular, this suggests that competition with secondary
and tertiary claimant states seeking international recognition is likely to continue
to feature in intra-African politics as South Africa attempts to assert its authority in
the region.
In order to elaborate upon this argument we will provide a short overview of
concept of structural power and hegemony. This will be followed by an examination
of the South African case considering the role of historical conjuncture and its
relative material position within the region as an explanatory source for its global
standing. Building on this we will illustrate how this status has been challenged both
by the region and questioned by established powers. Finally, we will conclude with
some thoughts on the implications that this situation holds for South Africa and the
continent.

Structural Power and Regional Hegemony
The conceptual point of departure for this article is the scholarship on structural
power. The originator and main proponent of the concept, Strange (1988), deﬁnes it
as follows:
Structural power, in short, confers the power to decide how things shall be
done, the power to shape frameworks within which states relate to each other,
relate to people or relation to corporate enterprises. The relative power of each
party is more, or less, if one party is also determining the surrounding structure
of the relationship. (p. 25)
Structural power is manifested in four dimensions – security, production (including
trade), ﬁnance and knowledge – and states operate within frameworks formulated
and led by a hegemon. More recent explorations of hegemony provide a more
nuanced or ‘toned-down’ interrogation of the concept. The work of authors such as
Burges on consensual hegemony (Burges, 2008; see also Burges, 2015) and Hurrell
(2006) on the behaviour of ‘second-tier states’ in the international system provides
further insight into the status and role of South Africa within the African continent
and in the broader international system.
Burges follows Kindleberger in distinguishing between domination and leadership, deﬁning ‘consensual hegemony’ as a form of leadership rather than domination
(where the latter implies coercion), with leadership emphasising the importance of
ideas as critical to the hegemonic project. These ideas constitute a vision for the
system that the hegemon favours and it seeks the consent of other states in the
242

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa

building of the envisioned system, while devoting resources to the project –
intellectual, economic and security. The leadership provided by the predominant
state results in the creation of a hegemony, but this is separate from the hegemon
which leads the project: the hegemony becomes, in Burges’ (2008) words, the
‘constant’, whereas the ‘role of hegemon [shifts] between the embraced states
depending on which participant is best able to coordinate and advance a speciﬁc
aspect of the project’ (p. 74). In this article we argue that South Africa has long
sought to create a consensual hegemony on the African continent, with varying
degrees of success and we seek to explain the reasons for its successes and failures.
As Strange points out, there is no expectation of constant intervention nor is it a
requirement of structural power to secure the compliance of states on every given
issue. Rather she suggests that there are key intersects – ‘bargains’ – that reveal and
highlight the underlining position of states within the system in relation to the
hegemon (Strange, 1988, p. 31). The central point is that hegemonic powers exercise
their authority selectively and do so in response to their perceptions of the level of
necessity. And, while it is a nostrum of literature on power and hegemony that such a
condition is always contested, the fact is that the foundational requirements of
exercising power – that is the accruing of sufﬁcient material capabilities and ideational
sources to inﬂuence the behaviour of other actors and institutions – is never seen to be a
total condition nor is it expected to be. It is relational, conferred and accepted through
bargaining between states within a given system in which it operates.
The search of a second-tier state for hegemony (whether consensual or coercive) is
always subsumed under the ‘larger’ hegemony over the global system, and
inﬂuenced by counter-hegemonic struggles in the global system. In fact, as pointed
out by Hurrell (2006), and discussed in the article by Lobell et al, second-tier states
are usually involved in counter-hegemonic challenges, based on different conceptions of international order (p. 3), while also having to contend with regional
challenges to or animosities in its quest for leadership and in this article we discuss
South Africa’s efforts to win the conﬁdence and support of other African states for its
vision of the kind of hegemony that it aims to build on the continent.
In the context of a unilateral post-Cold War system, where the United States
occupied a seemingly unchallenged position of power and authority, the differentiated interests of Washington across the globe meant that it sought out like-minded
regional managers to address the requirements of stability and order. The emergence
of the international system as one of ‘a hub and spokes’, where the systemic
guarantees at the centre are reinforced through a combination of global rules and
norms articulated at international institutions and implemented by designated
regional hegemons, became the preferred form for the exercise of hegemonic
management (Neack, 2002). For a time, post-Cold war Africa, famously marginalised as a ‘hopeless continent’, seemed left outside of much of this process, yet the
spectre of global terrorism and the resurgent importance of natural resources, placed
the continent ﬁrmly back on the global agenda.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

243

Alden and Schoeman

For post-apartheid South Africa, three conditions in particular contributed to the
elevation of the country from international pariah to that of a putative regional
manager. The ﬁrst was the historical conjuncture of systemic change and the absence
of a regional manager in Africa which provided the international impetus for its
elevation to that status (see Lobell et al, in this volume). The second was its relative
material power and perceptions of that power as seen internationally and within the
region. Finally, the courting of international recognition of leadership by South
African president Thabo Mbeki, who sought to partner with Western states to put in
place a regional framework predicated on leveraging their power resources to meet
the basic requirements of provision for public goods to the region.

Post-Apartheid South Africa’s ‘Hegemonic Moment’
The transition from apartheid pariah to celebrated democracy between 1990 and
1994 was slow in coming, giddy in its implications and overwhelming in its
responsibilities for the new government. It offered the possibility that South Africa
could at last achieve its ‘historic mission’, that is to say to play the leading role in
continental affairs and through that, on the wider global stage (Barber and Baratt,
1990; Alden and Schoeman, 2013). While the complexities of integrating and
restructuring the foreign policy institutions in government turned out to be far greater
than anticipated, international rehabilitation nonetheless followed rapidly, with South
Africa’s position reinstated in a host of regional and international organisations from
which it had been barred during the apartheid era, thereby indicating early
international recognition of the country as an African leader.
On the economic front, statistics tell the story of the South African position
vis-à-vis the rest of Africa. In 1994, the South African economy accounted for 50
per cent of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP, it was (and is) the continent’s most
industrialised economy, had a modern manufacturing capacity that produced everything from appliances and automobiles to cutting edge mining equipment and an
atomic bomb. The ﬁnancial sector was (and remains) widely admired for its innovation
and probity while the Johannesburg Stock Exchange is the seventh largest in the world.
All of this was matched by a modern physical infrastructure that – while neglecting the
needs of the black majority (a fact largely and deliberately hidden from sight) –
contributed to the impression that South Africa had no rivals on the continent. This was
particularly true as far as the level of industrialisation and economic and infrastructure
development was concerned. South Africa has consistently, since the early 1990s,
contributed 70 per cent of Southern African Development Community’s (SADC)
GDP and 60 per cent of the region’s total trade (see also Cheru, 1996;
Lee, 2011) and, despite Nigeria rapidly gaining ground, South Africa still has the
biggest economy in sub-Sahara Africa (Cox, 2013).
244

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa

Concurrently, the opening of diplomatic ties with the rest of Africa provided
opportunities for South African business to expand beyond its borders as never
before. The result was an outward investment push that saw South African mining
and construction ﬁrms, retail, media and telecommunications giants and parastatals
seek out investment opportunities and markets in the relatively untrammelled African
environment. Within a short time, the area of historically recognised South African
economic dominance – the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and to some
extent the broader Southern African region – began to be supplemented with a
growing presence in rest of the continent through the spread of South African
consumer goods and the opening of branch ofﬁces by some in its corporate sector.
Restraints on capital controls were only lowered for South African ﬁrms investing in
the rest of Africa in 2002, so investment was still limited to the largest multinationals
who were able to command sufﬁcient internal capital reserves to ﬁnance investments
abroad. At the same time, there was every reason to think that these preliminary
forays abroad would continue and gather pace.
The ﬁrst indications of a bid for regional leadership under an ANC-led government
came at this unprecedented historic juncture. Having engaged in a year-long
consultation process within government and civil society, South African foreign
policy was ofﬁcially placed on a different footing from the past, with the new
areas of focus being, respectively, South African national development, Africa
and the South (Alden and le Pere, 2003). Reﬂecting this re-alignment, the South
African government successfully bid for a leadership role in a range of
South-oriented international organisations, starting with hosting of the UNCTAD
summit in 1996 and 2 years later chairing the Non-Aligned Movement in Durban
(Alden and le Pere, 2003). Concurrently, at international conferences, such as the
Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1995, South African diplomats played a key role in
facilitating agreements between the established nuclear powers and the developing
countries.
South Africa’s efforts to build a new continental system, based on its vision of an
African renaissance, also required the country to become much more involved in
peace and security issues. Its initial attempts to conﬁne its peace-making efforts to the
sphere of mediation, met with criticism, especially in the face of the large troop
contributions made by many other smaller and poorer African countries. Leadership,
the country had to learn, required not only ideas, but also other more tangible
sources. Since the late 1990s therefore, South Africa’s contribution to UN and
African Union (AU) peace missions increased rapidly, turning it into one of the major
African troop-contributing countries with a total of 2020 troops in 14 peace missions.
These ﬁgures indicate a threefold increase in the numbers originally envisaged in the
1990s. However, analysts continue to point out that the country’s defence budget is
completely insufﬁcient for the demands placed on its defence force in its quest to
contribute to peace and security on the continent (Le Roux, 2012). ‘Crude material
power’ may not be the sole determinant of hegemonic capacity, but soft power alone
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

245

Alden and Schoeman

(in the form of good ideas and other intangible goods) cannot sustain a would-be
hegemonic project.
The contrast with the positive international reception for South African leadership
and the African reaction to Pretoria’s efforts was marked and is reminiscent of the
position of Brazil (see Burges in this volume). At the SADC, which was originally
founded in 1980 for the purpose of de-linking regional economies from South Africa,
simmering rivalries between Mandela and Mugabe produced institutional paralysis
over foreign and security policies (Nathan, 2012). Concerns about South African
foreign policy activism were heightened by the SANDF invasion of Lesotho to
reverse a military coup in 1998 and, as the newly established government in Kinshasa
came under pressure in August the same year, Zimbabwe, Angola and Namibian
forces launched their own invasion of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).
As a result, SADC’s involvement in regional security became mired in factionalism
and internal disputes for several years, scuppering South Africa’s vision for a
regional security regime of its own making. At the continental level, Mandela’s
efforts to mobilise a sanctions campaign against the Nigerian military regime in the
wake of the execution of Ken Saro Wiwa and the Ogoni 9 was not even able to
produce one vote of public support among African governments (Van Aardt, 1996).
There were, however, areas that did reﬂect a more assertive strain in South African
foreign policy, namely the mediating role played in Burundi and the DRC. What was
notable about these was the fact that they were framed around the promotion of a
‘South African model’ of negotiated power-sharing arrangements (and, in the case of
Burundi, at the behest of an established mediator in the form of President Julius
Nyerere), with the consensus of the parties involved. At the same time, further
underscoring the imperative of consensus in order to achieve its foreign policy aims,
equivalent efforts by Mandela to promote this approach in the Angolan conﬂict were
roundly rejected outright by an angry MPLA.
Overall, during what has been characterised as the ‘foreign policy of transition’,
the international community eagerly sought to integrate post-apartheid South Africa
into global affairs. The response of African states was much more cautious,
welcoming the change in regime but wary of the material power that South Africans
wielded and, in the case of some individual leaders, the prestige accorded to the
singular ﬁgure of Nelson Mandela.

Visions and Proﬁts – South Africa’s Expansion into Africa
President Thabo Mbeki’s imprint on the effort to promote South African leadership
aspirations were distinctive and ambitious, setting the stage for their realisation
through the development of a new ideology, a reworking of regional institutions in
line with this vision and a reformulation of continental partnerships with the West.
Framing his approach within a far-reaching vision of an African renaissance,
246

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa

Mbeki sought to engage African (particularly Nigerian) and Western governments
in a grand bargain that would raise aid and investment in return for adoption of
neo-liberal policies and improvements in governance called the NEPAD.
The process of institutionalising South Africa’s claim to continental leadership
began as part of Mbeki’s accelerating international activism through constant
engagement in the succession of G8 summits involving Africa starting in 2000 at
Okinawa, the prominent position taken by Mbeki in developing and ﬁnancing of the
NEPAD initiative, and Pretoria’s seminal role in creating the AU. Most notably, the
latter involved the inclusion of clauses on the suspension of governments illicitly
coming to power and intervention to prevent forms of genocide and gross violations
of human rights. These measures were bolstered by the aforementioned willingness
to sponsor the peace negotiations between different Congolese parties in the late
1990s and early 2000s, and its involvement in peace efforts in, among others,
Burundi, Sudan and Cote d’Ivoire. Even South African initiatives deemed to be a
failure – at least by some international actors and regional African actors – such as
Mbeki’s promulgation of ‘quiet diplomacy’ in Zimbabwe and the attempted
brokering of peace in Cote d’Ivoire (Piccolino, 2010) nevertheless were clear
demonstrations of a desire to play a central role in regional management and the
exertion of inﬂuence.
Coming alongside the South African efforts to develop policies and institutions
that cohered with Mbeki’s vision was the expansion of South African economic
presences across the continent, providing the material conditions for the exercise of
structural power. Examining the political economy of South African involvement
with the continent more closely, it could be understood as operating within three
concentric circles of economic engagement, with the ﬁrst being deﬁned by the
geographic parameters of the SACU, the second SADC and the third being the rest of
the continent (Alden and Soko, 2005).
With respect to the SACU, an entity established in 1910, South Africa’s structural
power was its greatest and exercised through ﬁnancial control over the currencies of
SACU members and its overwhelming capacity economic capacity. The revision of
the 1969 ﬁnancial arrangements that governed the allocation of revenue to the weaker
members of SACU by the South African Treasury occupied several years of
negotiation and was only completed in 2002. The SADC formed the next circle
of engagement and here the position of South Africa was marked by movement of
construction, mining and retail as well as smaller businesses in the region. Indeed,
South African trade represented 68 per cent of the total regional trade in 2010
(Sandrey, 2013). The South African penetration of the Zimbabwean economy, which
had been given further impetus with the unilateral decision to abrogate the longstanding bilateral trade agreement in 1996, effectively dismantled the Zimbabwean
textile industry to the beneﬁt of South African producers. Even at this early stage, this
aggressive approach was not pursued nor was it successful everywhere. For instance,
South African Breweries (SAB), which had been repelled in Kenya adopted a
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

247

Alden and Schoeman

cautious approach in its purchase of the smallest of Angola’s three breweries which
involved utilising local agents to disguise its bid.
Finally the remaining circle of engagement was the rest of the African continent
where South Africa’s commercial reach ranged from non-existent to being limited in
scope, and in some cases was highly contested causing some states to even resort to
‘soft balancing’ in the name of national economic interests. On the one hand, by 2013
South African investment had increased its corporates’ presence across the region to
historical highs though it lagged behind investors, such as China, India, the United
Kingdom and Canada in terms of the amount of capital invested (Mail & Guardian,
2013). This was exempliﬁed in the case of Ghana, a region far removed from its
traditional ambit of inﬂuence, which boasted over 80 South African businesses by
2012 (Republic of South Africa, 2011). At the same time, foreign and local
competition and even resistance put constraints on South African economic penetration
of this part of the continent. For instance, while cellular phone company MTN carved
out a position in Uganda and Nigeria, Woolworths and Clicks opened branches in
Ghana, and Standard Bank expanded its ‘African footprint’ to 18 countries, there were
notable failures too. SAB’s successful takeover bid of national breweries in Tanzania
was contrasted with its highly publicised failure to do so in Kenya. At the same time,
South African Airways managed to unite the divided Kenyan government and local
business interests, which successfully fought a high-proﬁle campaign to block the
takeover of its national airline (Alden and Soko, 2005).

South African Hegemony and Its Discontents
While the institutional building blocks of regional hegemony, coupled to the
expansion of South African corporate activism on the continent, may have been put
in place during the Mbeki presidency, global recognition of South Africa’s status as
primus inter pares in Africa did not protect it from criticism. In fact, the two principal
pillars of its claims to regional leadership – the articulation and implementation of a
new continental vision for development and an economy driven by a robust private
sector – became ﬂash points which exposed the weaknesses of South Africa’s
capacity to play a hegemonic role. Linked to this was its conduct as a non-permanent
member of the UN Security Council, which saw Pretoria take on positions at odds
with both its Western backers and African states.
South Africa ﬁnds the establishment of its hegemonic vision for the continent
under constant challenge. While NEPAD won convincing support from the G8
countries, culminating in commitments made at the Gleneagles summit in 2005, core
elements like the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) – which linked aid and
investment provisions to assessments of performance – remained controversial with
many African governments. Its goal of having NEPAD as a separate institution
alongside the AU was thwarted by an AU decision to subsume NEPAD under the
248

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa

auspices of the continental organisation, thereby largely undermining the independence of NEPAD and neutering its monitoring mechanism, the APRM. South Africa
countered by driving an aggressive campaign to have its own candidate elected to the
chairpersonship of the AU and succeeding despite heavy criticism from several
African countries, including Nigeria. Some of its voting positions as an elected
member of the UN Security Council further estranged it from its continental peers
(this was especially the case when South Africa voted in favour of Resolution 1973
on Libya in 2011) and also from Western states when it refused to vote in favour of
sanctions against Zimbabwe during its ﬁrst term on the Security Council. Its secondtier position that requires Western support for its development goals for the continent
is often in conﬂict with its vision for a changed international system.
Concurrently, since coming to ofﬁce in 2009, President Jacob Zuma has embraced
a more assertive foreign policy explicitly rooted in national interest that has further
complicated relations with many African governments. Bolstered by South Africa’s
selection as Africa’s only representative on the G20, and in late 2010, the invitation
to join the BRICS, Pretoria began to take a more forthright approach to regional
concerns. However, the more assertive foreign policy approach towards Zimbabwe,
with Zuma deliberately shunning Robert Mugabe at SADC meetings and pushing for
free and fair elections, did not produce the expected changes in that country.
Indeed, in the aftermath of Mugabe’s re-election, friction over South African political
interference and dominance of their economy has only escalated (Lee, 2012;
Business Reporter, 2013; Ncube, 2013). Even Swaziland’s embattled monarchy,
despite overwhelming dependency on South Africa, has so far been able to defy
Pretoria’s efforts to introduce political reforms even to the extent of turning down
needed economic assistance.
As far as the material basis for its hegemonic position on the continent is
concerned, South Africa’s economic position vis-à-vis the rest of the continent is
also weakening. Nigeria is, at least as far as crude GDP growth is concerned, on the
rise resulting in speculation that Nigeria might in the foreseeable future eclipse South
Africa’s ‘big economy’ status on the continent (O’Neil, 2014). It is also clear that
early expectations of South Africa as the gateway to Africa are overrated. China and
India have shown that it is not necessary to move into the continent through South
Africa: several African countries have sufﬁcient expertise and resources to fulﬁl
gateway positions.
Moreover, within the context of South Africa’s structural power position in SACU,
Pretoria has found it increasingly frustrating to provide the kinds of beneﬁts expected
from SACU members. The country contributes 98 per cent of the pool of customs and
excise duties shared between SACU members, but it has little say in the way in which
the revenue is spent. There are strong indications that South Africa wants a portion of
these revenues to be set aside for regional integration and development and that it
wants to place some restrictions on how SACU revenue is spent, (Mail & Guardian,
2013) pointing to a more assertive approach to its neighbours.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

249

Alden and Schoeman

Moreover, South African business expansion into Africa is not necessarily a
meaningful expression of hegemony, even if it is a component of it. Complicating the
picture of South Africa on the march northwards is the countervailing trends of
continental investment into South Africa and domestic drivers that have encouraged
capital ﬂight and/or reinvestment outside of the country. As African economies
began to experience accelerating growth from 2002 onwards, South Africa’s outward
expansion was complimented by a steady movement of African ﬁrms into the South
African economy. Ghana’s international agriculture ﬁrm Fruitis purchased land in
Mpumalanga province and marketed its products in South Africa while Nigerian
banks EcoBank and Guaranty opened up branches across South Africa.
Moreover, the push to gain access to the African market was sometimes conducted
by South African ﬁrms that were intent on reducing their exposure to the vagaries of
the South African environment. The de-listing of major South African multinationals like Anglo-American and SAB from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange,
the shifting of capital abroad and the opening up of businesses outside of South
Africa, were all strategies that reﬂected concerns with the possibility of nationalisation of assets or the rising cost of doing business in the stagnant South African
economy. Furthermore, the friction and at times hostility between the South African
state and its business community, riveted by lingering racial animosities and fears of
government interference, argued against the collusion of state and industry (see also
Shaw, in this volume). Few companies turn to the Department of Trade and
Industry for export support or advice nor do they expect assistance, causing leading
South African analysts to bemoan the absence of a ‘South Africa Inc’ (Alden and
Soko, 2005).
On the international stage, South Africa’s standing among key Western governments is fading. When George Bush declared on a state visit to South Africa in the
early 2000s that Thabo Mbeki was his ‘point man’ on the Zimbabwe issue, it was an
endorsement of faith in South Africa to present a Western case in the African setting.
By June 2008, the United States and the United Kingdom used the G8 Summit to
publically castigate the South African position. Pretoria’s voting record during its
two-term tenure as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council added
further to their dismay (Discussions with Western diplomats in Pretoria, 2011, 2012,
2013). In fact, the invitation to join the BRICS grouping in December 2010 and the
subsequent outcry over Pretoria’s support for UNSC Resolution 1973 on NATO
intervention into Libya marked a further shift away from its Western orientation.
In turn, South Africa has increasingly sought to strengthen its international ties by
moving closer to emerging global South powers, both to avoid over-dependence on
Western support for its continental vision, and to tap potential resources coming from
fast-growing economies, such as China. South Africa’s push for the establishment of
a BRICS development bank is predicated on the expectation that it would provide
access to resources for continental development which would reinforce its leadership
position, as well as its vision for the continent. On the part, though, of other BRICS
250

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa

members, there does not seem to be the same measure of enthusiasm for South
Africa’s plans.
For secondary and tertiary competitor states like Nigeria and Kenya, the space for
movement and pursuit of their own economic and foreign policy interests is widening
further (see Shaw in this volume). Discourses of ‘African authenticity’ will continue
to feature in their criticism of South African positions of continental issues ranging
from trade and development to regional security and UN reform while the courting of
international opinion based on their relative gains in material power will be aimed at
competing and diluting Pretoria’s legitimacy.

Conclusion: Symbolic Representivity
The South African case as a ‘second-tier power’ reminds us that the distribution of
power across the international system is more than a function of material capability
but rather reﬂects contingencies derived from the perceived requirements for the
maintenance of order in line with leading states. For instance, the elevation of France
and the Republic of China as permanent members on the newly created United
Nations, enervated allies of the British and the United States, were the product of the
need and contingencies of a particular historical moment. Neither could operate
effectively without the resources and support of their ‘patrons’. In the case of South
Africa, the ‘hegemonic moment’ came in the midst of a withdrawal of Western
interest in Africa during the early post-Cold War years, and remained salient when
the continent started to rise in the wake of renewed interest in its natural resources.
Both Mandela and Mbeki were masters at utilising contingency to position South
Africa as continental leader in the eyes of the world, and to put Africa back on the
global agenda. Elevated in standing, the difﬁculties experienced in meeting the
requirements of providing public goods to Africa in response to both international
and region pressures are manifold.
The implications of South Africa’s symbolic representivity rather than substantive
hegemony over Africa is that it is always conditioned by a need to work in
partnership with external powers to achieve its foreign policy aims. Under Mbeki
this was expected to happen by forging a ‘new partnership’ with G8 countries for
African development. In the wake of the ﬁnancial crisis and shifting economic trends
towards East Asia, the South African government shifted its focus towards China.
Much of the debate surrounding the BRICS development bank turns on the question
of winning BRICS support for employing Chinese ﬁnance towards fulﬁlling much
the same agenda: the delays in bringing the institution into being are suggestive of
constraints in this alternative source of support.
The means by which South Africa has achieved global standing, as Africa’s
representative in global politics, promises to pose continual dilemmas that challenge
its best efforts to reconcile its own concerns with the impulse to serve as a bridge
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

251

Alden and Schoeman

builder, facilitator and protector for the region. Matters like Zimbabwe, Cote d’Ivoire
and Libya, where there is a clash between established regime interests and broadly
held principles of solidarity and human rights will expose, time and again, this
conundrum. In a sign of emerging realism, South African foreign policy commentators are beginning to acknowledge that acting effectively in Africa requires
accepting that it may be subject to intense criticism from elements in the continent.
Although some may say that such criticism is a normal feature of the exercise of
leadership (which it is), in the South African case it carries much more existential
meaning. For should South Africa, in its pursuit of an assertive foreign policy,
continuously lose the support of the continent or its somewhat precarious economic
circumstances falter, the international community’s own enthusiasm for it may
diminish. It is upon this soft clay that the very basis of this putative hegemon’s global
standing rests.

About the Authors
Chris Alden is a Professor in International Relations at the London School of
Economics and Political Science (LSE) and research associate with the Department
of Political Sciences, University of Pretoria. His most recent publications are China
and Mozambique: From Comrades to Capitalists (Jacana 2014) co-edited with
Sergio Chichava; ‘South Africa in the company of giants: The search for leadership
in a transformed global order’, International Affairs 89(1) 2013, with Maxi Schoeman;
and ‘Upstairs and downstairs dimensions of China and the Chinese in South Africa’, The
State of the Nation (Pretoria: HSRC 2013) with Yoon Park.
Maxi Schoeman holds a PhD from the University of Wales (Aberystwyth) and is
Professor and Head of the Department of Political Sciences, University of Pretoria.
Her most recent publications include: ‘South Africa’s foreign policy: Challenges and
constraints’, Welt Trends 21, September/October (with Chris Alden); ‘South Africa
in the company of giants: The search for leadership in a transformed global order’,
International Affairs 89(1), with Chris Alden and ‘Foreign policy and the military: In
service of reconstruction and development?’ in Theo Neethliing and Heidi
Hudson (eds), Post Conﬂict Reconstruction and Development in Africa, Cape Town:
UCT Press.

References
Ahwiring, F. and McGowan, P. (1998) Partner or hegemon: South Africa in Africa. Journal of
Contemporary African Studies 16(1/2): 165–195.
Alden, C. and le Pere, G. (2003) South Africa’s Post-Apartheid Foreign Policy. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
252

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

South Africa’s symbolic hegemony in Africa

Alden, C. and Schoeman, M. (2013) South Africa in the company of giants: The search for leadership in a
transforming global order. International Affairs 89(1): 111–129.
Alden, C. and Soko, M. (2005) South Africa’s economic relations with Africa: Hegemony and its
discontents. Journal of Modern African Studies 43(3): 367–392.
Alessi, C. (2013) South Africa’s Economic Faultlines. Council on Foreign Relations, 17 May, http://www
.cfr.org/south-africa/south-africas-economic-fault-lines/p30727, accessed 27 November 2014.
Barber, J. and Baratt, J. (1990) South African Foreign Policy: The Search for Recognition. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Burges, S. (2008) Consensual hegemony: Theorizing the practice of Brazilian foreign policy. International
Relations 22(1): 65–84.
Business Reporter (2013) Zimbabwe to review trade pact with SA. The Herald 7 November, http://www
.herald.co.zw/zim-to-review-trade-pact-with-sa/, accessed 12 February 2014.
Cheru, F. (1996) Africa in the new world order: Rethinking development planning in the age of globalization.
In: A. Adedeji (ed.) South Africa & Africa: Within or Apart? London: Zed Books, pp. 44–72.
Cox, P. (2013) Nigerian economy gaining on regional heavyweight South Africa, 24 September, http://
www.voanews.com/articleprintview/1755773.html, accessed 12 February 2014.
Daniels, J., Southall, R. and Naidu, S. (2008) The South Africans are coming!. In: J. Daniels and
R. Southall (eds.) The State of The Nation. Pretoria, South Africa: HSRC.
Dlamini, K. (2013) Superpowers must play their part. Sunday Independent 19 May, http://www.iol.co.za/
sundayindependent/superpowers-must-play-the-part-1.1518127#.VHsX8MnhKSo, accessed 30 November
2014.
Holmes, T. (2013) SA business is blooming in Africa. Mail & Guardian 28 June, http://mg.co.za/print/
2013-06-28-00-sa-business-is-blooming-in-africa, accessed 9 January 2014.
Hurrell, A. (2006) Hegemony, liberalism and global order: What space for would-be great powers?
International Affairs 82(1): 1–19.
Lee, R. (2011) South Africa and regional economic integration, 10 August, http://www.osisa.org/
economic-justice/south-africa-and-regional-economic-integration, accessed on 27 November 2014.
Lee, R. (2012) ZANU-PF lashes out at South Africa, 6 March, http://www.osisa.org/general/zimbabwe/
zanu-pf-lashes-out-south-africa, accessed on 27 November 2014.
Lee, D. and Hamill, J. (2001) A middle power paradox. International Relations 15(4): 33–59.
Le Roux, L. (2012) Draft South African defence review 2012. The dichotomy between ambition and
reality. Institute for Security Studies Policy Brief No. 32. July, Pretoria, pp. 1–4.
Nathan, L. (2005) Consistencies and inconsistencies in South African foreign policy. International Affairs
81(2): 360–372.
Nathan, L. (2012) Community of Insecurity: SADC’s Struggle for Peace and Security in Southern Africa.
London: Ashgate.
Ncube, X. (2013) Zuma rubbishes Mugabe. Zimbabwean Mail 21 February, p. 1.
Neack, L. (2002) Middle powers once removed: The diminished role of middle powers and American
grand strategy. International Studies Association Conference Proceedings, 14–18 March 2000, Los
Angeles, p. 2.
O’Neil, J. (2014) Why the MINTs come after BRICS. The New Statesman 23 January, http://www
.newstatesman.com/2014/01/after-brics-mints-austerity-britain-and-big-c, accessed 9 February 2014.
Piccolino, G. (2010) Mediation, local response and the limits of international engagement in Cote d’Ivoire.
Paper presented at the ECPR Graduate Conference; Dublin, 30 August–1 September 2010.
Republic of South Africa (2011) President Jacob Zuma to receive President John Atta Mills on a two day
visit to South Africa DIRCO press release, 23 August.
Sandrey, R. (2013) An analysis of SADC’s free trade area. Tradelac 19 June.
Schoeman, M. (2003) South Africa as an emerging middle power. In: J. Daniel, A. Habib and R. Southall
(eds.) State of the Nation – South Africa 2003–2004. Pretoria, South Africa: HSRC, pp. 349–367.
Strange, S. (1988) States and Markets. London: Pinter.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

253

Alden and Schoeman

Taylor, I., Nel, P. and van der Westhuizen, J. (2002) New Africa, globalization and the conﬁnes
of elite reformism: Getting the rhetoric right, getting the strategy wrong. Third World Quarterly
23(1): 163–180.
Van Aardt, M. (1996) A foreign policy to die for: South Africa’s response to the Nigerian crisis. Africa
Insight 26(2): 107–119.

254

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 239–254

Original Article

African agency? Africa, South Africa and the
BRICS
Timothy M. Shaw
McCormack Graduate School, University of Massachusetts, 100 Morrissey Boulevard, Boston,
MA 02125-3393, USA.
E-mail: Timothy.Shaw@umb.edu

Abstract African states, economies and societies are increasingly ambivalent about
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (the BRICS), especially their latest, ﬁfth
member, South Africa, as economic growth comes with costs, shorter- and longer-term,
from social to ecological. ‘Emerging’ economies, powers and societies may claim to be
‘developmental’ but they still confront challenges of governance, especially of their nonrenewable natural resources. Symbolic of the price of growth is continuing migration into
South Africa, uneven scores on a range of indicators – African Capacity Building Indicators (ACBI), Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), Human Development
Index (HDI), Fragile States, Ibrahim Index and so on – and the West African Commission
on Drugs (WACD). The African Mining Vision (AMV) remains problematic despite or
because of the BRICS.
International Politics (2015) 52, 255–268. doi:10.1057/ip.2014.48;
published online 12 December 2014
Keywords: African agency; developmental states; new regionalisms; South Africa;
transnational governance

Since 2001, Africa’s GDP has expanded more quickly each year than the
global average. In the past decade, only the bloc of developing Asian
economies, led by China, has grown faster than Africa …
… even as China slows, there is enough momentum for Africa’s GDP to grow
by around 5.5 per cent in 2014, the average of the past decade – faster than any
other region in the world, according to the EIU. (O’Sullivan, 2014, p. 73)
Divergence in rates of development between the North and the South may increase as
the global South grows and challenges the dominance of the North, now beset by
problems such as ageing populations, climate change and the Eurozone. The range of
security strategies, as discussed by Lobell, Williams and Jesse (2015) that apply in
other regions like South America may not resonate in Africa because of its distinctive
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748 International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

Shaw

informal, transnational cross-border relations, many small states and economies
and the constraints on South Africa’s role (Flemes, 2010; Shaw et al, 2011; Fanta
et al, 2013). South Africa may be primus inter pares but hardly dominates the
other 54 countries of the continent (55 or 56 and counting if Puntland, Reunion,
Western Sahara and so on are recognized). Yet to date, Africa has lacked the strong
secondary and tertiary powers which Brazil faces in South America as discussed
by Daniel Flemes and Leslie Wehner (cf Merke, 2015). For instance, Nigeria and
Egypt continue to face major political, social and economic stresses and its aspiring developmental states are largely quite modest in size and scale (Alden and
Schoeman, 2013). Already several developmental states (for example, Botswana,
Mauritius and Seychelles) and non-developmental states (for example, Equatorial
Guinea and Gabon) have higher purchasing power parity (PPP) scores (cf. Alden and
Schoeman, 2015).
Because of its history and political culture/economy, South Africa may project at
least two foreign policies which hardly connect because of its inheritance of
apartheid: state and non-state. So in terms of non-state foreign policy, transnational
corporate and civil society relations, including fast-food/ﬁnance/hotel/supermarket
and other franchises, media like cell-phone brands like MTN and satellite TV like
DStv, sports like soccer and rugby, supply chains, and technologies, even private
security companies, do not impact ofﬁcial diplomacy. Hosting the Africa Cup of
Nations or FIFA World Cup or running the continent’s largest airline do not lead to
regional hegemony. South Africa’s soft power is separate from its inter-state status,
two solitudes with historical roots. But South Africa as host to millions of Africans in
their diasporas does impact inter-state affairs, generating some soft balancing and
even binding as the continued ﬂow of remittances is crucial for some national
budgets (for example, Lesotho, Zimbabwe); in short, given ubiquitous transnational
ties, continental relations are characterized by endless, ﬂuid coalitions and tensions
around complex interdependence of a distinctive variety. As the gap between South
Africa and the continent’s developmental states narrows so the latter can increasingly
resist any pressures from the former. The rest of this article proceeds from the
continent’s new growth trajectory leading to possibilities of more African ‘agency’,
especially around burgeoning forms of regionalisms, which demand innovative
analysis as well as policy.
I turn from noting the continent’s unprecedented growth in the present century to
its new ability to maximize policy choices, including articulating ambivalence
towards South Africa as one of the BRICS.

Africa’s Economic Growth: Sustainable After 2015?
‘African agency’ in the second decade of the 21st century is the collective economic
and foreign policy mantra of the continent’s ‘developmental states’, the continent’s
256

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

African agency?

initial deﬁnition of contestation. Africa’s economic agencies such as the UN
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) along with the African Development
Bank (AfDB) and African Union (AU) plus UN Developemnt Programme (UNDP,
2013) came to advocate the adoption of policies leading towards developmental
states (Singh and Bourgouin, 2013) a decade after Mkandawire (2001) ﬁrst advanced
the concept; the interim decade of the ﬁrst 10 years of the 21st century was that of the
BRICs then BRICS, leading to unprecedented growth on the continent (Economist,
2013). The most concrete or advanced articulation of such agency to date is the AMV
(AMV, 2009) (www.africaminingvision.org). This constitutes one example of normsetting by ‘rising powers’ which is an embryonic form of soft-balancing in which
South Africa plays an ambivalent role as the latest, tenuous member of the BRICS’
coalition.
African agency constitutes a determined response by the continent’s developmental states to the gains rather than costs of the discovery of Africa’s potential by
the BRICS, especially China. After a decade of ‘renaissance’, its leaders are
increasingly selective about overtures from the BRICS, now including the latest,
ﬁfth member, South Africa. The latter may be the most marginal of the BRICS but on
the continent its presence is ubiquitous so scepticism about South African intentions
gets projected onto the BRICS as a whole. Meanwhile, African states, which have
suffered a series of promising ‘new African’ leaders for them only to overstay and
age in ofﬁce – hence the difﬁculty of Mo Ibrahim awarding his African Leadership
prize each year – have undertaken minimal soft rather than hard balancing even at
regional levels as they contrive means to gain from rather than challenge RSA,
especially as the lustre of the ‘rainbow nation’ is wearing thin, symbolized by the
passing of Nelson Mandela before Xmas 2013.
African foreign policy has always been distinctive because more informal and
transnational and is now getting the attention it deserves as a contribution to
comparative inter-regional analysis (Flemes, 2010). Symptomatically, at the turn of
the decade, a new introduction to African international relations was published
(Cornelissen et al, 2012) and an earlier collection by Dunn and Shaw (2001) was
reissued, after more than a decade, in a Classics paperback edition with a new
overview as well as translated into Chinese – if not rising powers, certainly not in
decline. As Kevin Dunn suggests in his new Preface (Dunn and Shaw, 2001, p. xxv),
it is decreasingly axiomatic that:
1. Africa is politically and economically marginalized within the practice of world
politics, and
2. Africa is ignored or marginalized by theorists of world politics.
The increasing salience of the continent – soft if not hard balancing – was marked
by a set of articles in International Affairs from Chatham House at the start of 2013,
including a review of the ﬁeld by Harman and Brown (2013) which focused on two
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

257

Shaw

contrasting case studies: China in Africa and HIV/AIDS. The ‘drivers’ are no longer
extra-continental, whether from the old North or new South.
The balance between developmental and fragile or failed states is shifting as the
number of the former increases; see states at top and bottom in a series of rankings for
the continent from ACBF, EITI, HDI, Ibrahim Index, UNECA and so on. So, for
example, the top trio on the continent in terms of HDI according to the UNDP is
Mauritius, Botswana and South Africa; the last 16 states at the bottom of the UNDP
HDI in 2013 are all African except for Afghanistan. The synthetic Ibrahim Index of
African Governance for 2012 ranks at the top, Mauritius, Cape Verde, Botswana,
Seychelles, South Africa, Namibia and Ghana with, at the bottom, Somalia (#52),
DRC, Chad, Eritrea, CAR and Zimbabwe. And Foreign Policy’s ‘Failed States
Index’ in 2013 has Somalia, DRC, Sudan, South Sudan and Chad at the bottom. Such
states hardly relate to RSA as one of the BRICS let alone engage in sophisticated,
sustained binding/bonding strategies towards it.
Moreover, at least some political economies on the continent are moving away
from commodities to services:
The region already has a group of fast-growing export-oriented economies that
do not rely on the production of commodities. Some of the continent’s biggest
economies, such as Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda, are in this category
(O’Sullivan, 2014).
Given the legacy of a decade of the BRICS, Africa anticipates post-2015 development agendas without the shadow of dependency, anticipating AMV advocacy and
adoption by emerging non-state as well as state actors by the middle of this decade
both on and off the continent. Enlightened by Lucy Corkin’s (2013) analysis of
Angola’s leverage over China’s EXIM Bank, I relate to the emerging ‘agency’ versus
‘dependency’ debate (Brown, 2012; Brown and Harman, 2013; Harman and Brown,
2013; Lorenz and Rempe, 2013) as an unexpected correlate of the continent’s recent
unprecedented growth. This sets it apart from continuing economic difﬁculties and
setbacks in much of the established North of the OECD, especially the PIIGS and
Cyprus of the Eurozone. And while China and the other BRICS may be slowing, the
former is still expected to grow at more than 7 per cent in 2014. As O’Sullivan (2014,
p. 73) suggests:
As China’s economy evolves so will Africa’s … with fewer challengers from
Asia’s tigers, the IMF predicts that four of the world’s six fastest-growing
economies in 2014 will be in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
This article juxtaposes two dominant interrelated strands in the political economy of
today’s continent: the impact of the BRICS, especially China (Xing and Farah,
2013), and the return of a commodities boom, this time with a focus on energy and
minerals but, in future to include food, land and water. So, how to maximize
balancing and networking given an unprecedented decade at the start of the new
258

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

African agency?

century (Africa Progress Panel, 2012), especially as the continent’s economies as
well as leaderships rise and fall, symbolized by the historic contests between two sets
of neigbours, Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana, Zambia and Zimbabwe: a decade ago, no one
would have anticipated that Ghana and Zambia would be in the lead!?
Half of the dozen fastest growing countries identiﬁed in the Economist’s ‘World in
2011’ (note just 5/12 in 2014 (Economist, 2014)) were African (Economist, 2010),
from Ghana, the best-case example of democratic development, to Angola, the new
‘oil giant’ (Corkin, 2013) as reinforced by the expansion of the African middle class
(AfDB, 2011). Such growth and associated changes in the nature of ‘governance’
inside and around the continent may expand the possibility and reach of ‘agency’ of
African countries and communities (Brown, 2012; Brown and Harman, 2013; Lorenz
and Rempe, 2013); the ability of a range of African state and non-state actors to
impact decisions and directions at a variety of levels by expanding their room for
manoeuvre (Africa Progress Panel, 2012), or to maximise reach of balancing/norm
setting: they can increasingly balance old inﬂuences from the EU and OECD with
new, such as the BRICS and other emerging economies/powers. This unanticipated
possibility is not just a function of continuing growth courtesy of the BRICS,
especially China (Xing and Farah, 2013). In short, established assumptions about
inherited ‘dependency’ on the supposedly ubiquitous ‘external’ need to be reconsidered, especially if the latter now includes burgeoning transnational diasporas from
the former (Ratha et al, 2011; World Bank, 2011).

Varieties of African Agency Post-2015?
I base this analysis on ﬁve major developments in agency especially at the regional
level (see next section below) that suggest above all that, after the BRICS’ decade,
the character of development is very much in ﬂux on the continent (Shaw, 2012;
Economist, 2013). These developments suggest that the continent’s 53 states need to
undertake little soft-balancing let alone binding as South Africa is decreasingly
dominant (cf. Merke, 2015 on Brazil and LA).
First, with particular relevance for this analysis, African stakeholders have been
central to a set of innovations in transnational governance including Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR), however problematic, from Kimberley Process (KP) at the end
of the 20th century to Publish What You Pay (PWYP)/Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) at the turn of the century and now onto Dodd-Frank
in the new decade (www.enoughproject.org). Second, African regions have generated a series of innovations, from Maputo Corridor to trans-frontier peace parks or
the Tripartite Free Trade Agreement (T-FTA) between the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), East African Community (EAC) (Hansohm,
2013) and Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)
(Hartzenberg et al, 2012). Third, South Africa has been elevated and recognized as
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

259

Shaw

the ﬁfth member of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa),
however justiﬁed (Sandrey et al, 2013). This raises questions about the emphasis or
priority of the biggest economy on the continent and its leadership aspirations at the
regional, continental and global levels (Jordaan, 2003; Flemes, 2010; Nel and Nolte,
2010; Nel et al, 2012). Fourth, if we expand our purview from the continent itself to
its diasporas concentrated in Europe and North America, agency through remittances
is likely to become even more inﬂuential in the years ahead (Ratha et al, 2011)
(www.au.int/pages/remittance/about).
And ﬁnally, albeit controversially, if we go beyond the ‘formal and legal’ to ‘gangs
and guns’, we can discover novel forms of African agency particularly in de facto
regional conﬂict zones like the Great Lakes, the Horn of Africa and the Sahel and in the
energy and minerals sectors (Besada, 2010; Bagayoko, 2012; Klare, 2012; Nathan,
2012). The most notable form of such agency in response to global drugs supply chains
moving to West Africa is the preemptive WACD (www.wacommissionondrugs.org)
supported by the Koﬁ Annan Foundation. In short, we need not only to appreciate
and to include such agency, we need to redeﬁne it to reﬂect Africa in the new
millennium as a burgeoning part of the global South (UNECA, 2011, 2012; UNDP,
2013), increasingly able to engage in ‘contestation’.
In a series of reports in the present decade (www.africaprogresspanel.org), the
Center for Global Development (CGD) in DC now suggests that 17 African countries
are ‘leading the way’ (Radelet, 2010) (www.cgdev.org); McKinsey (2010) lauds the
continent’s ‘lion kings’ (www.mckinsey.com); the Boston Consulting Group (BCG)
(2010) has identiﬁed 40 African corporations as global ‘challengers’ (www.bcg
.com); and Central and Eastern European Development Institute identiﬁes a dozen
‘cheetahs’, from Botswana to Zambia): and The Economist (2013) now recognizes
the continent to be hopeful rather than hopeless.
This article has three interrelated concerns which stake out paths to a brighter
future for the continent centered on its regional innovations, including its myriad
diasporas. First, the growing articulation in the present century of ‘new multilateralisms’ or ‘transnational governance’ with African dimensions – African agency.
These are dynamic and span several emerging sectors from International Campaign
to Ban Landmines (ICBL) and Ottawa Process through Kimberley Process with
Partnership Africa Canada (PAC) and Global Witness (GW) to EITI (www.eiti.org).
In terms of human security, they include the International Action Network on Small
Arms (IANSA) and Arms Trade Treaty (ATT); yet coalitions over Small Arms and
Light Weapons (SALW) and children/women’s security have been stalled because of
US vetoes: more/less soft balancing.
Second, the focus of a pair of recent collections (Brown and Harman, 2013;
Lorenz and Rempe, 2013), Africa has generated an innovative range of ‘new
regionalisms’ involving a range of non-state actors: from Maputo Corridor and
Kgalagadi trans-frontier peace-park to Nile Basin Initiative (NBI)/Dialogue; and
from International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to corporate
260

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

African agency?

supply chains and now onto the grand scheme for the Tripartite Free Trade
Agreement (Hartzenberg et al, 2012). Alex Warleigh-Lack et al (2011) have begun
to recognize the relevance of such new regional relationships for comparative
studies of the EU especially as it confronts its own ﬁnancial crisis around the euro
(Acharya, 2012; Fioramonti, 2012).
And ﬁnally, third, what implications of this pair of novel directions and players –
African agency – for our analyses and policies, state and non-state: who are the
‘drivers’ or agents, innovators and animators in African development in addition to
RSA and what security strategies – human as well as national and continental? – have
they adopted? Who conceived of the WACD (www.wacommissionondrugs.org) as
preemptive diplomacy at the start of the second decade of the 21st century when
developmental and fragile states alike were threatened by transnational drug/gun/
gang supply chains being routed through West Africa?
Informed by contemporary international relations (Dunn and Shaw, 2001 and
2013; Cornelissen et al, 2012) and development studies perspectives, in particular
network/regional/ transnational approaches, this comparative article identiﬁes emerging opportunities as well as challenges for African agency/norm-setting/coalitionbuilding at the start of the second decade of the 21st century.
As suggested in the ﬁnal section below, this is a welcome challenge or opportunity
facing the continent at the start of its second 50-year period. What has it learned and
can it adapt after its ﬁrst half century given the signiﬁcantly transformed global
context at the turn of the decade? There are divergent regional incidences of and
responses to the ‘global’ ﬁnancial crisis with the global South being much less
negatively impacted than the established trans-Atlantic core in both ‘old’ and ‘new’
worlds (Pieterse, 2011). And can African agency seize the opportunity to become
primary driver of regional development in the second decade of the 21st century in
addition to/instead of RSA and its ﬂeeting advocacy of a New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) (Brown, 2012; Brown and Harman, 2013; Lorenz
and Rempe, 2013)?
I turn next to burgeoning varieties of regionalisms now emerging in Africa as the
rest of the global South. These constitute a response to the challenges of the BRICS,
especially South Africa: collective reaction to both pressure and opportunity. At most
this is a very light form of ‘soft-balancing’.

Varieties of ‘New Regionalisms’
Reﬂective of its more than 50 states, already Africa has been the leading region in the
South to advance regional innovations and institutions even if it has received less
analytic attention than, say, Asia (Shaw et al, 2011). I identify a half-dozen below.
But these constitute a form of very soft-balancing as South Africa is important in its
own region but hardly in the continent as a meso- or mega-region. Indeed, regional
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

261

Shaw

integration or buffering in the era of apartheid – for example early Southern African
Development Cooperation Community (SADCC) – was intended to further isolate/
sanction South Africa so it was a latecomer to regional/continental/global institutions, particularly helping to redeﬁne/revise the continent at the turn of the century:
from OAU to AU facilitated by South Africa’s advocacy of NEPAD.
In the initial, one-party nationalist period, reﬂective of jealousy surrounding newly
realized independence, these were typically ‘old’ inter-governmental arrangements.
But in the post-bipolar era, such regionalisms became less exclusively state and
economic and more inclusive around emerging issues like ecology, energy, security
and water (Shaw et al, 2011). And now, regional development is increasingly
focused on new resources such as corridors for supplies (SID, 2012) and pipelines
and valleys for energy and water (Fanta et al, 2013), symbolized by the new eastern
Africa as a rising energy region (Economist, 2012). Hence the relevance of TradeMark in Southern and East Africa (TMSA and TMEA) (www.trademarkea.com,
www.trademarksa.org), facilitating regional infrastructures, networks and supplychains (SID, 2012).
Nevertheless, ﬁrst, the revived, redeﬁned East African Community is emblematic
of ‘new’ African regionalisms. There are now ﬁve rather than the initial trio of
members (Hansohm, 2013), with innovative civil society, media, parliamentary and
security dimensions (SID, 2012), qualifying as an instance of ‘new regionalisms’
(Shaw et al, 2011). Given the scale and resilience of regional conﬂict on the
continent, several attempts have been made at regional peace-building, from Dafur to
Cote d’Ivoire, especially around the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), GLR, and Horn such as the ongoing process around the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, reinforced and publicised by the US
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Section 1502 on conﬂict metals. These
increasingly involve a ﬂuid range of actors in a heterogeneous coalition (Leonard,
2013), from INGOs to MNCs, as such conﬂicts are always about ‘greed’ as well as
‘grief’; so resource extraction and accumulation proceeding in tandem with violence,
all too often targeting women and children as successive UN reports on the Congo
have revealed. And as security is increasingly privatized, especially in and around
RSA, so such coalitions become ever more problematic. This is particularly so
around energy and mineral extraction and supply-chains as their products attract the
attention of transnational as well as local criminal networks. Shorter-term peacemaking is typically tied to longer-term norm-creation to advance sustainable
development by regulating the ﬂow of 3T (tin, tantalum and tungsten) conﬂict metals
and minerals like coltan, diamonds and gold as already indicated above (www
.enoughproject.org).
Second, in the new century, regionalisms on the continent have come to cover the
spectrum of levels – macro/meso/micro (Soderbaum and Taylor, 2008) – and sectors –
civil society, corporate networks, and security. While Export-Processing Zones
(EPZs) are associated with Asia and gas pipelines with Central Europe (Kuzemko
262

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

African agency?

et al, 2012), development corridors and peace-parks are largely a function of
Southern Africa’s distinctive political economy (Ramutsindela, 2011). Similarly,
Africa has its share of river valley organizations (for example, Congo, Niger, Nile,
Zambezi) and other cross-border more to less formal micro-regions. The Maputo
Corridor has advanced growth in Southern Mozambique as well as the eastern
Witwatersrand, reinforcing the cross-border dimensions of the Lesotho highlands
water project for electricity and water. The latter was informed by the only global
commission to be based outside the North – in Cape Town – which also included
MNCs as well as NGOs and states in its membership (Khagram, 2004): the World
Commission on Dams. Reﬂective of growing concern for the environment, Southern
Africa is the centre of the trans-frontier peace-parks movement which has led to the
recognition of several such cross-border parks in the region; these may evolve from
designated elephant corridors into multipurpose functional arrangements for renewable energy and water resources.
Third, encouraged by growing recognition of climate change – NB the development of the India, Brazil and South Africa trio (IBSA) into Brazil, South Africa, India
and China (BASIC) around the annual environmental/climate change Conference of
the Parties (COP) 15 in Copenhagen at end-2009 and beyond – the continent’s river
basins are beginning to receive exponential attention as centres of biodiversity,
energy, food and water as well as conﬂict including the Congo and the Zambezi.
The Nile Basin Initiative and Dialogue are arguably the most advanced to date, but,
given the Arab Spring, increasingly problematic.
Fourth, symptomatic of emerging tensions and possibilities is the discovery of oil
around the rift valley lakes in northwest Uganda along the border with Congo; such
oil production may propel Uganda into the ranks of the developmental states but it
may endanger some of its environment and wildlife, let alone local communities.
And in early 2012, new discoveries of oil and gas were announced in northern Kenya
and southern Ethiopia and in northern Mozambique and southern Tanzania by a
series of global energy players (Economist, 2012): an emerging energy exporting
region of growing importance for AMV. The ﬁrst East Africa Oil and Gas Summit
was held in Nairobi in November 2012 to discuss pipelines from Juba to Lamu and
Mtwara to Dar and Mombasa as well as reﬁnery in northern Uganda: redeﬁnition of
African regions? Some of the 50 global energy companies involved in this new
Eastern Africa include China’s CNPC and CNOOC, US Anardarko and ExxonMobil
and BG, ENI, Statoil and Tullow from Europe; already the Indian ONGC is buying
access in Mozambique from Anadarko to join Japan’s Mitsui et al.
Fifth, the continent’s pattern of inter-regional relationships (Fawn, 2009) is in ﬂux,
from classic, inherited North-South dependencies towards a novel South-East axis
around China and India but also Japan and Korea along with athletics, ﬁlm, music,
soccer etc. Symbolically, Africa’s regions’ reluctance to sign Economic Partnership
Agreements (EPAs) with the EU at the turn of the decade despite a mix of pressures
and incentives may mark a turning point as global rebalancing continues; Europe of
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

263

Shaw

the eurozone crisis around the PIIGS and Asia of the BRICS transforms policy
options and calculations for the continent as suggested in Cheru and Obi (2010),
advancing the prospects for African agency. The tone of annual African-China
FOCAC palavers (Taylor, 2011) can be contrasted to that at the third EU-Africa
summit in Tunis in November 2010. Iberia increasingly relies on investment from
and emigration to Angola, Brazil, Mexico and Mozambique.
Finally, sixth, given its numerous land-locked states, Africa has always experienced informal cross-border migration and trade, some now in illegal goods like
drugs and small arms. Hence the WACD as preemptive diplomacy as West Africa
becomes a hub in the supply chain from LA to EU. And as MNCs, now from China
and India as well as South Africa (hence the transition from IBSA to BRICS), have
increased their investments in energy and minerals, franchises and shopping malls, so
their logistics and supply chains have come to deﬁne their own regional networks
(Power et al, 2012). Exponential infrastructural development will further new
regionalisms on the continent in the second decade of the 21st century, symbolized
by the mobile phone revolution and the roles of MTN and Celtel/Bharti, including the
Mo Ibrahim Foundation. I conclude by posing questions about the implications of
developments in ﬁnance and regionalisms for African policy post-2015 (Economist,
2013): more/less agency? And what relationship between RSA and the other
53 governments given ubiquitous transnational connections (see Flemes and
Wehner 2015, in terms of Brazil’s relations with burgeoning secondary powers in
South America)

Onto Varieties of Innovative Analyses and Policies?
After the BRICS’ decade, expanding economies generate burgeoning varieties of
governance with implications for policy towards RSA. Are these norm-setting rather
than-taking? Regionalisms reinforces the prospect for public, including foreign,
policy in and around the continent (Hanson et al, 2012): How distinctive is the
African developmental state in 2015 (cf. Lobell et al, this issue)? They also present
challenges to African and related analyses – from dependency to agency (Brown,
2012; Cooper and Shaw, 2013; Brown and Harman, 2013; Corkin, 2013; Lorenz and
Rempe, 2013) – as they demand ‘innovative’ perspectives and policies, both state
and non-state; ie civil societies, private companies and/or media. As such they are
compatible with comparative notions of soft – balancing (cf. Lobell and Flemes,
2015). And simultaneously the focus of regional development is shifting from older
inter-governmental paradigms (Acharya, 2012) around the formal economy to newer
technologies and sectors such as brands and supply-chains, energy and water,
pipelines and reﬁneries (Shaw et al, 2011; Cornelissen et al, 2012); increasingly
authoritative transnational networks and norms (Flemes and Wehner, 2012).
264

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

African agency?

Africa at the turn of the second decade of the 21st century after 10 years of the
BRICs/BRICS is, then, at a crossroads in terms of governance for development
(www.africaprogresspanel.org) and aspirations to developmental states. Can it seize
its second chance and transcend its somewhat lacklustre ﬁrst half-century to advance
both by transforming itself from norm-taker to -setter (UNECA, 2011, 2012; Flemes
and Wehner, 2012)? In turn, can African interests advance inclusive public or
network diplomacy of non-state as well as state actors for the most marginalized
continent in the global South using new medias/technologies?
Africa’s place at the centre of innovative sources of ﬁnance and styles of
governance leads to optimism (UNECA, 2009; Hanson et al, 2012) while the
number of continuing conﬂicts and persistent fragile/failed states leads to
scepticism, even pessimism (Brock et al, 2012): after 2015, what balance by
2020 and beyond? Will the 53 states be benign towards RSA given its own
difﬁculties along with hosting so many migrants from the continent (cf. Alden and
Schoeman, this volume) or will the handful of embryonic developmental states or
emerging secondary powers begin to challenge its leadership (Jordaan, 2003; Nel
and Nolte, 2010; Nel et al, 2012)? In turn, in Africa as elsewhere in the global
South (UNDP, 2013), what will be the balance between regional conﬂict and
regional development (Fanta et al, 2013)?

About the Author
Timothy M. Shaw is Visiting Professor and Graduate Program Director of the new
PhD in Global Governance and Human Security at the University of Massachusetts,
Boston. Previously, he directed graduate programmes in London (Commonwealth
Studies) and Trinidad (International Relations) after teaching for three decades at
Dalhousie University in Nova Scotia. With others, he has recently coedited two
collections on African international relations for Palgrave Macmillan.

References
Acharya, A. (2012) Comparative Regionalism: A ﬁeld whose time has come? International Spectator
47(1):March: 3–15.
AfDB (2011) The middle of the pyramid: Dynamics of the middle class in Africa, 20 April, http://www
.afdb.org/ﬁleadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Publications/The%20Middle%20of%20the%20Pyramid_
The%20Middle%20of%20the%20Pyramid.pdf, accessed 11 February 2014.
Africa Progress Panel (2012) Report 2012, http://africaprogresspanel.org/publications/policy-papers/
africa-progress-report-2012/, accessed 11 February 2014.
Alden, C. and Schoeman, M. (2013) South Africa in the company of giants: The search for leadership in a
transforming global order. International Affairs 89(1): 111–129.
AMV (2009) African Mining Vision. Addis Ababa: AMV.
Bagayoko, N. (2012) Introduction: Hybrid security governance in Africa. IDS Bulletin 43(4): 1–13.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

265

Shaw

Besada, H. (ed.) (2010) Crafting an African Security Architecture: Addressing Regional Peace and
Conﬂict in the 21st Century. Farnham: Ashgate.
Boston Consulting Group (2010) The African Challengers: Global Competitors Emerge from the
Overlooked Continent. Boston: Boston Consulting Group.
Brock, L., Holm, H.-H., Sorensen, G. and Stohl, M. (2012) Fragile States: Violence and the Failure of
Intervention. Cambridge: Polity.
Brown, W. (2012) A question of agency: Africa in international politics. Third World Quarterly 33(10):
1889–1908.
Brown, W. and Harman, S. (eds.) (2013) African Agency and International Relations. Abingdon:
Routledge.
Cheru, F. and Obi, C. (eds.) (2010) The Rise of China and India in Africa. London: Zed for NAI.
Cooper, A.F. and Shaw, T.M. (eds.) (2013) The Diplomacies of Small States: Between Vulnerability and
Resilience?, 2nd edn. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Corkin, L. (2013) Uncovering African Agency: Angola’s Management of China’s Credit Lines. Farnham:
Ashgate.
Cornelissen, S., Cheru, F. and Shaw, T.M. (eds.) (2012) Africa and International Relations in the Twentyﬁrst Century. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dunn, K.C. and Shaw, T.S. (eds.) (2001) Africa’s Challenge to International Relations Theory. London:
Palgrave.
Economist (2010) The World in 2010: 25th Anniversary Edition. London: Economist.
Economist (2012) African energy: Eastern El Dorado? 7 April.
Economist (2013) Special report. Emerging Africa: A Hopeful Continent 406(8825): 1–16.
Economist (2014) The World in 2014, http://www.economist.com/theworldin/2014, accessed 27 November
2014.
Fanta, E., Shaw, T.M. and Tang, V. (eds.) (2013) Comparative Regionalisms for Development in the 21st
Century: Insights from the Global South. Farnham: Ashgate for NETRIS and UNU-CRIS.
Fawn, R. (ed.) (2009) Special issue: Globalising the regional, regionalising the global. Review of
International Studies 35(February): 1–261.
Fioramonti, L. (ed.) (2012) Regions and Crises: New Challenges for Contemporary Regionalisms.
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Flemes, D. (ed.) (2010) Regional Leadership in the Global System: ideas, Interests and Strategies of
Regional Powers. Farnham: Ashgate.
Flemes, D. and Wehner, L. (2012) Drivers of Strategic Contestation in South America. Hamburg,
Germany: German Institute of Global and Area Studies GIGA, GIGA Working Paper no. 207.
Hansohm, D. (2013) South Sudan, Sudan and the East African Community: Potential of Enhanced
Relationships. Bruges, Belgium: UNU-CRIS. Working Papers W-2013/4.
Hanson, K.T., Kararach, G. and Shaw, T.M. (eds.) (2012) Rethinking Development Challenges for Public
Policy: Insights from Contemporary Africa. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Harman, S. and Brown, W. (2013) In from the margins? The changing place of African international
relations. International Affairs January 89(1): 69–87.
Hartzenberg, T. et al (2012) The Tripartite Free Trade Area: Towards a New African Integration
Paradigm? Stellenbosch: Tralac.
Jordaan, E. (2003) The concept of a middle power in IR: Distinguishing between emerging and traditional
middle powers. Politikon 30(2): 165–181.
Khagram, S. (2004) Dams and Development: Transnational Strategies for Water and Power. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Klare, M.T. (2012) The Race for What’s Left: The Global Scramble for the World’s Last Resources.
New York: Metropolitan.
Kuzemko, C. et al. (eds.) (2012) Dynamics of Energy Governance in Europe and Russia. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
266

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

African agency?

Leonard, D. (ed.) (2013) Special issue: Social contracts, networks and security in tropical Africa. IDS
Bulletin 44(1): 1–99, iii-x.
Lorenz, U.-C. and Rempe, M. (eds.) (2013) Mapping Agency: Comparing Regionalisms in Africa.
Farnham: Ashgate.
McKinsey (2010) McKinsey on Africa: A Continent on the Move. New York: McKinsey & Company.
Mkandawire, T. (2001) Thinking about developmental states in Africa. Cambridge Journal of Economics
25(3): 289–313.
Nathan, L. (2012) Community of Insecurity: SADC’s Struggle for Peace and Security in Southern Africa.
Farnham: Ashgate.
Nel, P. and Nolte, D. (eds.) (2010) Regional powers in a changing global order. Review of International
Studies 36(4): 877–974.
Nel, P., Nabers, D. and Hanif, M. (eds.) (2012) Special issue: Regional powers and global redistribution.
Global Society 26(3): 279–405.
O’Sullivan, J. (2014) Digging deeper: Some of the world’s fastest-growing economies in 2014 will be in
Africa. The Economist 18 (November): 73.
Pieterse, J.N. (2011) Global rebalancing: Crisis and the East-South turn. Development and Change 42(1):
22–48.
Power, M., Mohan, G. and Tan-Mullins, M. (2012) China’s Resource Diplomacy in Africa: Powering
Development? London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Radelet, S. (2010) Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries are Leading the Way. Washington, DC: Center for
Global Dialogue.
Ramutsindela, M. (2011) Transfrontier conservation and the spaces of regionalisms. In: T.M. Shaw,
J.A. Grant and S. Cornelissen (eds.) The Ashgate Research Companion to Regionalisms. Farnham:
Ashgate, pp. 361–373.
Ratha, D. et al (2011) Leveraging Remittances for Africa: Remittances, Skills and Investments.
Washington, DC: World Bank and AfDB.
Sandrey, R. et al (2013) BRICS: South Africa’s Way Ahead? Stellenbosch: Tralac.
Shaw, T.M. (2012) Africa’s quest for developmental states: ‘Renaissance’ for whom? Third World
Quarterly 33(5): 837–851.
Shaw, T.M., Grant, J.A. and Cornelissen, S. (eds.) (2011) The Ashgate Research Companion to
Regionalisms. Farnham: Ashgate.
SID (2012) State of East Africa 2012: Deepening Integration, Intensifying Challenges. Nairobi: TMEA.
Singh, J.N. and Bourgouin, F. (eds.) (2013) Resource Governance and Developmental States
in the Global South: Critical International Political Economy Perspectives. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Soderbaum, F. and Taylor, I. (eds.) (2008) Afro-Regions: The Dynamics of Cross-Border MacroRegionalism in Africa. Uppsala: NAI.
Taylor, I. (2011) The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC). Abingdon: Routledge.
UNDP (2013) Human Development Report 2013: The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse
World. New York: UNDP.
UNECA (2009) African governance report II. New York: Oxford University Press, http://www.uneca.org/
sites/default/ﬁles/publications/agr2-english.pdf, accessed 10 December 2013.
UNECA (2011) Economic Report on Africa 2011: Governing Development in Africa – The Role of the
State in Economic Transformation. Addis Ababa University Press: ECA.
UNECA (2012) Economic Report on Africa 2012: Unleashing Africa’s Potential as a Pole of Global
Growth. Addis Ababa University Press: ECA.
Warleigh-Lack, A., Robinson, N. and Rosamond, B. (eds.) (2011) New Regionalism and the EU:
Dialogues, Comparisons and Research Directions. Abingdon: Routledge.
World Bank (2011) Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to It. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2011b) Migration and Remittances Factbook 2011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

267

Shaw

Xing, L. and Farah, A.O. (eds.) (2013) China-Africa Relations: The Past, the Present and the Future.
Farnham: Ashgate.

Web References
www.afdb.org.
www.afhdr.org.
www.africaneconomicoutlook.org.
www.africaminingvision.org.
www.africaprogresspanel.org.
www.au.int/pages/remittance/about.
www.bcg.com.
www.cgdev.org.
www.economist.com/theworldin/2014.
www.eiti.org.
www.enoughproject.org.
www.foreignpolicy.com.
www.globaldialogue.info.
www.globalwitness.org.
www.govafricajournal.org.
www.hdr.undp.org.
www.icglr.org.
www.isealalliance.org.
www.mckinsey.com.
www.moibrahimfoundation.org.
www.naturalresourcecharter.org.
www.new.uneca.org.
www.oecd.org.
www.pacweb.org.
www.post2015.org.
www.post2015hlp.org.
www.resourcesfutures.org.
www.sec.gov.
www.undp.org.
www.wacommissionondrugs.org.

268

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1384-5748

International Politics

Vol. 52, 2, 255–268

International Politics
www.palgrave-journals.com/ip/
International
Macmillan.

Politics

is

published

by

Palgrave

Publisher All business correspondence and enquiries
should be addressed to International Politics, The Journals
Publisher, Palgrave Macmillan, Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS, UK.
Tel: +44 (0)1256 329242. Fax: +44 (0)1256 353774.
Palgrave Macmillan is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers
Limited, registered in England, company number 785998.
Registered office as above. Palgraves and Macmillans
are registered trademarks in the United States, the United
Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
International Politics is online at www.palgravejournals.com/ip/. Visit the journal’s home pages for details
of aims and scope, readership, instructions to authors and
how to contact the Editors and publishing staff. Use the
website to order a subscription, reprints, a sample copy or
individual articles and search online tables of contents and
our abstracts service.

Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS,
UK. Where appropriate, subscribers can make payment to
UK Post Office Giro Account No: 519 2455. Full details
must accompany the payment.
Subscriptions F USA
USA subscribers can call toll-free on: 1 800 747 3187.
Please send cheque/money order/credit card details to
Palgrave Macmillan Journals Subscriptions, 175 Fifth
Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA.
Prices are set in UK Sterling and US dollars. All prices,
subscriptions and details are subject to change without
prior notification. Please note: print only subscriptions are
available which can be entered into at our standard
subscription rates.
Advertisements Enquiries concerning advertisements
should be addressed to advertising@palgrave.com. Our
media pack can be viewed at www.palgrave-journals.com/
pal/advertisers/index.html.

Abstracting/Indexing: International Politics is abstracted
and/or indexed in CIAO Geobase/Geo Abstracts; Historical Abstracts and America: History and Life International
Bibliography of the Social Sciences; International Development Abstracts; International Political Science Abstracts, Scopus; Sociological Abstracts, Worldwide
Political Science Abstracts.

Reprints For reprints of any article in this journal please
contact reprints@palgrave.com

Free to all readers: tables of contents and abstracts
of articles. Register to receive the table of contents by
e-mail as each issue is published.

Copyright

2015 SITE LICENSE AND SUBSCRIPTION RATES

All rights of reproduction are reserved in respect of all
papers, articles, illustrations, etc., published in this journal in
all countries of the world. All material published in this
journal is protected by copyright, which covers exclusive
rights to reproduce and distribute the material. No material
published in this journal may be reproduced or stored on
microfilm or in electronic, optical or magnetic form without
the written authorization of the publisher.

Institutional policy
Palgrave Macmillan has a site license policy for institutional online access using prices based on Full Time
Equivalents.
Separate print only institutional subscriptions are also
available. Please see www.palgrave-journals.com/pal/
subscribe for full details.
Institutional Site Licenses
Contact your local sales representative for a tailored price
quote for online access for your institution. You will be
required to complete a site license agreement.
E-mail: The Americas: onlinesales@palgrave-usa.com
Asia Pacific: institutions@natureasia.com
Australia and New Zealand: nature@macmillan
.com.au
India: npgindia@nature.com
UK and rest of world: onlinesales@palgrave.com
More information is available at www.palgrave.com/
librarians/
Institutional Print Subscriptions
Institutional Subscription (print): EU: d899/RoW: d899/US$1677

Individuals
Standard (online and print): EU: d102/RoW: d102/US$190
Online only: EU: d97/RoW: d97/US$180
Subscriptions F outside the USA
Orders must be accompanied by remittance. Cheques
should be made payable to Palgrave Macmillan and sent to:
Palgrave Macmillan Subscriptions Department, Brunel

Permissions For reproduction rights, please contact the
rights office (rights@palgrave.com) at the publisher’s
address above.
r 2015 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
Online ISSN: 1740-3898
Print ISSN: 1384-5748

Authorisation to photocopy items for internal or personal
use of specific clients is granted by Palgrave Macmillan
for libraries and other users registered with the Copyright
Licensing Agency Ltd (CLA), Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby
Street, London EC1N 8TS, UK, and the Copyright
Clearance Center (CCC) Transaction Reporting Service,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, provided
that the relevant copyright fee is paid directly to the CLA or
to the CCC at the above addresses. Identification code for
International Politics: 1384-5748/15.
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or
private study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the
Copyright, Design and Patent Act 1988, this publication
may be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or
by any means, only with the prior permission in writing of
the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction,
in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the CLA
or the CCC as described above.
This publication is printed on paper suitable for recycling
and made from fully managed and sustained forest
sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing processes
are expected to conform to the environmental regulations
of the country of origin.

Typeset by MPS Limited. Bangalore, India.
Printed and bound by C.O.S Printers, Pte, Singapore.

