Recently, the global role of the countries of the Asian Pacific Region has been growing. However this region is extremely unstable and highly conflictprone, which threatens both regional and international security. The South China Sea is one of the hotbeds of tension. The South China Sea not only presents an economic and ideological, but also a strategic problem. The Paracel and Spratly Islands pose the greatest interest for our study, since it is precisely these islands that are the target of territorial disputes. Border territories have always had common features due to the affinity of cultures in the contact zones, which influences interaction. The problem created by the South China Sea is closely related to a whole series of international conflicts that are having an impact not only on the development of the Asia Pacific Region, but also on the global breakdown of forces. The Paracel Islands and the Gulf of Tonkin are of strategic significance--if any country gains control over them, it essentially acquires control over the trade routes connecting the Pacific and Indian oceans. This country will have a certain influence on the economic development of the region. However, we must not forget that these territories and water areas are close to the Russian and Japanese borders and whatever goes on in them could threaten the national security of these countries, as well as have a direct or indirect effect on US interests. Today the South China Sea trade routes cannot be described as safe. The regional countries are making repeated attempts to take control over some part of the South China Sea, which is causing the other contenders to react and provoking conflict. As for the prospects for progress in the Asia Pacific Region, they can be reduced in the most general terms to overcoming the confrontation between the East-West civilizations, developing cooperation, and enhancing mutual influence and synthesis of civilizations. This could give rise to a new type of civilization and the formation of a Eurasian region of peace and security. Furthermore, an increasing number of countries and groups of countries are actively joining the all-round advance in the Asia Pacific Region." Small dragons" are appearing in Japan's wake, followed by" new tigers." And the" large dragons"--China and India--are also on the rise.
