578952

research-article2015

EJT0010.1177/1354066115578952European Journal of International RelationsHameiri and Jones

Article

Rising powers and state
transformation: The case
of China

EJIR
European Journal of
International Relations
﻿1­–27
© The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1354066115578952
ejt.sagepub.com

Shahar Hameiri

Murdoch University, Australia

Lee Jones

Queen Mary, University of London, UK

Abstract
This article draws attention to the transformation of statehood under globalisation as
a crucial dynamic shaping the emergence and conduct of ‘rising powers’. That states
are becoming increasingly fragmented, decentralised and internationalised is noted by
some international political economy and global governance scholars, but is neglected
in International Relations treatments of rising powers. This article critiques this neglect,
demonstrating the importance of state transformation in understanding emerging
powers’ foreign and security policies, and their attempts to manage their increasingly
transnational interests by promoting state transformation elsewhere, particularly in their
near-abroad. It demonstrates the argument using the case of China, typically understood
as a classical ‘Westphalian’ state. In reality, the Chinese state’s substantial disaggregation
profoundly shapes its external conduct in overseas development assistance and conflict
zones like the South China Sea, and in its promotion of extraterritorial governance
arrangements in spaces like the Greater Mekong Subregion.
Keywords
China, development assistance, Greater Mekong Subregion, International Relations
theory, rising powers, South China Sea, state transformation

Corresponding author:
Lee Jones, School of Politics and International Relations, Queen Mary, University of London, Mile End Road,
London, E1 4NS, UK.
Email: l.c.jones@qmul.ac.uk

2

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

Introduction
Recently, ‘rising powers’ have gripped scholars and political leaders alike. The growing
economic, military and diplomatic weight of states like China, India, Brazil and Russia
is seen to herald a shift from a unipolar to a more multipolar world order, and possibly
even serious great-power conflict. Despite the now-voluminous commentary on this phenomenon, we argue that International Relations (IR) has overlooked one crucial dimension. Contemporary states — even in non-Western regions — are increasingly fragmented,
decentralised and internationalised, with significant consequences for rising powers’ foreign and security policies. First, fragmented and decentralised state apparatuses and
quasi-market actors are increasingly pursuing their own independent interests and agendas overseas, generating conflict-ridden, incoherent policy output, often mistakenly
interpreted as ‘grand strategy’. Second, as these institutions and actors acquire transnational interests, they are also vying to establish transboundary governance arrangements
to manage them, particularly in neighbouring territories. Thus, state transformation
within rising powers indirectly generates attempts to promote it elsewhere.
Existing IR approaches overlook these dynamics because their focus is overwhelmingly
systemic. They ask whether changing interstate power relations will violently disrupt the
prevailing order, or whether there are sufficient constraints — military deterrence, economic interdependence, institutions or norms, depending on one’s theoretical orientation
— to avoid serious conflict. Consequently, they do not consider that IR’s ‘units’ may have
fundamentally changed, reshaping their interrelations. This neglects extensive literature on
the transformation of statehood. For instance, political scientists have identified a general
shift towards ‘regulatory statehood’, whereby central executives withdraw from ‘command
and control’ activities to merely set broad targets for diverse national, subnational and private bodies (Majone, 1994). As Rosenau (2003) observed, this ‘fragmentation’ is often
followed by novel forms of integration. Many agencies, regulatory bodies and subnational
units have developed their own international policies and relationships, breaking the
monopoly of foreign and defence ministries (Jayasuriya, 2001). Thus, state decentralisation has fostered ‘paradiplomacy’ by subnational agencies, turning them into quasi-autonomous foreign policy actors (Aldecoa and Keating, 1999). International political economy
(IPE) and global governance scholars have explored how such changes have generated
transgovernmental networks and networked, multilevel governance arrangements, particularly at the regional level (Cerny, 2010; Slaughter, 2004). However, IR scholars either dismiss these insights as irrelevant in the study of rising powers, which are assumed to be
‘Westphalian’ states immune from such transformations, or even posit a reverse shift:
it appears that a century of wars and diplomacy has brought the international system right back
to where it was at its inception … the way [is] being paved back to Westphalia … by rising
powers such as China, India and Brazil, who are staunch guardians of the principle of national
sovereignty. (Flemes, 2013: 1016–1017)

Even in IPE, scholars detect ‘an unacknowledged transition from the globalisation debate
of the 1990s … to a more state-centric framework in which the rising powers and the
West are locked in a zero-sum struggle for influence over global governance institutions’
(Gray and Murphy, 2013: 185). This cyclical tendency is reflected in publication titles
that ask ‘Will Asia’s past be its future?’ (Acharya, 2006), or whether the international

Hameiri and Jones

3

system will go ‘Back to the future’ (Mearsheimer, 1990; cf. Chong and Hall, 2014). We
suggest that this reflects more of a reluctance to update IR theoretical frameworks than
any real-world reversal of the trends identified in existing scholarship.
Our argument proceeds in three sections. The first surveys the leading IR approaches
to rising powers — realist, liberal, constructivist, English School and neo-Marxist — to
highlight their general neglect of state transformation. The second section explains how
we conceptualise state transformation and why it matters for the study of rising powers.
The third provides a case study of China, insights from which are also used in the preceding sections.
China is selected because it is the most important rising power, and because it is a
‘hard’ case for our argument, since IR scholars typically depict it as a unified, authoritarian regime ruling a ‘Westphalian’ state, clinging to norms of sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Indeed, it is often presented as the ‘new Prussia’ (Goldstein, 2003), threatening
precisely the aforementioned ‘return to Westphalia’. Conversely, Sinologists have long
emphasised the rise of a ‘fragmented authoritarianism’ (Lieberthal, 1992), within an
increasingly ‘deconstructed’ state (Goodman and Segal, 1994), whose internal architecture is ‘more like the European Community of the 1970s than the USA today’ (Breslin,
2013: 70). IR scholars must take these established insights seriously.
The first part of our case study synthesises this literature, showing how China’s state
has become fragmented, decentralised and internationalised. The second demonstrates
how disaggregated state apparatuses and quasi-independent, market-facing actors are
increasingly acting overseas in ways not effectively coordinated in Beijing. Our examples — overseas development assistance in the Pacific and territorial conflicts in the
South China Sea (SCS) — show that what is often perceived as menacing evidence of
‘grand strategy’ may actually involve multilevel, inter-agency struggles and local economic imperatives. The case study’s third part shows how, as Chinese entities develop
transnational interests, they extend their ‘governance frontier’ beyond China’s territory,
promoting state transformation elsewhere. We focus on the Greater Mekong Subregion
(GMS), where Chinese agencies — notably, Yunnan’s provincial administration — are
promoting massive infrastructural development and governance changes to manage
growing economic interdependence and non-traditional security threats. These ‘minicase studies’ concern highly controversial policy domains. They are necessarily brief,
being unable to rehearse the vast literatures around each one, and therefore cannot deliver
definitive proof for our argument. Nonetheless, these cases are absolutely central to
questions about China’s rise: is China promoting an alternative to the ‘Washington
Consensus’ using ‘rogue aid’? (Naím, 2007); will conflict in the SCS, East Asia’s major
‘flashpoint’, lead to war? (Kaplan, 2014); and, is China being integrated into global economic flows in a liberal fashion (Ikenberry, 2008)? For each, we provide a ‘plausibility
probe’, demonstrating how looking at these issues through the lens of state transformation sheds new light and helps explain apparently contradictory outcomes.

IR and rising powers: The neglect of state transformation
This section briefly surveys the main IR treatments of rising powers — realist, liberal,
constructivist, English School and neo-Marxist approaches — to identify their core

4

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

theses, but primarily to underscore their neglect of state transformation and how this
constrains their utility.

Realism
Realists present international politics as a timeless power struggle between functionally
identical states under anarchy. Power is understood materially, as the agglomeration of
factors like the size of states’ territories, populations, economies and armed forces.
Economic growth is seen as fungible into military power, and since states’ ambitions
grow with their power, rapid economic development changes the balance of power, fostering insecurity and potentially armed conflict (Gilpin, 1981). Resource conflicts are
particularly likely as competition for scarce commodities, particularly hydrocarbons,
intensifies (Klare, 2001). Realists differ on whether conflict is avoidable. For offensive
realists, war is virtually inevitable, with China’s rise seen as a major threat to the hitherto
US-dominated world order (Mearsheimer, 2001, 2006). Defensive realists suggest that
China could be ‘contained’ or deterred by new alliances (Kirshner, 2010; Ross, 2006).
Realists ignore how states have transformed under globalisation, significantly weakening their explanatory traction. For example, many liberals and IPE scholars emphasise
that economic transnationalisation has both heightened interdependence and rendered
national accounting useless for estimating states’ power potential (Breslin, 2013). Indeed,
Shambaugh (2013: 315) asserts that ‘China literally could not be contained’ even if the
West wanted to, ‘precisely because of [its] existing integration in the global system’.
More importantly for our argument, because realists neglect state transformation, they
may misinterpret rising powers’ international behaviour. For instance, the notion that
China is ‘grabbing’ natural resources, often in ‘alliance’ with ‘rogue’ states like Sudan,
ignores the fact that, following deregulation, the formally state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
involved are actually highly autonomous, market-driven entities selling commodities on
global markets, not delivering them to China (Houser, 2008). Similarly, extensive decentralisation in China has fostered provincial ‘duke economies’ that are often more integrated with different overseas economies than with each other. Such disaggregation of
statehood generates internal differences over external relations, not a single ‘national’
position or ‘grand strategy’ (Goodman and Segal, 1994). For example, while Hainan
Province benefits from advancing territorial claims in the SCS, over which it has formal
administrative control, landlocked Yunnan Province is tied economically and institutionally to mainland Southeast Asia, so SCS conflicts damage its interests (Su, 2012b; Zha,
2001). Such contradictory internal impulses could explain why Chinese policy in the
SCS is ‘consistently inconsistent’, swinging between conciliation and provocation
(Santicola, 2014). Since they neglect state transformation, realists overlook this possibility, dubiously reading sinister strategic motives into every action.

Liberalism
Liberals argue that rising powers’ conflict potential can be mitigated through economic
interdependence and institutional enmeshment, which can encourage rational cooperation based on commerce and mutual gains. Accordingly, relative US decline need not
portend the collapse of the US-created, liberal world order (Ikenberry, 2008; Keohane,

Hameiri and Jones

5

1984). Outcomes will instead turn on whether rising powers are fully integrated into
existing institutions or remain outsiders (Simpson, 2004). While most liberals are optimistic, some argue that intense economic interdependence could breed conflict, or question whether rising powers are generating middle classes sharing the rationalist,
universalist attitudes needed to sustain global cooperation (Chin and Helleiner, 2008;
Friedberg, 2005).
While improving on realism, liberals largely overlook state transformation. Despite
liberalism’s generic emphasis on identifying the domestic interests driving international
behaviour, in practice, liberal treatments of rising powers are overwhelmingly systemic,
focusing on the sustainability of international regimes. This is a serious oversight since
state transformation arguably conditions how rising powers are affected by both economic interdependence and international institutions. Following decentralisation, the
internationalisation of China’s economy has been heavily determined by provincial governments’ development strategies, which have generated both international cooperation
and conflict (Chen, 2005). Yunnan Province, for example, has expanded Chinese state
capitalism into the GMS, where it is the leading Chinese agency promoting regional
integration (Su, 2012b). However, elsewhere, exploitative Chinese investment has generated severe societal backlash and intergovernmental conflict (Nung Wong et al., 2013).
Moreover, inland regions, which are less globally integrated, have a more ‘conservative
outlook’ than coastal provinces (Goodman and Segal, 1994: 18). These divergent interests can generate intrastate conflicts that profoundly condition the effects that international institutions have on Chinese conduct. For example, while some neoliberal
technocrats in national ministries have promoted compliance with World Trade
Organisation (WTO) rules, this is heavily compromised by provincial-level protectionism (Breslin, 2013: 91–99). Disaggregating the state is vital to assess whether interdependence and institutions can yield the effects that liberals anticipate.

Constructivism
Constructivists are also more optimistic than realists about rising powers’ impact on
international order. They understand states as social actors whose interests and identities
can be transformed through interaction, persuasion and socialisation; accordingly, rising
powers may internalise prevailing norms, rather than overturning them (Acharya, 2006).
Constructivists have argued that China has done so, that it is a ‘status quo’ power, pursuing only modest reforms within existing institutions (Johnston, 2003). Others emphasise
rising powers’ historical culture, suggesting that, for example, China’s normative tradition of Confucian pacifism or benign Asian suzerainty will ensure a peaceful rise (Kang,
2003; Wang, 2013). Contradictorily, however, some highlight a Chinese tradition of realpolitik, with more disturbing ramifications (Johnston, 1998).
Constructivists thus treat rising powers like any other states — as coherent, unitary
actors (even as ‘persons’ (Wendt, 2004)), with singular ‘identities’ — and largely neglect
states’ internal reconfigurations. This is problematic because the question of which
norms to adopt and what ‘identity’ to project are often hotly contested within rising powers, reflecting wider struggles for power and resources (see Shambaugh, 2013: ch. 2).
Thus, while constructivists may demonstrate persuasively that small groups of officials
in the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) have been ‘socialised’ into a normative

6

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

international order promoted by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
(Johnston, 2003), this does not necessarily mean that these norms will prevail in policymaking. In an era of state disaggregation and decentralisation, foreign policymaking is
open to a far broader array of actors, pursuing sometimes contradictory interests and
agendas. As a former US assistant secretary of state recalls, SCS conflicts have often
reflected ‘unanticipated accidents and incidents’ involving ‘poorly coordinated elements
in the military or border protection units’, not a national strategy, forcing the embarrassed MFA ‘to work carefully behind the scenes’ with the US to ‘untangle the mess’
(Campbell, 2014). Without attention to state transformation, we cannot know whether
normative socialisation will really restrain a rising power.

English School
The English School, or ‘international society’ approach, attends to power, ideas and institutions simultaneously. For its adherents, emerging powers are rising not in a vacuum,
but in a pre-existing ‘anarchical society’, comprising deeply rooted ‘primary institutions’: shared norms and practices that structure international relations and condition
states’ prospects of achieving great-power status (Buzan, 2004). Power capabilities are
necessary, but insufficient: great power status is only awarded ‘socially’, when other
states confer it in exchange for international ‘public goods’ (Goh, 2013). Like constructivists, most English School theorists suggest that emerging powers like China are rising
within a US-dominated world order, rather than fundamentally challenging it (Goh,
2013; Hurrell, 2006). However, others note many contradictions between Chinese rhetoric and behaviour, justifying fear of a ‘China threat’ (Buzan, 2010).
Despite its considerable sophistication, the English School is constrained by its
entrenched statism. ‘States’, seen as essentially unitary actors, are the supposed subjects
of ‘international society’. Although non-governmental actors are assigned an increasingly important role, they are simply added alongside ‘states’ in ‘hybrid’ global governance arrangements (Buzan, 2004: ch. 4; Hurrell, 2008: ch. 4). States themselves have
not changed: the English School’s leading theorist explicitly denies that ‘globalisation
is … associated with and reflects a new kind of state’ (Hurrell, 2008: 203). Thus, this
approach neglects to explore how different parts of rising powers’ states may be integrated very unevenly into different aspects of international society, and how struggles
among them may ultimately determine whether a rising power respects or challenges
international order.

Neo-Marxism
Neo-Marxist accounts of rising powers, the most sensitive of all to transnational dynamics, often focus on China. A Leninist strand emphasises the crisis-prone nature of the
contemporary neoliberal order and the possibility of Sino-US inter-imperialist rivalry
(Callinicos, 2009). Gramscian approaches analyse rising powers as challengers to US
hegemony, which is founded upon a specific ‘historic bloc’ of class forces across many
states that perceives US leadership as supporting its interests and receives flows of material benefits from it (Cox, 1987). Gramscians typically underscore this bloc’s solidity,

Hameiri and Jones

7

arguing that China is fundamentally rising within it, albeit favouring a more ‘statist’
approach to economic governance than Western governments (Saull, 2012; Stephen,
2014). Finally, neo-Marxists influenced by World Systems Theory suggest that China is
forging a new counter-hegemonic alliance of developing states (Arrighi, 2007).
Only Gramscian approaches are at all sensitive to state transformation. The Leninist
strand is an essentially ‘proto-realist’ account (Callinicos and Rosenberg, 2008: 85),
paying no attention to changes in statehood. World Systems Theory generally neglects
local class conflict and state institutions, simplistically presenting the latter ‘as emerging … from the (changing) requirements for the generation of [economic] surplus’
(Brenner, 1977: 27). Gramscians have previously considered how hegemonic states
promote state transformation, particularly in turning subordinate states into ‘transmission belts’ for US-dominated neoliberal capitalism (Cox, 1987). Nonetheless, contemporary Gramscians often treat rising-power states as monoliths, with apparently coherent
‘state classes’ dominating their ‘state capitalism’, producing ‘national interests and state
preferences’ that diverge from Western-liberal ones (Stephen, 2014). This quasi-realist
approach marginalises contestation, fragmentation and internationalisation within states
and ‘state classes’.

The importance of state transformation for rising powers
This section explains why state transformation, despite its neglect in mainstream IR, is
important for understanding emerging powers, with specific reference to China. We
argue that, under globalisation, states can no longer be understood as Weberian, sovereign monoliths, coherently ruling bounded territories. They are increasingly fragmented,
decentralised and internationalised. Consequently, today’s emerging powers are quite
different to Prussia, and are ‘rising’ in a very different environment.
Our notion of state transformation is underpinned by Gramscian state theory, as
developed by Poultanzas (1976) and Jessop (2008). This tradition is not unique in recognising state transformation: as already noted, it has been studied by many IPE, global
governance and comparative politics scholars. However, this approach usefully avoids
the apolitical functionalism of many mainstream accounts, which see state transformation merely as a rational response to problems of modern governance (e.g. Slaughter,
2004). From a Gramscian perspective, states are neither the unitary actors of IR theory,
expressing a ‘national interest’ or ‘identity’, nor politically neutral, rationally designed,
problem-solving instruments; rather, they are institutional ensembles that reflect and
embed historically evolving social power relations. As states distribute power and
resources, the political representatives of social forces — particularly classes, class fractions and distributional coalitions, but also ethnic, religious and state-based groups —
constantly struggle to transform state institutions to suit themselves and their allies.
Accordingly, states are dynamic and historically contingent, reflecting changes in political-economy relations, particularly class formation and the political strategies of sociopolitical forces. Thus, how states evolve and are used is explained with reference to
social conflict. This is preferable to another prevalent tendency: to merely categorise
states as, for example, ‘pre-Westphalian’, ‘Westphalian’ and ‘post-Westphalian’
(Sørensen, 2004). This only evaluates states against idealised benchmarks, and is often
misleading: China, for example, is typically classified as ‘Westphalian’.

8

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

Another merit of this approach is its sensitivity to scale. As political geographers have
long recognised, different scales — for example, local, regional, national, global — privilege
different interests and agendas. Consequently, social groups struggle to define a scale of
governance that suits themselves and their allies. From this perspective, the dominance
of the national scale of governance, reflected in the ideal-typical Weberian ‘nation-state’
of much IR theory, is not natural, but a socially and politically produced historical artefact (Jessop, 2009). Thus, as social conflict evolves, governance may be ‘rescaled’ to
new levels as forces embedded at different scales struggle for dominance.
From this perspective, the consolidation of the European ‘nation-state’ — the hierarchically organised, territorially bounded, sovereign entity defined by Weber and adopted
wholesale by IR theory — occurred only through princes’ centuries-long struggle to
forcibly unify disparate territories and overcome competing authorities like city-states,
rival aristocrats and the Catholic Church (Tilly, 1990). Contrary to the ‘myth of
Westphalia’, this state form became dominant only in the 19th century; previously, transnational aristocratic politics dominated (Teschke, 2003). Even then, Western ‘nationstates’ coexisted alongside transnational empires well into the 20th century; it was only
after two world wars, anti-colonial revolutions and the onset of the Cold War that this
state form was finally universalised (Hobsbawm, 1987, 1994).
The Weberian-Westphalian state was consolidated by specific post-Second World
War global institutions based around ‘embedded liberalism’ (Ruggie, 1998). This regime
was designed to support domestic social-democratic compacts between capital and
labour, which bought industrial peace in exchange for rising living standards. The
Keynesian Bretton Woods settlement assisted this by regulating global capital flows,
empowering national leaders to protect and develop domestic industries, and enabling a
Fordist mode of production in which a rising social wage sustained demand. The postwar global economic order thus consolidated ‘the primacy of national economies,
national welfare states, and national societies managed by national states concerned to
unify national territories and reduce uneven development’ (Jessop, 2009: 99). This even
extended to post-colonial ‘quasi-states’, notwithstanding their relative incoherence
(Jackson, 1990), which received support for developmental state projects. Their borders
were also sanctified through norms of sovereign equality promoted through the United
Nations (Barkin and Cronin, 1994), and great power interventions, while frequent, were
nonetheless temporary, leaving the target’s formal sovereignty intact (Colás, 2008).
Crucially, IR’s mainstream theories developed during, and were profoundly shaped by,
this high tide of the ‘nation-state’.
Since then, however, while modern statehood has fundamentally changed, IR theory
has not kept up. In the 1970s, Western capitalism underwent severe crisis, disrupting the
post-war social compact by generating widespread labour unrest and socio-political conflict. The crisis was addressed in favour of capital by the New Right, which defeated trade
unions, curbed wage growth, privatised state assets and radically deregulated international trade and finance (Harvey, 2005). The state’s role was fundamentally reconfigured
from supporting a social-democratic compact through developmentalist intervention to
securing global competitiveness (Cerny, 1997). Corporatist institutions, and apparatuses
directing industrial development, were dismantled. SOEs were extensively privatised, and
regulatory powers were reassigned to quasi-autonomous or private organisations,

Hameiri and Jones

9

including devolved local administrations. The central state shifted from a ‘command and
control’ model, based on direct intervention to secure economic, social and political
objectives, to a ‘regulatory’ model, whereby central government merely sets broad targets
and regulations for diverse public and private actors (Majone, 1994).
This model spread beyond the West through various mechanisms. Following the early
1980s’ debt crisis, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) imposed structural adjustment
programmes on many Southern states. Coupled with decades of subsequent ‘good
­governance’ aid programmes, this has encouraged the dismantling of post-colonial
developmental states in favour of ‘governance states’ focused on producing a sound
regulatory environment for neoliberal capitalism (Harrison, 2004). The World Bank has
also extensively promoted decentralisation in the South, further spurring the disaggregation of hitherto unitary states. Asia’s developmental states transformed more slowly, but
this intensified after the 1997/ 1998 Asian financial crisis. Here, state restructuring was
again compelled partly by IMF intervention, but also by the pressures of global financial
markets and the emergence of transnational production networks, into which ruling elites
increasingly sought to insert parts of their territories. Accordingly, regulatory states have
emerged across the global South, including Asia (Dubash and Morgan, 2013).
This state transformation carries significant consequences for global politics: the
range of actors involved has broadened enormously, and, as deregulated transnational
flows have intensified, these actors are seeking to manage their transboundary effects. As
governmental authority has become fragmented and decentralised, national ministries
and agencies, subnational administrations, and quasi-public and private regulators have
increasingly developed their own overseas relationships and policies (Jayasuriya, 2001;
Rosenau, 2003). The foreign policy duopoly of foreign and defence ministries has
thereby evaporated. Reflecting the decreased privileging of the national scale, actors at
multiple territorial scales are now struggling to exert power and authority (Jessop, 2009).
Disaggregated functional bodies and technical experts have increasingly formed
‘transgovernmental networks’ to coordinate regulatory policies (Slaughter, 2004), while
subnational administrations pursue independent ‘paradiplomacy’ (Aldecoa and Keating,
1999). This networking is seen as essential to manage the risks and threats generated by
deregulation and globalisation. Accordingly, new scales of governance have emerged,
from cross-border regions to regional and global regulatory regimes (Blatter, 2004;
Hameiri and Jones, 2013; Keating, 2013). Diverse agents at multiple scales are increasingly networked into multilevel governance arrangements, where authority no longer
emanates from ‘Weberian’ states, but is continually negotiated (Hooghe and Marks,
2003). Elsewhere, institutions of powerful states have extended their ‘governance frontier’ beyond their borders to directly govern, or transform, other states seen to be ‘failing’
(Hameiri, 2010).
This uneven, contested process of state fragmentation, decentralisation and internationalisation carries significant consequences for understanding contemporary rising
powers. Although more research is needed to fully theorise the implications, three can be
identified now. First, insofar as they are undergoing state transformation, today’s rising
powers may differ starkly from those of the 19th century. They may not be coherent
‘Weberian’ or ‘Westphalian’ states. Different state apparatuses, allied with different nonstate forces, may well pursue different, even contradictory, agendas and be differentially

10

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

integrated into transnational economic and security regimes. Central authorities may
have difficulty coordinating these various elements, making their state’s ‘rise’ potentially
conflict-ridden and difficult for outsiders to interpret, possibly sparking interstate conflict. Yet, what might appear as a threatening ‘grand strategy’ could simply be driven
‘from below’ by increasingly autonomous state and/or private actors.
Second, contemporary rising powers are not simply seeking to unify and develop
national economies, as previously, but pursue growth by inserting parts of their territories and economies into transnational production and investment networks. Consequently,
they are enmeshed in complex interdependence from the outset, profoundly shaping their
interests. However, while some parts of their states and economies may become deeply
intertwined with global economic processes, others are less so, potentially generating
internal policy conflicts. Different elements might, for instance, promote involvement in
international regimes as part of a struggle against their rivals. Moreover, that one part of
a rising power’s state seems deeply embedded within existing international institutions
does not mean that other parts are, or will be subordinate to those that are. The transnationalised nature of emerging powers’ economies and states also means that other states
experience their ‘rise’ not merely as an ‘external’ power redistribution, but also internally, through the reconfiguration of their economies and attendant shifts in social composition, power and conflict. This may again produce serious interstate friction.
Third, growing transnational linkages and associated vulnerabilities generate imperatives for rising powers to extend their ‘governance frontiers’ beyond their borders and
participate in transnational, functional governance networks. For contemporary rising
powers, the capacity to join and influence these networks is of increasing importance
(Flemes, 2013), even being described as the ‘new sovereignty’ (Chayes and Chayes,
1995). Again, different interests may exploit their variable capacity to transnationalise
their activities in order to influence domestic power struggles. Accordingly, liberal, constructivist and neo-Marxist explorations of whether existing institutions are constraining
or being transformed by rising powers must be extended from formal intergovernmental
regimes to these functional networks, since they are also an important domain of struggle
and conflict.1

State transformation and the rise of China
This section develops our conceptual claims empirically through a case study of China.
IR scholars typically depict China as a highly coherent state, whose behaviour accordingly reflects a coherent ‘grand strategy’ (Goldstein, 2003), notwithstanding disagreements as to its content. As the quintessential ‘Westphalian’ state, China is said to offer
‘no viable alternative to the Cold War structure of international relations based on absolute sovereignty, non-interference and traditional power balancing’ (Odgaard, 2007:
216). Conversely, Sinologists have long argued that the Chinese state has undergone
extensive disaggregation, decentralisation and internationalisation since the late 1970s.
As Su (2012a: 4) insists: ‘we cannot treat the Chinese state as monolithic, or “China
Inc.,” in which everything works in harmony … the Chinese state’s functionality is riddled with competing state agencies, problems of cross-department coordination, and
mismatch between central and local policies’.

Hameiri and Jones

11

Our first subsection synthesises these insights for the benefit of IR scholars, who have
ignored them for too long. Our second and third subsections explore their implications
for China’s rise: rivalries and incoherence in foreign and security policy; and efforts to
extend China’s governance frontier to manage transnational issues.

State transformation in China
Since the reform era began in 1978, the Chinese state has experienced considerable disaggregation, the divestment of power and control to semi- and fully private actors, and
the devolution of authority and resources to subnational agencies. These changes were
designed to insert China into a global division of labour, and the consequent transnationalisation of production and investment has further spurred state transformation. The
resultant incoherence is partially managed by mechanisms within the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) and recurrent efforts to recentralise authority at the national scale.
The contested shift from Maoist state ‘socialism’ to state-managed capitalism is the
primary driver of Chinese state transformation. This has massively shifted power and
control over resources to a nascent bourgeoisie, mostly emerging from the CCP itself
(Lu, 2000). Beginning with modest concessions to market mechanisms, by the 1990s, the
state was privatising many small- and medium-sized enterprises and consolidating larger
ones. Many of the resultant ‘giant conglomerates’ were then ‘corporatised’, remaining
formally state-owned but operating as largely autonomous, self-financing capitalist
enterprises (Zheng, 2004: 131–133). China’s national oil companies (NOCs), for example, now answer to foreign shareholders and are primarily driven by ‘corporate interests
… rather than by the national interests of the Chinese state’ (Downs, quoted in Houser,
2008: 151).
Meanwhile, central state apparatuses have been reduced and reoriented to a coordinating function, and are less coherent. From the late 1990s, agencies associated with planning and direct economic management were abolished, the number of ministries
contracted by 28%, and the civil service halved (Zheng, 2004: 91–106). The central
government has withdrawn from directly controlling production and distribution, retreating to a ‘regulatory state’ model, setting broad macroeconomic policies for other public
and private actors (Breslin, 2013). Piecemeal reforms have vastly reduced its coherence,
with many ministries and agencies enjoying overlapping jurisdictions. For example,
China’s oceans and energy policy are each overseen by 11 different ministerial-level
agencies (ICG, 2012: 8; Meidan et al., 2009: 596–597).
A second key element of China’s state transformation has been decentralisation to
provincial governments and the incorporation of special administrative regions (SARs).
To spur capitalist reform, provincial administrations were allowed to undertake governance experiments after 1980, and fiscal responsibilities were also devolved. They rapidly
developed local businesses, privatised SOEs into the hands of local cadres and established internal protectionist measures, shattering the national economy into local ‘economic dukedoms’ (Zheng, 2004: 111–112). Notwithstanding repeated central government
efforts to claw back power, and especially tax revenue, the provinces resisted and, by
1994, ‘de facto federalism’ was established (Zheng, 2007). Since provincial governors
rank alongside national ministers, the latter cannot issue them with direct instructions.

12

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

Furthermore, some provincial governments have restructured their local administrations,
entirely severing national ministries’ line control. Moreover, the incorporation of Macao
and Hong Kong as SARs under the ‘one country, two systems’ formula has allowed them
to retain their own legal, judicial and political systems, permitting even greater autonomy from Beijing. Accordingly, the interests of local and national leaders are now frequently at odds, generating endless struggles over the scale at which issues are governed.
Central government initiatives regularly ‘encounter substantial obstruction and noncompliance’ from devolved administrations (Andrews-Speed, 2010: 28), while central
agencies periodically seek to re-concentrate power in their hands. Overall, Breslin (2013:
72) argues, China is now ‘a voluntary regulatory state, with local authorities still able to
decide whether to adhere to central regulation or not’.
A final aspect of China’s state transformation is the uneven internationalisation of
state agencies and SOEs at different scales (Zweig, 2002). Some of these actors promote
compliance with international governance systems, but others resist, while some formerly domestic entities have themselves acquired governance functions beyond China’s
borders. This is not simply a functionalist response to growing economic interdependence, but also reflects internal power struggles, as some interests promote internationalisation to coerce domestic rivals.
Consider, for example, the central bank, the People’s Bank of China (PBC). A historically ‘weak and marginalised institution’ (Bell and Feng, 2014: 198), despite
notionally acquiring independent control of monetary policy in 1994, it has pursued
internationalisation to empower itself and advance its reform agenda against powerful
domestic opponents. The PBC’s reformist technocrats have struggled to impose neoliberal disciplines on domestic banks because powerful politico-economic interests
benefit from politically directed credit, which has generated massive non-performing
loan books. To outflank its opponents, the PBC has promoted compliance with the
Basel Accords since 1990, thereby joining the main transgovernmental network governing global banking. The PBC also promoted strict compliance with WTO rules to
expose domestic banks to foreign ownership and competition and compel further
reforms (Walter and Howie, 2012). This sparked massive conflict with the Ministry of
Finance (MOF) and Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM), which resisted relinquishing
control over credit allocation and feared a decline in bank asset values. Eventually, the
PBC was stripped of regulatory control over commercial banking, which was, accordingly, only partially liberalised, violating Beijing’s WTO commitments (Breslin, 2014:
1000; Walter and Howie, 2012).
The PBC has also pursued the deregulation of China’s currency, the renminbi
(RMB), through strategic internationalisation. Here, too, it faced stiff opposition since
the RMB’s artificially low peg to the US dollar subsidises exporting companies, and
because currency controls enhance government control over credit allocation. The
PBC therefore promoted the RMB’s internationalisation, forging currency swap agreements with foreign central banks and fostering RMB trading centres in Hong Kong,
Taipei and Shanghai. The price of ‘offshore’ RMB is thereby allowed to float, despite
domestic exchange rate controls. It justified these moves by appealing to nationalists
with talk of boosting China’s ‘influence’ and ‘power standing’ and reducing dependence on US dollar reserves. However, internationalisation was actually a deliberate

Hameiri and Jones

13

PBC ploy to compel further domestic reform (Bell and Feng, 2014: 199; Cohen, 2012).
Experts argue that internationalisation and currency controls are ultimately unsustainable, making further currency liberalisation — the PBC’s preferred outcome — inevitable (McCauley, 2013).
To summarise, what outsiders may perceive as ‘an apparently powerful central government and unified system of governance’ is in fact ‘a fragmented and chaotic structure
over which the central government has little control’. Outcomes reflect not authoritative
central decisions, but ‘bargaining … horizontally between government ministries, agencies and state enterprises, as well as vertically, between different levels of government’,
which ‘continues throughout implementation’ (Andrews-Speed, 2010: 22, 27). The
Chinese state is actually a dynamic form of multilevel governance.
The resultant incoherence is, however, partially mitigated through the containment of
bargaining within the CCP and by sporadic recentralisation efforts. In ‘regulatory states’,
the central state is not defunct; its role is redefined as laying down broad policy contours
for others to follow (Majone, 1994). Although Chinese officials are highly adept at pushing the envelope, their latitude is constrained insofar as their career advancement occurs
through the CCP, membership of which is de rigueur for officials, politicians and SOE
managers. Moreover, the need for formal central approval and funding for major subnational initiatives constrains officials to forge alliances with national-level actors and present their initiatives as reflecting national priorities. Accordingly, leaders in Beijing
retain significant power, even if they must frequently reassert it through savage purges,
such as those that President Xi Jinping is currently undertaking. National leaders also
periodically attempt to recentralise control institutionally. This often involves forming
‘Leading Small Groups’ of the Politburo, designed to coordinate disparate state agencies,
or ad hoc initiatives. These are of dubious efficacy, but do reassert ‘red lines’ for officials, preventing severe incoherence. Recentralisation drives can also have distinct policy outcomes.
The aforementioned trends in state transformation are novel and epochal. They do not
merely reflect long-standing problems of central ‘bureaucratic capacity’ or centre–
periphery difficulties, which have plagued China as much as any modern state (Shue,
1988), or herald a return to ‘pre-Westphalian’ 19th-century warlordism. Instead, they
reflect the unprecedented disaggregation of a state-socialist regime that had earlier substantially unified China’s society and territory. While Mao attempted two rounds of
decentralisation and recentralisation, this only involved shifting administrative responsibilities. Today, China’s provinces have acquired unprecedented legislative, political and
managerial authority, while central control via the nomenklatura system has weakened
substantially (Gong and Chen, 1994). Moreover, and uniquely, this occurred in tandem
with massive marketisation, generating unprecedented competition among and between
different tiers of government and their associated SOEs. Furthermore, these SOEs are
now relatively autonomous, market-facing, profit-driven, internationalised actors, but
they can also exploit their remaining links to state apparatuses — again, this is unprecedented in Chinese history. Combined, these changes have ‘fundamentally altered China’s
command economy system and the power structure between the centre and localities’
(Jia and Wang, 1994: 35, 38). Inter-scalar power struggles now occur constantly, without
decisive resolution.

14

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

The impact on foreign and security policy
Accordingly, China’s rise does not reflect a monolithic state pursuing a coherent grand
strategy. Instead, multiple state and quasi-private agencies, having become somewhat
autonomous foreign policy actors, are pursuing uncoordinated and sometimes contradictory agendas overseas, notwithstanding efforts to coordinate them. This often provokes
an anti-Chinese backlash and fears about China’s intentions. We demonstrate this by
considering China’s aid programmes in the Pacific, and Chinese policies in the SCS.
China’s state transformation has substantially fragmented and expanded the domain
of foreign policy formation and implementation. The much-weakened MFA, while historically always subordinate to the CCP leadership, now faces ‘intense rivalry’ from
other ‘foreign policy actors’ (Jakobsen and Knox, 2010: 10). These include the armed
forces, MOF, MOFCOM, state security apparatuses, the central bank, the National
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) and the CCP’s International Department
(Jakobsen and Knox, 2010: 4–16). Major corporatised SOEs are also de facto foreign
policy actors. For example, Chinese NOCs, whose chairmen retain vice-ministerial rank,
frequently operate abroad without regard for national priorities, being empowered to
‘adapt, modify and even subvert government directives’ (Chen, 2009: 254–258).
Accordingly, the NOCs ‘drive … China’s international energy agenda, rather than the
government’ (Andrews-Speed, 2010: 53). Empowered to independently control their
international economic relations, the provinces and SARs have also become quasi-autonomous foreign policy actors, concluding transboundary agreements with local and
national governments as far afield as Africa (Chen et al., 2010; Li, 2014). Crucially, the
MFA lacks formal authority to coordinate equally ranked agencies and, informally, the
foreign minister reportedly ‘struggles to make the top 50 in the Central Committee’
(Smith, 2014).
Nonetheless, reflecting the ‘regulatory state’ model and inter-scalar contestation, the
centre remains heavily involved in defining broad policy contours and periodically seeks
to recentralise foreign policy authority. For example, Xi Jinping has created a State
Security Committee and held a Diplomacy Work Conference in 2013, elaborating broad
strategic contours for China’s many agencies to follow. Major policy shifts, like the
announcement of an Air Defence Identification Zone over the East China Sea in
November 2013, also remain contingent upon high-level approval. However, even such
major initiatives can stem from bottom-up proposals as sectional interests frame their
agendas in terms of the leadership’s broad policy statements, which are sometimes so
broad that ‘one can justify almost anything’ (Jakobsen, 2014: 1). Moreover, as the main
implementing agencies, subnational entities retain considerable latitude to shape outcomes, often diverging from Beijing’s intentions. Responding to the interstate frictions
that this frequently creates, the MFA often strains to recentralise policy control — though
its capacity to do so is limited.
Chinese aid in the Pacific. Chinese foreign development assistance is widely seen as part
of a broader hegemonic strategy, as ‘rogue aid’ designed to undermine the ‘Washington
Consensus’ and Western promotion of ‘good governance’ and democracy (Naím, 2007).
In the Pacific, some argue that China’s growing engagement, including aid

Hameiri and Jones

15

disbursements, reflects an aggressive plan to ‘replace the United States as the preeminent
power’ (Henderson and Reilly, 2003: 95). Others suggest that China is ‘soft balancing’
against the US and Australia, or seeking to grab raw materials for Chinese industry
(Lanteigne, 2012; Yang, 2009).
In reality, rather than being part of a strategic ‘master plan’, Chinese aid is primarily
driven from below, by commercial considerations, and is accordingly fragmented and
incoherent. Although notionally centred upon MOFCOM, significant aid funds are allegedly concealed within numerous other ministries’ budgets, including Health, Education,
Agriculture and Foreign Affairs, with MOFCOM unable to compel MOF to even disclose the total amount (Grimm et al., 2011: 7). This is a ‘recipe for chaos’ in Chinese aid
policymaking and implementation (Brautigam, 2009: 116). In practice, Chinese aid is
primarily driven and implemented ‘from below’ by various state-owned, private and
hybrid companies, linked predominantly to subnational governments, which seek business opportunities by lobbying Chinese and Pacific state agencies to initiate aid-funded
infrastructure and construction projects for them to undertake. These projects are frequently not linked to natural resources; instead, companies accept projects requested by
recipient governments, with low profit margins, hoping to later receive more lucrative
contracts (Brautigam, 2009). Thus, Chinese aid is mostly driven by ‘Chinese infrastructure companies in the Pacific, not aid agencies in Beijing’ (Smith, 2012).
Two examples demonstrate this. Papua New Guinea (PNG) receives 58% of total
Chinese aid in the Pacific. Chinese investment in a US$2.1 billion nickel mine has been
presented as evidence that this aid seeks to facilitate a massive resource grab. In reality,
Chinese engagement reflects independent, profit-seeking behaviour by diverse business
actors. In 2012, 13 of the 20 largest Chinese enterprises registered in PNG were construction firms, while nearly half of Chinese investment comprised small- and mediumsized retail and wholesale businesses (Smith, 2013: 329). Accordingly, Chinese aid has
mostly been devoted to infrastructure projects requested by the PNG government with no
link to the mine, like student dormitories. Similarly, a sevenfold increase of Chinese aid
to Fiji in 2007 was widely interpreted as a malign attempt to bolster Fiji’s new military
regime against Australian sanctions. In reality, the increase had been agreed in 2006 as
part of a wider pledge to Pacific governments, before the Fijian coup. Moreover, aside
from one e-government project, it was all devoted to construction and infrastructure
(Yang, 2011: 307–308). Far from expressing coherent, sinister, strategic intent, Chinese
aid in the Pacific seems more driven by politically connected construction firms lobbying for tied aid to absorb their surplus capacity.
The SCS. The SCS is even more seriously affected by inter-bureaucratic and multilevel
strife within the Chinese state. Rich in fisheries and hydrocarbons, the SCS is widely
regarded to be one of East Asia’s most serious ‘flashpoints’. China has issued vague but
obdurate claims to a vast oceanic area — the so-called ‘nine-dashed line’ — which overlaps with those of six Southeast Asian states. Conflicts with Vietnam and the Philippines
have been particularly acute in the mid-1990s and since 2012. This is widely interpreted
— particularly by realists — as reflecting China’s growing power and strategic ambition,
fuelling fears of armed conflict (Kaplan, 2014). The reality is far less coherent, reflecting
a lack of consensus within China, even on the ‘nine-dashed line’.

16

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

The MFA clearly does not control China’s SCS policy. While ‘theoretically responsible’, in practice, it is ‘largely bypassed by … more powerful players’ (ICG, 2012: 12). A
further dozen national and subnational agencies have some jurisdiction here, including the
Ministry of Agriculture’s Bureau of Fisheries Administration, China Marine Surveillance,
provincial governments, the navy, the NOCs and six law enforcement agencies under four
different ministries (ICG, 2012: 8). According to C. Chung (2004: 267–272), neither the
MFA nor the Politburo’s Foreign Affairs Leading Small Group has ‘ultimate power and
authority’ over the SCS; instead, decisions are made by ‘multiple autonomous actors’.
Consequently, while the MFA promotes a relatively cooperative line — including ratifying and implementing the UN Convention on the Laws of the Sea (UNCLOS) in 1992,
and negotiating a Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the SCS with ASEAN in 2002
— it is persistently undermined by other parts of China’s disaggregated state.
The navy, for example, has repeatedly and successfully exploited SCS disputes to
defend and expand its budget (Chung C-p, 2004: ch. 6). Apparently, this directly precipitated a 1988 military clash with Vietnam, resulting in China annexing the Paracel Islands
(Garver, 1992). Similarly, in 1995, the navy seized Mischief Reef, claimed by the
Philippines; this was apparently the price extracted for its support of incoming Premier
Jiang Zemin (Storey, 1999).2
China’s largely autonomous NOCs also generate conflict and crises. In the 1990s, due
to the exhaustion of domestic hydrocarbon supplies and a profit crunch induced by state
price controls, the NOCs exploited their influence and growing elite concerns about
‘energy security’ to successfully lobby for a ‘go out’ policy, thereby internationalising
their activities (Houser, 2008: 152–153). However, as relative latecomers, the NOCs
found open oil and gas fields only in areas neglected by Western oil majors: ‘rogue’
states like Sudan and disputed territories like the SCS. The MFA is left fending off subsequent international condemnation of their activity (Downs, 2008: 129). The China
National Offshore Oil Company (CNOOC) asserts Chinese sovereignty over the whole
nine-dashed-line area in the SCS as this vastly expands the concessions that it can offer
to national and foreign companies. CNOOC has repeatedly issued such concessions,
despite MFA disapproval, sparking disputes with neighbouring states (Beckman et al.,
2013: 429–430).
The NOCs have also rallied other state agencies to their cause. In 2007, the Chinese
National Petroleum Company (CNPC) commissioned Canadian firm TransOcean to drill
in the Zhongjiannan basin, an area partly disputed with Vietnam, which it had been exploring since 2004 with backing from the Ministry of Land and Resources (Xinhua.net, 2014).
Vietnamese coastguards harassed CNPC’s survey vessels, but the latter summoned
China’s State Oceanic Administration ships to protect them. These rammed the Vietnamese
vessels, sparking an international incident (Bentley, 2014). The project was abandoned in
2008 under MFA pressure (Downs, 2014). However, by 2012, CNOOC had procured its
own deep-sea rig, which CNPC hired and deployed in Vietnamese waters in March 2014.
The rig was accompanied by up to 80 Chinese vessels, including seven naval ships, suggesting that CNPC had also recruited the navy to its cause — or vice versa. This caused a
massive diplomatic crisis. The MFA had to contradict its own policy by claiming that the
rig was in Chinese territorial waters, implying, at minimum, a position violating UNCLOS
(for a legal discussion, see Thayer, 2014).

Hameiri and Jones

17

Some observers argued that this crisis reflected Xi’s centralisation drive and a new,
aggressive ‘grand strategy’ from Beijing (Downs, 2014; Thayer, 2014). If true, this would
reflect how constant inter-scalar struggles are shaping Chinese policy. However, these
claims are questionable. CNPC’s activities display significant continuity, while, just
before and after the crisis, the MFA and Xi were strongly pursuing improved relations
with Vietnam. Rather than heralding a new coherence, then, the incident was arguably the
latest of many contradictions produced by fragmented, interagency contestation (see
Santicola, 2014). Jakobsen (2014: 1) insists that ‘there is no evidence’ that the crisis
revealed ‘a grand strategy Xi is pursuing to coerce China’s neighbours in a tailored way
towards a pre-defined goal’; rather, diverse, disaggregated actors are still exploiting ‘Xi’s
very general guidelines on safeguarding maritime rights’ to ‘push their own agendas’.
Hainan’s provincial government is another of these opportunistic actors. As Zhang
(2012: 18) notes, unlike the MFA, ‘which is committed to avoid diplomatic and security
conflicts with neighbouring countries, local governments are motivated by economic
concerns’. The coastal provinces gained administrative control over China’s territorial
waters in 1992. Subsequently, they developed their own local law enforcement agencies
and rapaciously pursued maritime development opportunities. Hainan theoretically
administers the entire nine-dashed-line area, which is 60 times larger than its own land
surface. It thus has a strong interest in asserting maximalist territorial claims to promote
its local fisheries industry.
Following the industry’s deregulation in 1992, Hainan provided extensive financial
support to state-owned and private fishing companies, increasing the fleet’s size tenfold
from 1988 to 1997. Fisheries yields quadrupled, but the resultant overfishing of coastal
waters subsequently forced the fleet into the SCS (Zha, 2001: 588–592). This should
have been prevented by the national government’s adoption of UNCLOS and the Food
and Agriculture Organization’s sustainability standards during 1999–2002, which ought
to have reduced Hainan’s fishing fleet. However, as with many central initiatives, local
governments resisted implementing these regulations, siding with local economic interests (Brans and Ferraro, 2012). Indeed, Hainan actively supported the fleet’s expansion
into the SCS by subsidising expeditions, financing trawler upgrades and rescuing ships
confronted by other countries’ coastguards (Ruwitch, 2014). From 1989 to 2010, there
were 380 such confrontations, involving 750 Chinese vessels. Crucially, it is overwhelmingly these incidents that spark diplomatic crises, not military clashes (Zhang, 2012: 1).
Recurrent SCS crises thus reflect the Chinese state’s transformation and partial internationalisation. Agencies ‘originally established to implement domestic policies … now
play a foreign policy role. They have almost no knowledge of the diplomatic landscape
and little interest in promoting the national foreign policy agenda’, and since they ‘enjoy
significant autonomy’, the MFA cannot control them (ICG, 2012: 14). This explains why
Chinese policy is ‘consistently inconsistent’, displaying ‘an almost incomprehensible
level of unpredictability’ and ‘lack of any discernible strategy’ (Santicola, 2014) — not
a sinister ‘grand strategy’ of phased expansion, as realists suggest. However, the consequences of state fragmentation are clearly very dangerous, contradicting more optimistic
liberal and constructivist accounts. The Chinese government apparently recognises the
risks: it recently sought to recentralise policy control under the MFA and amalgamate
five maritime law enforcement agencies. However, this has apparently failed because the

18

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

latter ‘do not want to relinquish their power’ (ICG, 2012: 18, 32–36; see also Jakobsen,
2014: 17–20).

Managing transboundary interests
A second aspect of state transformation and China’s rise concerns growing Chinese
efforts to manage transboundary interests acquired through economic transnationalisation. As China’s economy expands beyond its borders, so does the ‘governance frontier’ of its state apparatuses, particularly those of border provinces. Chinese agencies
and SOEs seek to reshape other territories’ governance to pursue their (often divergent)
interests. To illustrate this, we consider Chinese engagement in the GMS, a transnational integration project involving China, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Myanmar and
Thailand.
Initially conceived by the Asian Development Bank, the GMS has greatly facilitated
Beijing’s ‘going out’ strategy, designed to develop its poor, non-coastal regions by linking them economically to neighbouring states. It has involved the substantial ‘rescaling’
of Chinese state apparatuses, constructing a complex, regionalised mode of multilevel
governance (Su, 2012a). Following the ‘regulatory state’ model, while central government agencies like the MFA, MOF and the NDRC conclude broad agreements with other
GMS member states, the detailed implementation is left to provincial governments,
which are also formally GMS members: Yunnan Province, which became China’s main
representative in 1992, and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, which joined in
2005. These provinces autonomously ‘receive foreign investments, set up economic
zones, manage border trade and sign contracts for border cooperation with neighbouring
countries’ (Colin, 2014: 112). Yunnanese SOEs and private firms have invested heavily
across the GMS, notably, in hydropower, manufacturing, mining and agribusiness
(Summers, 2013: 161–164). Exploiting national-level energy security concerns, Yunnan
also joined with CNPC to successfully lobby Beijing for a US$5.3 billion oil and gas
pipeline from Myanmar’s western coast to Yunnan in order to become a key base for
China’s petrochemicals industry (Steinberg and Fan, 2013: 180–181; Su, 2014:
100–102).
In pursuit of economic opportunities, Yunnan has gradually acquired important transboundary governance functions. To facilitate trade and investment, the provincial government has promoted extensive transboundary transport infrastructure development,
opening the Mekong River to large-scale shipping and constructing extensive road and
rail links. It has also worked intensively with other national and subnational GMS governments to promote regulatory changes beneficial to Chinese investors, including the
creation of transborder special economic zones (Summers, 2013).
Yunnan has also moved to manage the negative side effects of its economic transnationalisation, which include piracy, transboundary crime and drug- and people-trafficking.
Growing smuggling and piracy on the Mekong led Beijing to conclude an agreement for
joint river patrols with Myanmar, Laos and Thailand in December 2011. This is implemented by the Yunnan Border Police’s Waters Division; they host a combined operations
centre, coordinating day-to-day operations, and train and equip their Myanmar and
Laotian counterparts (Hu, 2013). From April to June 2013 alone, 2500 arrests were made

Hameiri and Jones

19

and drugs worth US$400 million were seized, alongside weapons and ammunition
(Storey, 2013).
A growing cross-border HIV epidemic, caused by drugs imported from the Golden
Triangle, has also prompted Yunnan to initiate transboundary counter-narcotics initiatives. Yunnan has worked closely with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
to train Myanmar and Laotian counter-narcotics police, launching 107 joint cross-border operations against drug traffickers from 2002 to 2005 (Li and Zheng, 2009: 634).
Additionally, Yunnan has promoted opium substitution in Myanmar and Laos. By 2006,
Yunnanese technicians had visited over 3000 sites there, training over 1000 of their
counterparts (Sheng, 2006: 112). Yunnan has also successfully lobbied Beijing to
finance massive subsidies for Chinese agribusiness investments to replace poppy fields
in GMS countries. Yunnan-based firms have invested over RMB1 billion in alternative
plantation agriculture, covering up to 410,000 hectares (Sheng, 2006: 112; Su, 2013: 2).
Although this might seem to validate liberal optimism about the cooperative impact
of economic integration, in reality, Yunnan’s primarily economically motivated actions
often have darker side effects that generate inter-scalar conflict and interstate friction. In
Myanmar, for example, Yunnanese extractive and plantation investments have encouraged violent land grabs, undermined subsistence livelihoods and exacerbated ethnic conflict, severely compromising the opium substitution programme (ICG, 2009: 41).
Moreover, while Beijing has supported the Myanmar government’s bans on border trade
in timber and gems in order to reduce the income of the anti-government rebels ‘taxing’
it, Yunnan has sought to defend the trade. Yangon holds Beijing accountable for these
developments, creating serious intergovernmental tensions (ICG, 2009: 25–26, 40–41;
Li and Lye, 2009: 266). Accordingly, national-level agencies have been forced to try to
recentralise authority over China’s Myanmar policy in order to mitigate Yunnan’s errors
and safeguard broader Chinese interests. Thus, in 2009, when Kachin forces resumed
their rebellion against Yangon, partly to protest against rapacious resource extraction,
Beijing intervened, mediating peace talks to try to stem the flow of refugees and the
threat to its oil and gas pipeline (ICG, 2013).

Conclusion
We have argued that today’s rising powers are not the unitary states of much IR theorising;
rather, reflecting transformations in the global political economy since the 1970s, they are
increasingly fragmented, decentralised and internationalised. Consequently, different
parts of rising powers’ states may pursue divergent or contradictory agendas, with outcomes reflecting disorganisation and conflict, not grand strategy. Different state and business interests may be unevenly integrated into international economic, diplomatic and
institutional circuits, deepening these contradictions. Moreover, as transnational interests
grow, so do rising powers’ interests in managing transboundary flows, threats and risks by
extending their governance frontiers beyond their borders. We demonstrated these arguments using the case of China, conventionally considered a classic ‘Westphalian’ state but
in reality a complex, multilevel governance system riven by contending interests.
Clearly, we lack the space here to consider other rising powers. Nonetheless, there is
prima facie evidence of similar trends elsewhere, suggesting a fruitful research agenda.

20

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

For example, subnational diplomacy and governance rescaling has been observed in
Brazil (Setzer, 2014), Russia (Sharafutdinova, 2003), India (Sridharan, 2003) and South
Africa (Nganje, 2014). Naturally, these cases will not be identical to China. Since the
transformation and operation of state apparatuses are driven by local socio-political conflicts, we anticipate considerable variation.
Fully revising IR theory to incorporate state transformation is also impossible here,
but some provisional insights can be offered. China’s internal fragmentation and struggles clearly generate quite incoherent, conflict-ridden outcomes. This may help to explain
why even proponents of the same IR theory can identify supporting evidence for both
pessimistic and optimistic accounts of China’s rise. The contradictory evidence reflects
not a failure of interpretation, but a phenomenon being ignored by IR theory — state
transformation. Once we attend to this, outcomes appear explicable, contingent and
issue-specific, depending on the actors and interests involved. This does not mean, for
example, that pessimistic realists are necessarily wrong that Chinese behaviour in the
SCS is threatening and destabilising — it clearly is. However, this is not because ‘China’
is pursuing some monolithic, expansionist ‘grand strategy’ reflecting growing power
resources; rather, it reflects internal conflicts among disaggregated state and semi-private
actors. Similarly, liberals, constructivists and English School theorists are not necessarily
wrong to claim that some Chinese agencies are now heavily involved in international
governance. However, they must recognise that others are not, and that long-run outcomes depend on struggles between contending agents and visions. Nor is such internationalisation necessarily inherently ‘liberal’ in content; it frequently is not, prompting
backlashes that erode China’s so-called ‘soft power’. To generate more accurate analyses
and predictions, IR scholars must incorporate the conflict-ridden dynamics of state transformation into their approaches.
Our argument also has implications for practitioners. It suggests that traditional diplomatic practices, focused on interactions between foreign ministries, are insufficient to
inform policies towards China, and possibly other rising powers. The MFA is simply not
in control of Chinese foreign policy. To assume otherwise risks severe misinterpretation
of events and disproportionate policy responses that could precipitate serious international conflict. To avoid this, diplomats should incorporate our insights into their work.
They should broaden their contacts, data gathering and analysis to many more actors, and
interpret rising powers’ behaviour not as monolithic, but as reflecting internal disaggregation and conflict. They need to identify and encourage those interests most amenable
to peaceful cooperation, and they should help educate their own policymakers and publics about the realities of today’s rising powers.
Acknowledgements
The authors are very grateful for feedback on earlier drafts from Shaun Breslin, Rosemary Foot,
Ruben Gonzalez-Vicente, Kanishka Jayasuriya, Ian Storey and the journal’s excellent editors and
reviewers.

Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or
not-for-profit sectors.

Hameiri and Jones

21

Notes
1.
2.

Preliminary examples, albeit constrained by a continued neglect of state transformation,
include Drezner (2008) and Mattli and Woods (2009).
China’s territorial disputes often escalate as new leaders consolidate their power bases
through purges and nationalist posturing. Zhang (2014) attributes recent tensions in the SCS
to the handover to Xi.

References
Acharya A (2006) Will Asia’s past be its future? International Security 28(3): 149–164.
Aldecoa F and Keating M (eds) (1999) Paradiplomacy in Action: The Foreign Relations of
Subnational Governments. London: Frank Cass.
Andrews-Speed P (2010) The institutions of energy governance in China. Institut Français des
Relations Internationales, January.
Arrighi G (2007) Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the Twenty-First Century. London: Verso.
Barkin JS and Cronin B (1994) The state and the nation: Changing rules and the norms of sovereignty in international relations. International Organization 48(1): 107–130.
Beckman R, Schofield C, Townsend-Gault I et al. (2013) Factors conducive to joint development
in Asia: Lessons learned for the South China Sea. In: Beckman R, Schofield C, TownsendGault I et al. (eds) Beyond Territorial Disputes in the South China Sea: Legal Frameworks
for the Joint Development of Hydrocarbon Resources. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 411–
441.
Bell S and Feng H (2014) How proximate and ‘meta-institutional’ contexts shape institutional
change: Explaining the rise of the People’s Bank of China. Political Studies 62(1): 197–215.
Bentley S (2014) Vietnam and China: A dangerous incident. The Diplomat, 12 February.
Blatter J (2004) From ‘spaces of place’ to ‘spaces of flows’? Territorial and functional governance
in cross-border regions in Europe and North America. International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research 28(3): 530–548.
Brans M and Ferraro G (2012) International agreements and the salience of domestic politics:
Locus, focus and gradus. The case of fisheries policy reforms in China and Senegal. Journal
of Comparative Policy Analysis: Research and Practice 14(1): 9–25.
Brautigam D (2009) The Dragon’s Gift: The Real Story of China in Africa. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Brenner R (1977) The origins of capitalist development: A critique of neo-Smithian Marxism. New
Left Review 104(1): 25–92.
Breslin S (2013) China and the Global Political Economy. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Breslin S (2014) Financial transitions in the PRC: Banking on the state? Third World Quarterly
35(6): 996–1013.
Buzan B (2004) From International to World Society? English School Theory and the Social
Structure of Globalisation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Buzan B (2010) China in international society: Is ‘peaceful rise’ possible? Chinese Journal of
International Politics 3(1): 5–36.
Callinicos A (2009) Imperialism and Global Political Economy. Cambridge: Polity.
Callinicos A and Rosenberg J (2008) Uneven and combined development: The social-relational
substratum of ‘the international’? An exchange of letters. Cambridge Review of International
Affairs 21(1): 77–112.
Campbell K (2014) Trouble at sea reveals the new shape of China’s foreign policy. Financial
Times blog, 22 July. Available at: http://blogs.ft.com/the-a-list/2014/07/22/trouble-at-seareveals-the-new-shape-of-chinas-foreign-policy/ (accessed 25 July 2014).

22

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

Cerny PG (1997) Paradoxes of the competition state: The dynamics of political globalization.
Government and Opposition 32(2): 251–274.
Cerny PG (2010) Rethinking World Politics: A Theory of Transnational Neopluralism. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Chayes A and Chayes AH (1995) The New Sovereignty: Compliance with International Regulatory
Agreements. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chen S (2009) Marketization and China’s energy security. Policy and Society 27(3): 249–260.
Chen Z (2005) Coastal provinces and China’s foreign policy making. In: Hao Y and Su L (eds)
China’s Foreign Policy Making: Societal Force and Chinese American Policy. Aldershot:
Ashgate, pp. 187–208.
Chen Z, Jian J and Chen D (2010) The provinces and China’s multi-layered diplomacy: The cases
of GMS and Africa. The Hague Journal of Diplomacy 5(4): 331–356.
Chin G and Helleiner E (2008) China as a creditor: A rising financial power? Journal of
International Affairs 62(1): 87–102.
Chong JI and Hall TH (2014) The lessons of 1914 for East Asia today: Missing the trees for the
forest. International Security 39(1): 7–43.
Chung C-p (2004) Domestic Politics, International Bargaining and China’s Territorial Disputes.
London: Routledge Curzon.
Chung C (2004) The Spratly Islands dispute: Decision units and domestic politics. PhD thesis,
University of New South Wales.
Cohen BJ (2012) The Yuan tomorrow? Evaluating China’s currency internationalisation strategy.
New Political Economy 17(3): 361–371.
Colás A (2008) Open doors and closed frontiers: The limits of American empire. European Journal
of International Relations 14(4): 619–643.
Colin S (2014) The participation of Yunnan Province in the GMS: Chinese strategies and impacts
on border cities. In: Fau N, Khonthapane S and Taillard C (eds) Transnational Dynamics in
Southeast Asia: The Greater Mekong Subregion and Malacca Straits Economic Corridors.
Singapore: ISEAS, pp. 107–142.
Cox RW (1987) Production, Power, and World Order: Social Forces in the Making of History.
New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Downs ES (2008) Business interest groups in Chinese politics: The case of the oil companies. In:
Li C (ed.) China’s Changing Political Landscape: Prospects for Democracy. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 121–141.
Downs ES (2014) Business and politics in the South China Sea: Explaining HYSY 981’s foray into
disputed waters. China Brief XIV(12): 6–8.
Drezner DW (2008) All Politics is Global: Explaining International Regulatory Regimes.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dubash NK and Morgan B (eds) (2013) The Rise of the Regulatory State of the South: Infrastructure
and Development in Emerging Economies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Flemes D (2013) Network powers: Strategies of change in the multipolar system. Third World
Quarterly 34(6): 1016–1036.
Friedberg AL (2005) The future of US–China relations: Is confict inevitable? International
Security 30(2): 7–45.
Garver JW (1992) China’s push through the South China Sea: The interaction of bureaucratic and
national interests. The China Quarterly 132: 999–1028.
Gilpin R (1981) War and Change in the International System. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Goh E (2013) The Struggle for Order: Hegemony, Hierarchy, and Transition in Post-Cold War
East Asia. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hameiri and Jones

23

Goldstein A (2003) An emerging China’s emerging grand strategy. In: Ikenberry GJ and
Mastanduno M (eds) International Relations Theory and the Asia-Pacific. New York, NY:
Columbia University Press, pp. 57–106.
Gong T and Chen F (1994) Institutional reorganization and its impact on decentralization. In: Jia
H and Lin Z (eds) Changing Central–Local Relations in China: Reform and State Capacity.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, pp. 67–88.
Goodman DSG and Segal G (eds) (1994) China Deconstructs: Politics, Trade and Regionalism.
London: Routledge.
Gray K and Murphy CN (2013) Introduction: Rising powers and the future of global governance.
Third World Quarterly 34(2): 183–193.
Grimm S, Rank R, McDonald M et al. (2011) Transparency of Chinese aid: An analysis of the
published information on Chinese external financial flows. Publish What You Fund/Centre
for Chinese Studies, Stellenbosch University, August.
Hameiri S (2010) Regulating Statehood: State Building and the Transformation of the Global
Order. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hameiri S and Jones L (2013) The politics and governance of non-traditional security. International
Studies Quarterly 57(3): 462–473.
Harrison G (2004) The World Bank and Africa: The Construction of Governance States. London:
Routledge.
Harvey D (2005) A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Henderson J and Reilly B (2003) Dragon in paradise: China’s rising star in Oceania. The National
Interest 72: 94–104.
Hobsbawm EJ (1987) The Age of Empire, 1875–1914. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Hobsbawm EJ (1994) The Age of Extremes: A History of the World, 1914–1991. New York, NY:
Pantheon Books.
Hooghe L and Marks G (2003) Unraveling the central state, but how? Types of multi-level governance. American Political Science Review 97(2): 233–243.
Houser T (2008) The roots of Chinese oil investment abroad. Asia Policy 5(1): 141–166.
Hu Y (2013) Patrols bring security to Mekong River. China Daily USA, 17 December.
Hurrell A (2006) Hegemony, liberalism and global order: What space for would-be great powers?
International Affairs 82(1): 1–19.
Hurrell A (2008) On Global Order: Power, Values, and the Constitution of International Society.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ICG (International Crisis Group) (2009) China’s Myanmar Dilemma. Beijing: ICG.
ICG (2012) Stirring Up the South China Sea. Beijing: ICG.
ICG (2013) A Tentative Peace in Myanmar’s Kachin Conflict. Jakarta: ICG.
Ikenberry GJ (2008) The rise of China and the future of the West: Can the liberal system survive?
Foreign Affairs 87(1): 23–37.
Jackson RH (1990) Quasi-States: Sovereignty, International Relations, and the Third World.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jakobsen L (2014) China’s unpredictable maritime security actors. Lowy Institute Report,
December.
Jakobsen L and Knox D (2010) New Foreign Policy Actors in China. Stockholm: SIPRI.
Jayasuriya K (2001) Globalisation and the changing architecture of the state: Regulatory state and
the politics of negative coordination. Journal of European Public Policy 8(1): 101–123.
Jessop B (2008) State Power: A Strategic-Relational Approach. Cambridge: Polity.
Jessop B (2009) Avoiding traps, rescaling states, governing Europe. In: Keil R and Mahon R
(eds) Leivathan Undone? Towards a Political Economy of Scale. Vancouver: UBC Press,
pp. 87–104.

24

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

Jia H and Wang M (1994) Market and state: Changing central–local relations in China. In: Jia H
and Lin Z (eds) Changing Central–Local Relations in China: Reform and State Capacity.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, pp. 35–65.
Johnston AI (1998) Cultural Realism: Strategic Culture and Grand Strategy in Chinese History.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Johnston AI (2003) Socialization in international institutions: The ASEAN way and International
Relations theory. In: Ikenberry GJ and Mastanduno M (eds) International Relations Theory
and the Asia-Pacific. New York, NY: Columbia University Press, pp. 107–162.
Kang DC (2003) Getting Asia wrong: The need for new analytical frameworks. International
Security 27(4): 57–85.
Kaplan RD (2014) Asia’s Cauldron: The South China Sea and the End of a Stable Pacific. New
York, NY: Random House.
Keating M (2013) Rescaling the European State: The Making of Territory and the Rise of the
Meso. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keohane RO (1984) After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kirshner J (2010) The tragedy of offensive realism: Classical realism and the rise of China.
European Journal of International Relations 18(1): 53–75.
Klare M (2001) Resource Wars: The New Landscape of Global Conflict. New York, NY: Owl
Books.
Lanteigne M (2012) Water dragon? China, power shifts and soft balancing in the South Pacific.
Political Science 64(1): 21–38.
Li C and Lye LF (2009) China’s policies towards Myanmar: A successful model for dealing with
the Myanmar issue? China: An International Journal 7(2): 255–287.
Li HY and Zheng Y (2009) Re-interpreting China’s non-intervention policy towards Myanmar:
Leverage, interest and intervention. Journal of Contemporary China 18(61): 617–637.
Li M (2014) Local liberalism: China’s provincial approaches to relations with Southeast Asia.
Journal of Contemporary China 23(86): 275–293.
Lieberthal KG (1992) Introduction: The ‘fragmented authoritarianism’ model and its limitations.
In: Lieberthal KG and Lampton DM (eds) Bureaucracy, Politics, and Decision Making in
Post-Mao China. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, pp. 1–30.
Lu X (2000) Booty socialism, bureau-preneurs, and the state in transition: Organizational corruption in China. Comparative Politics 32(3): 273–294.
McCauley RN (2013) Renminbi internationalisation and China’s financial development. Journal
of Chinese Economic and Business Studies 11(2): 101–115.
Majone G (1994) The rise of the regulatory state in Europe. West European Politics 17(3): 77–101.
Mattli W and Woods N (2009) The Politics of Global Regulation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Mearsheimer JJ (1990) Back to the future: Instability in Europe after the Cold War. International
Security 15(1): 5–56.
Mearsheimer JJ (2001) The Tragedy of Great Power Politics. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Co.
Mearsheimer JJ (2006) China’s unpeaceful rise. Current History 105(690): 160–162.
Meidan M, Andrews-Speed P and Xin M (2009) Shaping China’s energy policy: Actors and processes. Journal of Contemporary China 18(61): 591–616.
Naím M (2007) Rogue aid. Foreign Policy, 1 March.
Nganje F (2014) The developmental paradiplomacy of South African provinces: Context, scope
and the challenge of coordination. Hague Journal of Diplomacy 9(2): 119–149.
Nung Wong P, Aquino K, Lara-de Leon K et al. (2013) As wind, thunder and lightning: Local
resistance to China’s resource led diplomacy in the Christian Philippines. South East Asia
Research 21(2): 281–302.

Hameiri and Jones

25

Odgaard L (2007) China: Security cooperation with reservations. In: Kirchner EJ and Sperling J
(eds) Global Security Governance: Competing Perceptions of Security in the 21st Century.
London: Routledge, pp. 199–218.
Poulantzas N (1976) State, Power, Socialism. London: New Left Books.
Rosenau JN (2003) Distant Proximities: Dynamics beyond Globalization. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Ross RS (2006) Balance of power politics and the rise of China: Accommodation and balancing in
East Asia. Security Studies 15(3): 355–395.
Ruggie JG (1998) Constructing the World Polity: Essays on International Institutionalisation.
London: Routledge.
Ruwitch J (2014) Satellites and seafood: China keeps fishing fleet connected in disputed waters.
Reuters, 27 July.
Santicola R (2014) China’s consistently inconsistent South China Sea policy. The Diplomat, 24
May.
Saull R (2012) Rethinking hegemony: Uneven development, historical blocs, and the world economic crisis. International Studies Quarterly 56(2): 323–338.
Setzer J (2014) How subnational governments are rescaling environmental governance: The case
of the Brazilian state of São Paulo. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning (DOI:10.10
80/1523908X.2014.984669).
Shambaugh D (2013) China Goes Global: The Partial Power. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sharafutdinova G (2003) Paradiplomacy in the Russian regions: Tatarstan’s search for statehood.
Europe-Asia Studies 55(4): 613–629.
Sheng L (2006) China–ASEAN cooperation against illicit drugs from the Golden Triangle. Asian
Perspective 30(2): 97–126.
Shue V (1988) The Reach of the State: Sketches of the Chinese Body Politic. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Simpson G (2004) Great Powers and Outlaw States: Unequal Sovereigns in the International
Legal Order. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Slaughter A-M (2004) A New World Order. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Smith G (2012) Are Chinese soft loans always a bad thing? Lowy Institute Interpreter Blog, 29
March. Available at: http://www.lowyinterpreter.org/post/2012/03/29/Are-Chinese-softloans-always-a-bad-thing.aspx
Smith G (2013) Beijing’s orphans? New Chinese investors in Papua New Guinea. Pacific Affairs
86(2): 327–349.
Smith G (2014) The top four myths about China in the Pacific. Lowy Interpreter blog, 18
November. Available at: http://www.lowyinterpreter.org/post/2014/11/18/The-top-fourmyths-about-China-in-the-Pacific.aspx
Sørensen G (2004) The Transformation of the State: Beyond the Myth of Retreat. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Sridharan K (2003) Federalism and foreign relations: The nascent role of the Indian states. Asian
Studies Review 27(4): 463–489.
Steinberg DI and Fan H (2013) Modern China–Myanmar Relations: Dilemmas of Mutual
Dependence. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Stephen MD (2014) Rising powers, global capitalism and liberal global governance: A historical
materialist account of the BRICs challenge. European Journal of International Relations
20(4): 912–928.
Storey I (1999) Creeping assertiveness: China, the Philippines and the South China Sea dispute.
Contemporary Southeast Asia 21(1): 95–118.
Storey I (2013) China’s growing security role in Southeast Asia raises hopes and fears. World
Politics Review, 5 July.

26

European Journal of International Relations ﻿

Su X (2012a) Rescaling the Chinese state and regionalization in the Great Mekong Subregion.
Review of International Political Economy 19(2): 502–527.
Su X (2012b) Transnational regionalization and the rescaling of the Chinese state. Environment
and Planning-A 44(6): 1327–1347.
Su X (2013) China’s antidrug policies in Southeast Asia’s Golden Triangle. Asia Pacific Bulletin
234: 1–2.
Su X (2014) Multi-scalar regionalization, network connections and the development of Yunnan
Province, China. Regional Studies 48(1): 91–104.
Summers T (2013) Yunnan — A Chinese Bridgehead to Asia: A Case Study of China’s Political
and Economic Relations with its Neighbours. Oxford: Chandos.
Teschke B (2003) The Myth of 1648: Class, Geopolitics, and the Making of Modern International
Relations. London: Verso.
Thayer CA (2014) China’s oil rig gambit: South China Sea game-changer? The Diplomat, 12
May.
Tilly C (1990) Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 900–1990. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Walter CE and Howie FJT (2012) Red Capitalism: The Fragile Financial Foundations of China’s
Extraordinary Rise, Revised and Updated. Singapore: John Wiley and Sons.
Wang Y-K (2013) Harmony and War: Confucian Culture and Chinese Power Politics. New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
Wendt A (2004) The state as person in international theory. Review of International Studies 30(2):
289–316.
Xinhua.net (2014) Experts talk about the Zhongjiannan drilling project. Xinhua, 16 July.
Yang J (2009) China in the South Pacific: Hegemon on the horizon? The Pacific Review 22(2):
139–158.
Yang J (2011) China in Fiji: Displacing traditional players? Australian Journal of International
Affairs 65(3): 305–321.
Zha D (2001) Localizing the South China Sea problem: The case of China’s Hainan. The Pacific
Review 14(4): 575–598.
Zhang H (2012) China’s evolving fishing industry: Implications for regional and global maritime
security. RSIS Working Paper 246/12. Available at: http://dr.ntu.edu.sg/handle/10220/9118
(accessed 11 July 2014).
Zhang J (2014) The domestic sources of China’s more assertive foreign policy. International
Politics 51(3): 390–397.
Zheng Y (2004) Globalization and State Transformation in China. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Zheng Y (2007) De Facto Federalism in China: Reforms and Dynamics of Central–Local
Relations. Singapore: World Scientific.
Zweig D (2002) Internationalizing China: Domestic Interests and Global Linkages. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.

Author biographies
Shahar Hameiri (PhD, Murdoch) is senior lecturer in international politics and research fellow at
the Asia Research Centre, School of Management and Governance, Murdoch University, Australia.
He is the author of Regulating Statehood: State Transformation and the Changing Global Order
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2010) and Governing Borderless Threats: Non-Traditional Security and the
Politics of State Transformation (with Lee Jones) (Cambridge University Press, 2015).
Lee Jones (DPhil, Oxford) is senior lecturer in the School of Politics and International Relations at
Queen Mary, University of London, UK, and research associate at the Asia Research Centre,

Hameiri and Jones

27

Murdoch University, Australia. He is the author of ASEAN, Sovereignty and Intervention in
Southeast Asia (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), Governing Borderless Threats: Non-Traditional
Security and the Politics of State Transformation (with Shahar Hameiri) (Cambridge University
Press, 2015) and Societies Under Siege: Exploring How International Economic Sanctions (Do
Not) Work (Oxford University Press, 2015).

