U.S.-Vietnam Security Cooperation:
Catalysts and Constraints

Hoang Anh Tuan*
Do Thi Thuy†

In any bilateral relationship, trust is measured by the depth and scope of defense ties,
not by trade volume and investment flows. U.S.-Vietnam defense cooperation over the
past 20 years has not been an exception. Despite falling behind in their economic and
political relations, security cooperation between the two has been progressing slowly
but firmly, serving as a foundation for overall relations to move forward. This article
analyzes the various catalysts and constraints on forging U.S.-Vietnamese strategic
trust. It argues that the degree of bilateral security cooperation has been shaped by a
number of structural and agential factors: changes in the Asian balance of power
stemming from China’s rise and the U.S. pivot to Asia, convergences and divergences
in national interests and threat perceptions with regard to China policy and the South
China Sea disputes, and the accumulation of historical lessons. These have had a
“push and pull” effect on strategic cooperation.
Key words: ASEAN, China, security, South China Sea, U.S.-Vietnam defense cooperation

I

n 2015, Vietnam and the United States celebrated the 20th anniversary of the
normalization of their bilateral diplomatic relations. This was considered an
important milestone in Vietnam-U.S. relations, and a series of meetings and
conferences were held in Hanoi and Washington in which participants
reviewed the past 20 years of cooperation, analyzed both strengths and weaknesses of their relationship, and made recommendations on what could be
done better to promote this bilateral relationship between former wartime
adversaries during past Indochinese conflicts. All of these developments were
symbolic of the considerable momentum that has developed in this bilateral
*Hoang Anh Tuan is Director-General of the Institute for Foreign Policy and Strategic
Studies at the Diplomatic Academy of Vietnam.
†
Do Thi Thuy is a PhD Candidate in the Department of International Relations, Australian National University, and lecturer (currently on leave) at the Diplomatic Academy of
Vietnam.
The views expressed in this paper are the authors’ own and do not represent those of
the institutions with which they are affiliated.
Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Number 1—Pages 179–192
C 2016 Policy Studies Organization. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
V

Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Issue 1—2016

association since the two countries’ diplomatic relations were normalized in
1995. They also point to a growing dimension of geopolitical cooperation which
is bound to impact on the strategic environment in the South China Sea and
throughout Southeast Asia.
With such a painful recent history, the dramatic transformation of the U.S.Vietnam relationship from wartime enmity to comprehensive partnership
within such a short time span merits academic attention. Existing literature
tends to explain the rapid progress of U.S.-Vietnam strategic ties through a realist lens of balance of power, that is to counter China’s rise and its increasing
assertiveness in the South China Sea, and attributes the limits of this bilateral
relationship to Vietnam’s concerns about regime legitimacy (see, e.g., Liu &
Sun, 2015). This article does not reject such logic; yet it posits that viewing this
relationship from a single factor perspective, be it balance of power or regime
legitimacy, often provides an oversimplified explanation of U.S.-Vietnam security ties. Instead, we posit that the dynamics of U.S.-Vietnam security cooperation are shaped by a number of catalysts and constraints stemming from the
interplay of both structural and agential causes.
Reviewing the evolution of U.S.-Vietnam relations from before the Vietnam
war to the present, this article finds that structural causes embedded in the
bipolar Cold War order were the most salient, if not the single, determining factor that shaped U.S.-Vietnam strategic rivalry in the Cold War. Bilateral security
cooperation in the post-Cold War era, particularly since the normalization of
ties in 1995, meanwhile, has been forged by the diversification of intervening
factors including a historical heritage (the war legacy and historical learning),
structural changes in the balance of power in Asia (the rise of China and U.S.
pivot to Asia), and the convergence-cum-divergence between Vietnam’s and
the United States’ threat perceptions and national interests regarding the South
China Sea disputes and their corresponding policies toward China. The emergence of agential factors, such as Vietnam’s perception of security threats and
national interests as well as learning from its past mistakes in designing its
strategies toward great powers, also contributes to the shaping of the defense
cooperation. This explains why Vietnam is moving closer to the United States
strategically, but thus far has not acted in the same realist way that it did during
the Cold War—to ally with the United States to counter against the China threat
in the South China Sea.

From Foes to Friends: Historical and Political Background
It is widely known that the United States and Vietnam fought one of the longest and bloodiest wars in the Cold War. However, few know about the “misperceptions” or “missed opportunities” that prevented the two countries from
establishing a relationship that might have helped avoid that miserable war.
During the mid-1940s, the United States, through its Office of Strategic Services,
and the Hochiminh-led Viet Minh League worked hand-in-hand in the fight
against Japanese imperialism which eventually contributed to the Viet Minh’s
take-over of the government in Hanoi in August 1945. In his Declaration of
Independence on September 2, 1945, Ho Chi Minh recalled Thomas Jefferson’s
famous saying enshrined in the 1776 American Declaration of Independence:

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

180

181

“that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with
certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of
Happiness.” During the 1945–1946 period, Ho also wrote a number of letters to
U.S. President Harry Truman and U.S. Secretary of State James Byrnes expressing his high hopes that the United States would aid Vietnam in its struggle for
national independence amid French colonialism. It had been argued that if
Washington had supported the anti colonial movement in Indochina rather
than caving into the French demands, the United States might have been spared
a long and lethal war in Vietnam (Bartholomew-Feis, 2006).
Yet, the Cold War dynamics changed the course of history. Driven by their
concerns about the “domino theory” and a mis-perception that Ho Chi Minh
was a radical communist or a “Soviet puppet” seeking to “communize” the
entire Indochinese region, the Truman administration decided to support
France and Britain in suppressing the independence movements in Indochina,
which subsequently led to “America’s longest war.” As a counter balance,
Hanoi decided to ally with the Soviet Union and China to mobilize forces for its
struggle for national independence and unification which was eventually realized in April 1975.
Nonetheless, the Vietnam war was by no means a dead end for U.S.-Vietnam
relations. After three decades of continuous conflicts, a war-ravaged Vietnam
realized the urgent need to rebuild the country. One important pathway toward
that end was to seek rapprochement with its Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) neighbors and the West, including the United States. As
early as May 1976, Hanoi and Washington started negotiations on the normalization of relations. Differences remained, however, over issues such as the
identification and repatriation of American Prisoners of War (POW) and those
Missing in Action (MIA) as well as Vietnam’s demand for war compensation.
When Jimmy Carter assumed the U.S. presidency in January 1977, his administration was particularly enthusiastic in such negotiations with Hanoi and even
“turned on the green light” for Vietnam’s entry into the United Nations in September 1977.
However, structural causes, particularly the Sino-Soviet split and the SinoWest rapprochement, once again cast a long shadow on U.S.-Vietnam relations.
Amid the heightened Sino-Soviet split and the deterioration of the SinoVietnamese relationship, Hanoi’s decision to enter a formal alliance with the
Soviet Union in 1978 created a new crisis in its relations with China, the United
States, and Vietnam’s ASEAN neighbors. In this context, Vietnam proposed a
Zone of Genuine Independence, Peace, and Neutrality which rivalled the earlier Zone of Freedom, Peace, and Neutrality adopted by ASEAN in 1971. Hanoi’s point was that Southeast Asian countries should be truly independent from
great powers (e.g., China and the United States), but the initiative was dismissed because Vietnam itself was seen as a “Soviet satellite” (Mastny & Zhu,
2013). China’s subsequent invasion of Vietnam in 1979 and Vietnam’s intervention in Cambodia in the same year suspended Vietnam-U.S. relations and Vietnam’s foreign relations overall for more than a decade. The United States joined
hands with China and ASEAN members in imposing embargoes and in isolating Vietnam in the international arena until the end of the Cambodian conflict
in 1991.

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

U.S.-Vietnam Security Cooperation

Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Issue 1—2016

The end of the bipolar era opened a new page in U.S.-Vietnam relations.
Emerging from the Cold War deeply frustrated with alliance politics and keen
to preserve its hard-won independence, Hanoi decided to pursue an
“omnidirectional” and self-reliant foreign policy. To support its economic
reform (Doi Moi) which was initiated in 1986, Hanoi also adopted “new
thinking” in its foreign relations—to “befriend all nations in the world
community” including the improvement of ties with its former foes (China, the
United States, and ASEAN). Against this background, on April 9, 1991, Washington introduced a “roadmap” for improving relations with Vietnam. Resolving the war legacy remained one of the biggest barriers toward this end. For
Washington, the lingering “Vietnam syndrome” among war veterans created
pressure for the government to push Vietnam hard on the POW/MIA issue.
For Hanoi, the hardest issue was to “cool the heads” of some of the Vietnamese
elite who still perceived the United States as a “strategic opponent” who
wanted to undermine the Vietnamese communist leadership through subversive activities.
Vietnam’s complete withdrawal of its troops from Cambodia and its proactive cooperation in the POW/MIA issue further facilitated rapprochement.
With distinguished Vietnam War veterans, for example, Senators John McCain
and John Kerry, as well as leading American businesses realizing that Vietnam
was a promising market, on March 2, 1994, President Bill Clinton lifted the economic embargo on Vietnam, paving the way for normalization of bilateral relations in July 1995. Five years later, Clinton became the first American President
to make a state visit to Vietnam since before the Vietnam War, and his successor, George W. Bush, made the second visit to Vietnam by an American President when Hanoi hosted the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Summit in 2006. In return, Vietnamese Presidents Nguyen Minh Triet and
Truong Tan Sang visited the United States in 2007 and 2013, respectively. During President Sang’s 2013 visit, the two countries launched their comprehensive
partnership framework.
Perhaps, the most notable recent event was the first visit to the United States
by the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam, Mr. Nguyen Phu
Trong, at the invitation of U.S. President Barack Obama, on July 7–11, 2015.
America had never before welcomed the general secretary of the Vietnamese
Communist Party (who has no official state title) with the highest protocol for a
head of state. This visit underscored the United States’ respect not only for Vietnam’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, and the principle of noninterference in
Vietnam’s internal affairs, but also its political institutions. To put it in another
way, the United States is increasingly sensitized that the political choice for
Vietnam’s future destiny is in the hands of the Vietnamese people. This is a
firm indication of how Vietnam-U.S. relations have matured over the years.
In light of this development, the following section analyzes the importance of
security cooperation in forging overall U.S.-Vietnam relations since their normalization, as well as the catalysts and constraints on such maneuvers. It identifies the structural and agential factors that have shaped those catalysts and
constraints. If U.S.-Vietnam rivalry during the Cold War was overwhelmingly
determined by the bipolar structure, the evolving multipolar order in Asia
allowed the two countries to have a greater agency role in making strategic

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

182

183

choices and designing policies toward each other. Indeed, during a visit to Vietnam in December 2013, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry remarked on U.S.Vietnamese relations: “I can’t think of two countries that have worked harder,
done more, and done better to try to bring themselves together and change history and change the future” (Lee, 2013). The interplay of these structural and
agential factors is represented in a set of catalysts and constraints that are shaping the ongoing dynamics of this relationship.

The Development of U.S.-Vietnam Defense Cooperation
and Its Catalysts
Such an improvement in Vietnam-U.S. relations over the past 20 years could
not have been possible without the development of trust in the field of defense
cooperation. Bilateral defense cooperation has increased slowly but steadily
and there is much potential for further development. As with any bilateral relations, political trust is not just measured by the level of economic cooperation,
reflected in investments or trade volumes, but by the scope, substance, and
quality of defense cooperation, and Vietnam-U.S. defense cooperation is no
exception to this rule.
During the first few years of the normalization of ties, U.S.-Vietnam defense
cooperation mainly focused on resolving the wartime legacy such as the POW/
MIA and Agent Orange issues. Progress in these areas created momentum for
broadening the scope of defense cooperation.1 In the later years, Vietnam-U.S.
relations have shifted dramatically from focusing only on one issue to a fullfledged relationship. While defense cooperation between the two countries has
developed more slowly compared to other areas, it is now visibly progressing.
The U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Defense Cooperation Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed in 2011 was the first milestone in Vietnam-U.S. defense
cooperation. Five important areas in the MOU include initiatives on maritime
security cooperation, high-level defense dialogues, search and rescue programs,
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, and United Nations peacekeeping
operations. This paved the way for U.S. Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta to
visit Cam Ranh Bay in June 2012 and to negotiate for increased U.S. naval
access for more port visits. The United States also signed an agreement with
Vietnam in late 2013 to provide formal training to the Vietnamese coastguard
as a means of signaling to other regional parties an increased VietnameseAmerican joint capacity to coordinate in response to intensified maritime tensions in the South China Sea.
Since the signing of the MOU, defense cooperation between Vietnam and the
United States has made great progress. This can be seen in the number of highlevel defense dialogues between the two countries that have been established,
for example the Defense Policy Dialogue, the Bilateral Defense Dialogue, and
the Service Talks through the Army, Navy, Air Force, and State Partnership
Program. High-level visits have also increased, as exemplified by the visits to
Vietnam by the U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Martin Dempsey, in
August 2014, and by the U.S. Secretary of the Navy, Ray Mabus, in April 2015.
In the area of search and rescue programs and initiatives, the United States and
Vietnam collaborated on the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight MH 370 which

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

U.S.-Vietnam Security Cooperation

Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Issue 1—2016

disappeared in March 2014. Regarding United Nations peacekeeping operation
initiatives, the United States helped Vietnam to construct a US$3.1 million training facility and provided training equipment for engineers and a hospital. The
U.S. Defense Department is now scheduled to deploy a peacekeeping expert at
the U.S. Embassy in Hanoi to facilitate Vietnamese military personnel for future
United Nations peacekeeping assignments (Pellerin, 2015).
Military collaboration has been particularly effective when undertaking
“non traditional security” missions. Cooperation in this field is facilitated by a
series of agreements that the two governments have concluded in the past decade, including a bilateral search and rescue agreement in 2002, a counternarcotics letter of agreement in 2006, a bilateral maritime agreement in 2007,
and the Megaports Agreement in 2010 to better identify weapons of mass
destruction components in maritime shipping (Wester, 2013). Translating these
agreements into practice, noncombat exercises between the two navies have
been conducted annually in recent years, focusing on military medicine, search
and rescue, and shipboard damage control. Alongside the exercises, a symposium on military operations and law was held at Danang University in April
2014 to discuss maritime security topics such as counter-piracy. As Lieutenant
Commander Clay Doss, a U.S. Navy public affairs officer, recently observed:
“The quality and depth of the exchanges is increasing each year as our navies
get to know each other better” (Boudreau, 2014).
Since December 2013, the United States has also committed to provide US$18
million in new assistance to Vietnam (accounting for more than half of its
US$32.5 million assistance for Southeast Asia) for enhancing the capacity of
coastal patrol units to deploy rapidly for search and rescue, disaster response,
and provision of fast patrol vessels to the Vietnamese Coast Guard (U.S.
Department of State, 2013). In addition, with support from both the U.S. Coast
Guard and the Department of State, a training facility with a focus on maritime
law enforcement is being constructed in Vietnam’s northern city of Haiphong
(Wester, 2013). On May 31, 2015, after touring a Vietnamese Coast Guard vessel
ravaged during the 2014 confrontation with Chinese ships in Vietnam’s claimed
exclusive economic zone in the South China Sea, U.S. Defense Secretary Ashton
Carter confirmed that Vietnam will receive more funds to acquire Americanmade patrol vessels to enhance its maritime enforcement capabilities. As he
stated, after 20 years, “we need to modernize our partnership,” and “there is
more we could do together” (Alexander, 2015).
The visit by Defense Secretary Carter to Vietnam in mid-2015 signifies
another milestone in Vietnam-U.S. defense cooperation. At this time, Vietnam
and the United States agreed to upgrade their MOU on defense cooperation
with a Joint Vision Statement. The most crucial component of the statement
was raising the possibility of co-production of weapons and defense supplies,
which would help Hanoi become more independent in satisfying its defense
needs. This is important given that Vietnam current buys around 90% of its
defense equipment imports from Russia. Accordingly, the agreement with the
United States means that Vietnam can “wean itself off of a sole-source
provider” for the procurement of external defense systems (Mehta, 2015).
As we can see from the above, there has been a steady evolution of defense
cooperation between Vietnam and the United States over the past 20 years.

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

184

185

Without a doubt, this progress has its roots in the changing geopolitics in Asia,
particularly the rise of China and its growing assertiveness in territorial disputes that challenges American primacy and the security interests of its allies in
Asia. As a counter measure, the United States initiated the strategy of rebalancing or the pivot to Asia to strengthen and broaden the scope and substance of
its Asian alliances and partnerships to deal with China’s rise. Having its own
past strategic conflicts and its current territorial disputes with China in the
South China Sea, Vietnam is increasingly seen as a “natural ally” or “security
partner” in the design of the U.S. pivot to Asia. Nonetheless, thus far Vietnam
has not acted in a way that realists would have expected or as it did during the
Cold War, that is, it has not entered a formal alliance or forged a “strategic
partnership” with the United States to counter China’s threat. Here, we argue
that geopolitical concerns do matter, but that states have an agency role that
would help strengthen or lessen the impact of such structural causes. In the
case of U.S.-Vietnam security relations, those agential factors are largely twofold: how both countries learn from the lessons of history in designing their
contemporary policy toward one another; and how they converge and diverge
in the interpretation of threat perceptions and national interests amid changes
in the international and regional order. We first analyze the six catalysts for
U.S.-Vietnam security cooperation, and then in the following section, discuss
three restraints that stem from the interplay of structural and agential factors.
First, security cooperation between Vietnam and the United States is an integral component of overall relations; therefore, it benefits from the developments in other aspects of the relationship. In all these areas, there are positive
developments which in turn are conducive for strengthening the defense relationship. In economics, Vietnam-U.S. bilateral trade has increased 200-fold as
their normalization of ties, making the United States a leading trade partner
and the largest export market for Vietnamese products. In 2008, the United
States invited Vietnam, the only non capitalist country, to join its group of negotiating countries for the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement, which is
widely seen as an economic component of its pivot to Asia. In education and
training, with 16,579 students, Vietnam has the eighth largest number of international students in the United States (and ranks sixth among all Asian countries) (Institute of International Education, 2014).
Importantly, despite the war memory, Vietnamese public opinion toward the
United States and bilateral relations overall is strikingly encouraging. According to a survey conducted by the Pew Research Center (2014, p. 37) during a
time when Vietnam was facing deteriorating territorial disputes with China,
76% of the Vietnamese held favorable views of the United States, only slightly
lower than their favorability toward Japan (77%), and much higher than their
positive opinion toward China (16%). Interestingly, this number is even higher
than the U.S. favorability rate in those Asian countries which have forged longterm alliances with the United States, that is, Japan (66%), and Thailand (73%).
Given that nationalism and historical issues have become a strategic liability for
the Sino-Japanese-Korean security relationship and even for Sino-Vietnamese
relations, it is fortunate indeed that historical issues have not been a destructive
factor in the case of U.S.-Vietnam security cooperation.

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

U.S.-Vietnam Security Cooperation

Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Issue 1—2016

Second, Vietnam and the United States share many interests and views about
bilateral, regional, and international security issues. Bilaterally, the United
States supports an independent and peaceful Vietnam that can maintain its
unity, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, and that can channel its active
diplomacy in the region and the world. Regionally, the United States wants a
unified and strong ASEAN where Vietnam can play an active role in projecting
the Association’s centrality in building regional institutions and architectures.
In regard to territorial disputes in the South China Sea, the United States and
Vietnam share the view that such differences should be resolved through
peaceful means and through the nonuse or threat of force, and that resolution
of disputes must conform with international law, especially the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) (this issue is discussed
more extensively below). On international security issues, Vietnam has worked
with the United States in combating international terrorism and nuclear proliferation by signing the a civilian nuclear agreement which complies with Section
123 of the U.S. Atomic Energy Act and the Proliferation Security Initiative.
Third, increasingly, the two countries share interests in the South China Sea
issue. To date, Vietnam regards the South China Sea territorial dispute as one
of its most serious national security challenges (Ministry of National Defence,
2009). The United States, meanwhile, has delivered the strongest statements in
favor of Vietnam’s security interests. Despite declaring neutrality on the territorial question, the United States sees that the issue is approaching a dangerous
redline. Freedom of navigation and aviation in the South China Sea, in particular, is a matter of particular U.S. concern since nearly 50% of global trade
depends on maritime security in the South China Sea, and the rival territorial
claims in the area not only have bilateral or regional security implications, but
also global ones. Therefore, the United States was one of the first and firmest
voices regarding territorial disputes and security in the South China Sea. The
United States’ stance is in line with the security interests of regional countries
including Vietnam and the international community. With its long coastline
directly facing the South China Sea, relatively sizable maritime forces, and historical experience in dealing with China and other great powers, Vietnam is
clearly an important strategic player in maintaining the balance of power in
this maritime locale. In light of this, enhancing Vietnam’s capability to defend
its own security and territory has become a matter of mutual interest for Hanoi
and Washington. Thus, this is one of the most important commonalities that
has lent impetus for recent maritime security cooperation between the United
States and Vietnam. Examples include the United States’ decision to partially
lift the ban on lethal arms sales to Vietnam and to provide five to six highspeed patrol vessels to help the latter’s coastguard forces increase its ability to
control its maritime domain and safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity (Hiebert, Nguyen, & Poling, 2014).
Fourth, the United States’ perspective on Vietnam’s role and influence in the
region and around the world is an important policy catalyst. Vietnam has
embraced a greater international role as evidenced by the 11th Congress of the
Communist Party of Vietnam’s affirmation in January 2011 that Vietnam is
ready to play a more proactive, active, and responsible role in regional and
international issues. Those responsibilities can be fulfilled by making a

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

186

187

contribution toward protecting regional and international peace through words
and actions. Vietnam knows that cooperation with the United States is an
important factor (albeit perhaps not a totally decisive one) in better fulfilling its
international responsibilities. Illustrative was Vietnam’s status as a nonpermanent member of the United Nations Security Council for the 2008–2010 term. In
addition, when Vietnam held the ASEAN presidency in 2010, it initiated the
ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus security dialogue channel that initially met three times a year (now twice a year) between ASEAN Defense Ministers and their counterparts from important ASEAN partners. This initiative was
warmly received by the United States (Bower, 2010).
Fifth, the United States and Vietnam increasingly understand one another’s
“comfort zone.” Through their enhanced interactions, both countries are now
more aware of the nature of the other side’s security concerns, and devote
adequate attention to managing them. In various official and unofficial
exchanges, U.S. officials and scholars have stated that they understand
“Vietnam’s delicacy” about defense cooperation with the United States and
that the United States should be patient with the pace at which the Vietnamese
are “comfortable” (private conversations). In light of this, Washington and
Hanoi do not articulate overly ambitious goals for the evolution of their security relationship. It is clear that Vietnam-U.S. relations have a painful history.
The past is still an unhealed wound which demands that relations and political
trust continue to be cultivated. As a result, both Vietnam and the United States
have worked hard to understand and listen to one another’s concerns and security sensitivities to continue developing better relations. Hence, both countries
suggest very modest goals, such that cooperation, results, and confidence over
the next year must be better than in the previous year. This is why bilateral
defense relations have progressed in a gradual manner and are not prone to
dramatic breakthroughs, and accordingly, improvement in relations are built
on a stable foundation. It should also be noted that Vietnam-U.S. defense cooperation began from a very low base, and so potential for cooperation was high.
Sixth, another favorable condition that further promotes Vietnam-U.S.
defense relations beyond their bilateral framework is the fact that they have
many common friends and strategic partners in the region. Almost all the countries within the system of the U.S. alliance and partnership in Asia are also Vietnam’s strategic or comprehensive partners. These include, among others,
Australia, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, South
Korea, and Thailand.2 This allows the United States and Vietnam to broaden
the scope of their defense cooperation to a trilateral or quadrilateral level. For
instance, the United States and Australia have joined hands in assisting Vietnam to develop English language and peacekeeping and stabilization skills for
its troops to take part in United Nations peacekeeping missions (Nicholson,
2013).3
The most promising trilateral framework among these is perhaps that
between Japan, the United States, and Vietnam. In 2011 and 2012, a number of
Japanese and American scholars and other observers first speculated about a
trilateral strategic security cooperative mechanism involving Vietnam that combines both Track 1 and Track 1.5 cooperative activities focusing on maritime
security, humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, and trilateral conferences on

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

U.S.-Vietnam Security Cooperation

Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Issue 1—2016

security issues of mutual concerns (Matsubara et al. 2012; Mori & Nishihara
2013). Like the United States, Japan has provided Vietnam with patrol vessels
and has helped enhance capacity building for Vietnam’s maritime law enforcement forces. Washington and Tokyo also share a great interest in assisting Vietnam in nuclear energy and Mekong subregional development (Mori &
Nishihara, 2013; Parameswaran, 2015). On the Vietnamese side, scholars and
practitioners Hoang Anh Tuan and Nguyen Vu Tung (2015, p. 36) from the
Diplomatic Academy of Vietnam have made suggestion significant proposal:
There should be an expansion of the U.S.–Japan security alliance to
incorporate a third party in policy discussions and coordination, information sharing, and so on; some prime examples of such cooperation
are the U.S.–Japan–Australia Dialogue and the U.S.–Japan–India Dialogue. In the future, the United States and Japan should consider the
creation of a dialogue mechanism, such as one that involves the Philippines, Indonesia, Vietnam, Malaysia, and even China, with the U.S.–
Japan alliance serving as the core.

Although the scope and substance of this kind of “minilateral” security
mechanism cannot be overstated at this stage, largely because of all parties’
concern that it may create a security dilemma with China, such a framework
may eventually contribute to consolidating and broadening the regional security architecture which thus far relies on two seemingly divergent pillars—the
U.S. “hub-and-spokes” network of bilateral alliances on the one hand, and
ASEAN-led soft multilateralism on the other.

Constraints on Vietnam-U.S. Security Cooperation
Although the United States and Vietnam share many common viewpoints,
defense cooperation between the two still exhibits differences and limitations.
There are three main obstacles to this. First, differences still exist in regard to
the assessment of threats in the region, which thereby shapes the level of
security–defense cooperation. It is important here to make note of China’s role.
For the past 1,000 years, well before the United States assumed a powerful role
in Southeast Asia and the Asia-Pacific, Vietnam addressed the Chinese security
threat on its own. While maintaining that security challenges in the South
China Sea, caused by China’s assertive policies, are the greatest security issue,
Vietnamese leaders also believe that these challenges can be overcome by active
engagement with China. And that is not to mention the geographical proximity
and ideological similarity between the two countries. By this reasoning, engagement, as opposed to confrontation, would allow China to see the benefits of
regional peace and cooperation. Therefore, Vietnam has devised a policy of
“three no’s”: no military alliances, no foreign military bases, and no collusion
against a third country.
Moreover, haunted by major power dealings in the past such as those
between Mao Zedong and Richard Nixon in 1972 regarding peace and unification in Vietnam, Vietnamese leaders are always concerned that a similar agreement could take place in the South China Sea which could harm Vietnam’s
security. Critically, the United States’ recent actions have yet to show genuine
substance relative to convergence with Vietnam’s core geopolitical interests,

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

188

189

rather than predominantly work to increase an American presence in the
region. Although U.S.-China relations have become increasingly tense, this has
not made China less assertive, nor pressed China to observe international law,
cease land reclamation activities, or stop other actions that have complicated
the situation in the South China Sea.
More alarmingly, Washington’s ambivalence in defending an ally’s interest
such as its indecisive behavior during the “Scarborough Shoal” crisis between
the Philippines and China in 2012 raises questions about U.S. strategic credibility among smaller regional states. Having learnt from its own lessons in the
past when China first launched a 1979 land border war against Vietnam and
later successfully overtook Vietnam-controlled islands in the South China Sea
in 1988 without any substantial action from its then ally—the Soviet Union—
Vietnam has been deeply distrustful of alliance politics allegedly designed to
balance or counter Chinese power. That sentiment explains why, despite its
acceptance of frequent port calls and high-ranking visits by U.S. military officials to the site, Hanoi continues to reject Washington’s proposal to host rotations of U.S. troops and warships in Cam Ranh Bay. That said, there is a visible
cap in the extent of Vietnam-U.S. strategic cooperation. Within those parameters, the “China factor” has been and will continue to exert both a push and
pull effect on Vietnam’s strategic thinking vis-a-vis the United States and its
Asian pivot (Do, 2014).
In this context, Vietnam’s ongoing policy in the triangular relationship
between China, the United States, and itself is to strengthen security–defense
cooperation with the United States and, at the same time, actively engage China
while implementing an external security–defense posture of independence and
self-reliance. The aim is to walk the tightrope carefully in its strategic collaborations with the United States and its ASEAN partners “so that it can be seen as
acting independently while keeping options open with China” (Hoang, 2012).
Second, there still remain war legacy issues, and a lack of trust and differences regarding democracy, human rights, and religion. In the U.S. Congress,
there are many who want to monitor democracy and human rights in Vietnam
as well as support of political organizations that could oppose the further cultivation of future Vietnam-U.S. ties. This leads to concerns about peaceful evolution and regime change. Thus, there are always two sides to Vietnam-U.S.
defense cooperation. On the one hand, cooperation reinforces Vietnam’s
defense capabilities against external threats, and on the other hand, it potentially weakens the Vietnamese government’s capability to exercise and project
self-reliant defense policies. In light of this, Vietnam’s approach to defense
cooperation is a cautious step-by-step process, in accordance with a commensurate deepening of bilateral trust. Nevertheless, it is important to note that
Vietnam-U.S. relations have already reached a mature stage where both countries can discuss their differences and prevent them from obstructing bilateral
relations in the future.
Third, the continued rise of China and heightened Sino-U.S. strategic competition at the regional level will make it increasingly harder for non allied
ASEAN members (Vietnam included) and ASEAN itself to retain their current
“hedging” strategy. In recent times, China has promoted a number of initiatives
rivalling U.S.-supported existing institutions (TPP, APEC), such as the Regional

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

U.S.-Vietnam Security Cooperation

Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Issue 1—2016

Comprehensive Economic Partnership and the Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank that have attracted the attention of many regional countries. Beijing also
actively sought to expand its influence within ASEAN and to weaken the Association so that the latter does not have a common and unified voice regarding the
South China Sea issue. An example of Chinese activity in this regard was
ASEAN’s failure to issue a Joint Statement on the South China Sea at the ASEAN
Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in Cambodia in July 2012. When U.S.-China relations
are strained, ASEAN faces the possibility of division and polarization. If anything, it recalls a similar period when the region was deeply divided over the
Cambodian conflict amid Sino-Soviet strategic competition. Having numerous
bitter experiences of being a victim of great power rivalry in history, Vietnam
(and other ASEAN members) will have to calibrate their overall foreign policy
and security ties with the United States cautiously by looking at the big picture
of the changing regional order so as not to repeat the tragedy of the past.

Conclusion
As this article has pointed out, the roots of U.S.-Vietnam security cooperation
can be traced back to before the end of the Second World War. Nonetheless,
given the complex international and regional circumstances during the Cold
War, the two countries experienced a miserable war and a long process toward
normalization of ties. Contemporary U.S.-Vietnam security and defense cooperation is still young, but it has been growing steadily since the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations in 1995. Although inherent limits are foreseeable, there is
also room and optimism for tapping the potential of this bilateral relationship.
Looking at the catalysts and constraints on U.S.-Vietnam security cooperation
over time, it can be seen that they are a combination or interplay of both structural and agential factors. The U.S.-Vietnam relationship during the Cold War
was driven mainly by structural concerns, and the United States’ and Vietnam’s
strategic behavior during that time fits in with the realist logic of a balance of
power. The end of the Cold War in 1991, however, lessened the monopoly of
structural factors in shaping this strategic relationship. Although structural
causes stemming from shared concerns about the rise of China and its assertiveness in territorial disputes continue to be the key underlying factor for deepening U.S.-Vietnam security cooperation in the post-Cold War era, the agency role
played by Vietnam and the United States in learning from the lessons of history
and past mistakes, and in designing their strategic choices, also contributes to
forging the dynamics of U.S.-Vietnam security cooperation to a degree of
mutual acceptability. In light of this, the United States and Vietnam can better
play their agency role to strengthen their security cooperation in the future.
Concrete measures toward this end are suggested as follows.
First, the United States should help Vietnam and ASEAN become stronger
and more integrated within the region in terms of economics, security, and politics. Only by developing economic strength can Vietnam be assured of effectively tackling security challenges and serve as a foundation for more extensive
security–defense cooperation with the United States. The TPP should not be
seen only as an economic tool but also as a strategic move for Vietnam to
enhance its economic and commercial power, to intertwine with the United

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

190

191

States economically and strategically as well as to underpin the peace, security,
and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region.
Second, the United States should understand that Vietnam does not want to
take part in the geopolitical game of confronting China for opposition’s sake.
Yet, it also does not want to become highly dependent on China or to be bullied
by it. Thus, it is Vietnam’s hope that the United States and regional countries
will continue to actively engage China, but balance such engagement by deterring China from becoming too assertive with neighboring countries or to pursue its economic, security, and diplomatic hegemony at its neighbors’ expense.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, the United States should not be hesitant in taking a lead role in persuading other actors inside and outside the
South China Sea to turn those waters into an area of peace. It should be forthright in asking concerned parties to work toward resolving disputes in the area
on the basis of international law and UNCLOS, and to refrain from the use or
threat of force. In the short-term, the United States should lead international
efforts in backing other regional claimants in the South China Sea dispute to
induce or compel China into stopping its land reclamation and expansion activities and from changing the South China Sea’s status quo. The United States
should also play an active role, along with regional and international parties in
ascertaining how to “neutralize” ownership of these artificial islands. If even
partial success is realized in meeting this objective, the prospects for the United
States and Vietnam to broaden their overall bilateral ties beyond the short-term
imperative of stabilizing offshore Southeast Asia will intensify and, over time,
residual historical and ideological tensions can be genuinely tempered by progress in realizing a deeper partnership based on its own merits.

Notes
1

As of August 31, 2015, 705 American POW/MIA in Vietnam have been accounted for, while the
status of more than 1,000 others remains unclear (Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency, 2015).
2
Vietnam and the Philippines do not have a comprehensive or strategic partnership as of yet.
Nonetheless, given their recent common concerns over Chinese-enhanced assertiveness in the
South China Sea disputes, Hanoi and Manila have agreed to step up negotiations for a strategic
partnership since early 2015 (Vnexpress, 2015). Closer defense and security cooperation between
Vietnam and the Philippines, especially in the maritime domain, could possibly encourage the
United States and Japan to participate in trilateral or quadrilateral maritime cooperation (given
Tokyo’s recent expression of interest in conducting reconnaissance flights over the South China
Sea) (Thayer, 2015).
3
India and Japan have also pledged to assist Vietnam in training its peacekeeping troops, so
expanded multilateral cooperation between Vietnam and these powers on this issue can be expected
in the future.

References
Alexander, David. (2015, May 31). Pentagon chief pledges $18 million for Hanoi to buy patrol boats.
Reuters. Retrieved from http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/05/31/us-vietnam-usa-defenseidUSKBN0OG0NB20150531.
Bartholomew-Feis, Dixee R. (2006). The OSS and Ho Chi Minh: Unexpected allies in the war against Japan.
Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.
Boudreau, John. (2014, April 8). U.S.–Vietnam naval exercises begin amid sea tensions. Bloomberg.
Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-04-07/u-s-vietnam-naval-exercisesbegin-amid-se-asian-tension.
Bower, Ernest Z. (2010, October 10). Inaugural ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting 1 8 in Hanoi. Center
for Strategic & International Studies. Retrieved from http://csis.org/publication/inauguralasean-defense-ministers%E2%80%99-meeting-8-hanoi.

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

U.S.-Vietnam Security Cooperation

Asian Politics & Policy—Volume 8, Issue 1—2016

Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency. (2015, August 31). Vietnam-era statistical report. Retrieved from
http://www.dpaa.mil/portals/85/Documents/VietnamAccounting/2015_stats/Stats20150831.pdf.
Do, Thuy T. (2014, April 3). Is Vietnam’s bamboo diplomacy threatened by pandas? East Asia Forum.
Retrieved from http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2014/04/03/is-vietnams-bamboo-diplomacythreatened-by-pandas/.
Hiebert, Murray, Nguyen, Phuong, & Poling, Gregory B. (2014, June). A new era in U.S.–Vietnam relations: Deepening ties two decades after normalization. Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Hoang, Anh Tuan, & Nguyen Vu Tung. (2015). Growing maritime security concerns in Southeast
Asia: A greater need for further regional cooperation. In Harry J. Kazianis (Ed.), Tackling Asia’s
greatest challenges: U.S.–Japan–Vietnam trilateral report (pp. 29–37). Washington, DC: Center for
the National Interest.
Hoang, Lien. (2012, May 12). Vietnam floats between China and US. Asia Times Online. Retrieved
from http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/NE12Ae01.html.
Institute of International Education. (2014). Open doors report on international educational exchange.
Retrieved from http://www.iie.org/Services/Project-Atlas/United-States/International-StudentsIn-US.
Lee, Matthew. (2013, December 14). Kerry returns to Vietnam, now as top US diplomat. Associated
Press. Retrieved from http://news.yahoo.com/kerry-returns-vietnam-now-top-us-diplomat140551757–politics.html.
Liu, Ruonan, & Sun, Xuefeng. (2015). Regime security first: Explaining Vietnam’s security policies
towards the United States and China (1992–2012). Pacific Review, 28, 1–24.
Mastny, Vojtech, & Zhu, Liqun. (Eds.). (2013). The legacy of the cold war: Perspectives on security, cooperation, and conflict. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Matsubara, Mihoko, Goldman, Justin, Hemmings, John, Koga, Kei, Meisels, Greer, Minehata,
Masamichi, Miyahira, Lynn, & Noro, Naoko. (2012). Trilateral strategic cooperative mechanism
between Japan, the United States, and Vietnam: A proposal. Issues & Insights, 12(2), 1–8.
Mehta, Aaron. (2015, June 2). New US–Vietnam agreement shows growth, challenges. Defense News.
Retrieved from http://www.defensenews.com/story/defense/policy-budget/budget/2015/
06/01/us-vietnam-joint-vision-statement-signed-in-hanoi/28291963/.
Ministry of National Defence. (2009, December). Vietnam national defence, Vietnam White Papers,
Hanoi. Vietnamese Ministry of National Defence. Retrieved from http://www.mod.gov.vn.
Mori, Satoru, & Nishihara, Masashi. (2013, November). Building a framework for Japan–US–Vietnam
trilateral cooperation: Analyses from Japanese perspectives. RIPS Policy Perspectives, No. 17. Tokyo:
Research Institute for Peace and Security, 1–14.
Nicholson, Brendan. (2013, March 20). Australian Defence Force to train Vietnamese troops for United
Nations peacekeeping role. The Australian. Retrieved from http://www.theaustralian.com.au/
national-affairs/defence/australian-defence-force-to-train-vietnamese-troops-for-united-nationspeacekeeping-role/story-e6frg8yo-1226601049252.
Parameswaran, Prashanth. (2015, June 23). The future of US–Japan–Vietnam trilateral cooperation.
The Diplomat. Retrieved from http://thediplomat.com/2015/06/the-future-of-us-japanvietnam-trilateral-cooperation/.
Pellerin, Cheryl. (2015, June 2). Carter: U.S., Vietnam committed to defense relationship. DOD News.
Retrieved from http://www.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id5128955.
Pew Research Center. (2014, July 14). Global opposition to U.S. surveillance and drones, but limited
harm to America’s image. Retrieved from http://www.pewglobal.org/files/2014/07/2014-0714-Balance-of-Power.pdf.
Thayer, Carl. (2015, March 10). The Philippines and Vietnam forge a strategic partnership. The Diplomat. Retrieved from http://thediplomat.com/2015/03/the-philippines-and-vietnam-forge-astrategic-partnership/.
U.S. Department of State. (2013, December 16). Expanded U.S. assistance for maritime capacity
building. Fact Sheet. Retrieved from http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2013/218735.htm.
^et l^
^en lu’o’c

^i t
Vnexpress. (2015, January 30). Vi^e: t Nam - Philippines s
a: p quan h^e: d-
ap thi
o
ac chi
:
[Vietnam and the Philippines soon to establish strategic partnership]. Retrieved from http://
vnexpress.net/tin-tuc/the-gioi/viet-nam-philippines-sap-thiet-lap-quan-he-doi-tac-chien-luoc3141464.html.
Wester, Rick. (2013, September 13). Coast Guard strengthens relationship with Vietnam Marine Police.
Retrieved from http://coastguard.dodlive.mil/2013/09/coast-guard-strengthens-relationshipwith-vietnam-marine-police/#sthash.czczPSz6.dpuf.

19430787, 2016, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aspp.12229 by Corvinus University Of Budapest, Wiley Online Library on [03/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

192

