Conflict
Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute
International Journal of China
Studies
Vol. 7, No. 1, April 2016, pp. 23-50

23

The Challenge of Conflict Resolution in the South
China Sea Dispute: Examining the Prospect of a
Stable Peace in East Asia
Renato Cruz De Castro*
De La Salle University, Manila

Abstract
Using Professor Charles A. Kupchan’s concept of stable peace, this article
explores the possibility of defusing the tension in the South China Sea through
conflict resolution. At the present, the precarious situation in the contested
territory is stabilized by a balance of power system. This system springs from
the littoral states’ (the Philippines and Vietnam) policies of drawing other
maritime powers such as the United States (US) and Japan into the issue to
constrain an assertive China. Apprehensive of China’s growing power in East
Asia, the US and Japan have increased their strategic presence in the South
China Sea. These developments have transformed the dispute into a case of
conflict irresolution. This article concludes that the imperative variable to
jumpstart the process of resolving the South China Sea imbroglio is China’s
willingness to accommodate unilaterally the territorial entitlements of the
small claimant states.
Keywords: ASEAN, China, Japan, US, South China Sea dispute, stable peace
The problem of peaceful change is in national politics, how to effect
necessary and desirable changes without revolution and, in international
politics, how to effect changes without war.1
E.H. Carr, 1939

1. Introduction
Located in the heart of Southeast Asia, the South China Sea is a semi-enclosed
sea surrounded by China and several small and militarily weaker Southeast
Asian powers such as the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, and Brunei.
Since the mid-1970s, these littoral states have been involved in a chronic
competition as each one seeks to extend its sovereignty and jurisdictional

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 23

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

24

Renato Cruz De Castro

claims over more than a hundred islets, reefs, and rocks and their surrounding
waters. The South China Sea dispute, however, hibernated in the late 1990s
and the early 21st century after China and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) signed the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in
the South China Sea.
The maritime row, however, flared up again in 2009 when China assumed
an assertive posture and consolidated its jurisdictional claims in the South
China Sea by expanding its military reach and pursuing coercive diplomacy
against the other claimant states.2 China increased its naval patrols (using
submarines, survey ships, and surface combatants) in Japan’s Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ) and territorial waters, and intimidated foreign oil
companies that tried to operate in the South China Sea.3 Since 2009, it has
shifted its strategy from delaying the resolution of the dispute to one that
emphasizes its sovereignty over the contested waters, to deter other claimant
states like the Philippines and Vietnam from cementing their claims and to
negotiate with these small powers from the position of strength.4 Recently, the
dispute has become more problematic because the claimant states are inclined
to deploy their naval assets in controlling the disputed offshore territories, and
to demonstrate their resolve to keep them.5
Early on, this maritime dispute has caught the attention of the United
States, which is trying to maintain its strategic primacy in East Asia,
albeit China’s emergence as an economic and military power. In 2010, the
US declared that it is in its vital interests that the freedom of navigation
in the South China Sea is maintained and that the dispute is peacefully
resolved through multilateralism and international law. In 2011, the Obama
Administration announced the US strategic rebalancing to the Asia-Pacific
region to ensure that its diplomatic initiative of a comprehensive “rule-based”
system to resolve the East Asian Westphalian states’ clashing territorial claims
in the South China Sea would be backed by American military power.6
Interestingly, Japan has also become interested in the dispute. As China’s
geo-strategic rival in East Asia, Japan is determined to play a balancing role
in the dispute by helping the Philippines and Vietnam build up their respective
naval capabilities.
These developments have transformed the South China Sea dispute into
one of the four potential flashpoints in East Asia, along with the Korean
Peninsula, the East China Sea, and the Taiwan Straits. To some analysts, the
South China Sea is becoming the future of conflict in which the Westphalian
states will jockey for strategic and diplomatic positions with their warships in
the high seas, pursue their conflicting claims for natural resources, and strive
for primacy in the Western Pacific.7
This paper explores how the South China dispute can be addressed by
going beyond mere conflict management by exploring the prospects for a

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 24

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

25

conflict resolution. Using Charles Kupchan’s theory of Stable Peace, the
article raises two central questions: 1) how is the South China Sea dispute
currently managed? And 2) how can the dispute be peacefully resolved
through a stable peace among the claimant states? It also tackles the following
questions: 1) what developments led to increased tension South China Sea? 2)
How are the claimant states responding to the maritime dispute? 3) How do
the external powers react to this maritime conflict? 4) What is the prospect of
resolving the South China Sea dispute peacefully?
2. From Conflict Irresolution to Stable Peace?
China’s strategic interests in its maritime environment, the stiff competition
for access to fishing grounds and other natural resources, the claimant states’
conflicting territorial claims and geo-strategic rivalries, and the involvement
of other major maritime powers in the issue produced a corpus of studies on
the South China Sea dispute. Scholars and defence analysts have elevated
this territorial dispute to a high-level geo-political concern, offered varied
prognoses on the potential eruption of armed clashes, and drew different
historical characterizations of the South China Sea as a dangerous ground
or future of conflict. They also devised ways to manage the conflict, to
deescalate the tension, and proposed long-term plans to settle the competing
claims of several East Asian Westphalian states bordering the semi-enclosed
body of water.
Recent published works on the South China Sea dispute use either the
liberal approach or the realist approach. Both approaches assert that settling
the issue will be long and arduous. These approaches, however, differ in the
end game. The liberal approach, on the one hand, hopes to resolve the conflict
through the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
and the joint development of resources of the South China Sea by the claimant
states.8 On the other hand, the realist approach is sceptical of such scenarios
and sceptically maintains that the dispute cannot be resolved in the near
future. In the meantime, the dispute could only be managed by strengthening
the naval capabilities of the Philippines and Vietnam and mustering the
support of like-minded states for ASEAN measures to counter Chinese
aggressiveness. A coalition of states can also be spearheaded by the US to
create a balance of power system to constrain China, prevent provocative
incidents at sea, and promote confidence-building measures among claimants
to avoid errors or miscalculations that can lead to war.9
As a liberal approach, utilizing the UNCLOS to resolve the South China
Sea dispute is problematic because this international convention contains
ambiguous legal provisions. Its legal machinery for adjudicating offshore
boundary disputes remains underdeveloped, and the claimant states’ are

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 25

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

26

Renato Cruz De Castro

reluctant to cede their sovereign territorial rights to an untested international
institution.10 Furthermore, most of these states refuse to abandon their
maritime claims, making dispute resolution extremely difficult. The prospect
for joint development, on the other hand, is hampered by claimant states’
distrust of each other. The small states are also wary of China’s formula
for joint development based on the late Deng Xiaoping’s exhortation:
“Sovereignty is ours, set aside disputes, pursue joint development.” Moreover,
the claimant states’ determination (especially China) to apply force and
coercion to assert their territorial claims undermines any prospect for fostering
trust and more cooperation in resource sharing. This situation is further
complicated by China’s heavy-handedness to enforce its territorial claims
over the South China Sea on its own terms. As a result, while all parties in the
dispute agree on cooperative development in principle, they fail to translate
it broadly in practice.11
The realist approach aims to prevent the dispute from destabilizing
regional security, and to avert any unwanted war. It intends to stave off any
armed clash that can escalate into a crisis situation and draw other major
powers into the fray. Its proposals for increased transparency, confidencebuilding measures, and a practical and workable Code-of-Conduct in the
South China Sea can create a cooperative management regime to prevent any
escalation of the conflict.
The idea behind America’s balancing role vis-à-vis China relative to
the South China Sea dispute does not spring from the US’s formal legal
obligation to any of the claimant states or from the strategic exigency of
resolving this territorial dispute. As a Pacific power, the US is broadly
interested in the peaceful settlement of disputes, and in the freedom of
navigation and overflight. 12 On the one hand, China can circumvent
America’s balancing role if it shows that its claims and coercive moves
against the other claimant states do not affect the freedom and safety of
navigation in the South China Sea. On the other hand, a deep US involvement in the South China Sea dispute literally makes China strategically
boxed-in by American allies such as South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, the
Philippines, and Australia. Improved security ties between the small but
assertive claimant states (Vietnam and the Philippines) and the US (and its
allies), will diminish China’s strategic positioning and can drive it to employ
its military power against these small powers.13 For example, Hanoi’s signing
of the November 1978 security treaty with Moscow precipitated Beijing’s use
of force against Vietnam in 1979.14 In the final analysis, the realist approach
suggests ways to manage and stabilize the maritime dispute, but it does not
proffer any long-term resolution to the territorial claim and sovereignty
issues. Thus, it simply prolongs“conflict irresolution.”15 The challenge
is to formulate a comprehensive approach to generate short to medium-

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 26

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

27

term stabilizing effects leading to the eventual and hopefully, the peaceful
resolution of the dispute.
In his book How Enemies Become Friends, Charles A. Kupchan explores
the mechanics of conflict resolution as he examines how endemic competition
and limited cooperation among a group of states can be transformed into
a stable peace.16 He does this by formulating a conceptual bridge that
links realism and liberalism/constructivism into what he called “realistconstructivist synthesis.”17 Accordingly, the main challenge in effecting a
stable peace is to be able to transform the mediating role of states’ intent,
motivation, political character, and identity in shaping how they can react
to the material elements of power. He argues that reconciliation leading to
a lasting peace requires not only rapprochement but actual reconciliation
among disputing states. This is not because states are willing to submit
themselves to (international) instruments that are available to induce discrete
episodes of international collaboration, such as international law, institutions,
economic interdependence, ideational convergence and regimes.18 Rather,
they find strategic balancing unappealing, inadequate, and inherently unstable
and destructive in the long run. States seek a regime of stable peace because
they are motivated by fear, strategic necessity, and objective national interests
(of survival).
Kupchan provides an interesting and bold account of how states can
free themselves from geo-strategic rivalry via rapprochement or even
reconciliation.19 He studied how stable peace was achieved in the following
cases: US-UK relations; Norway-Sweden relations; Brazil-Argentina relations;
the Concert of Europe; the European Union; and the ASEAN. In these cases,
a zone of stable peace emerged when strategically proximate states start
considering war among themselves as unthinkable, effect demilitarization
policies, and denounced the use of force as an instrument of statecraft. 20
According to him, the path to a stable peace is a sequential process consisting
of four distinct phases:21
A)		 Unilateral accommodation of one party – in a dispute, one party must
make an initial concession to the other states as an opening gesture of
goodwill and trust. It is then up to the targeted states to reciprocate
with their own acts of accommodation. During this stage of extending
concessions, the parties to the dispute seek to discern the intent behind
such moves and begin to entertain hope that they are dealing with a
potential partner rather than an implacable adversary.
B)		 Reciprocal restraint – Expectations of reciprocity promote successive
rounds of accommodation among the parties. Then they evaluate one
another’s broader motivation, not just their narrow intentions with respect
to specific concessions. Eventually, hope leads to mutual confidence and

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 27

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

28

Renato Cruz De Castro

understanding that their competition and rivalry can lead to peace, and
possibly, long-term cooperation.
C)		 Societal integration – Parties in the dispute begin interacting with
increasing frequency and intensity, as they attribute benign qualities to
one another’s political or diplomatic character.
D)		 Generation of New Political or Diplomatic Narratives – Using the
discourse of a newly-formed community, the former disputing parties
embrace a compatible, shared, or common identity and expectations of
peaceful relations that will have a “taken-for-granted” characteristic,
generating a sense of social solidarity.
This theory reflects on E.H. Carr’s aphorism that: “Every solution to the
problem of political change, whether national or international, must be based
on the compromise of morality and power.”22 Using the South China Sea
dispute as a case in point, this article explores the prospect of seeking stable
peace by examining how strategic necessity and objective national interests
can convince the claimant states to accommodate each other, and prevent the
dispute from escalating into a major armed conflict.
3. Origin of the Tension: China’s Realpolitik Approach
Among the claimant states, China poses the biggest challenge to any efforts
to either resolve/manage or escalate the South China Sea dispute and the
tension associated with it.23 Needless to say, China is the largest and most
powerful of littoral states and the sole administrator of the southernmost
islands of Hainan and the Paracel Islands in the South China Sea. It has also
declared full sovereignty over most of the contested sea based on an old and
official Chinese map featuring a nine-dotted line that extends as far south
as the northern Malaysian and Bruneian coast.24 Likewise, it claims the
two main island groups, the Paracels and the Spratlys which are small and
uninhabitable. Hence, by consolidating its claim over the South China Sea,
China enhances its territorial integrity and national security. Nevertheless,
from the point of the small and weak Southeast Asian states, this is clearly an
ominous act of Chinese expansionism in an area of key strategic location and
economic resources.25
China argues that its sovereign rights over the South China Sea date back
to thousands of years ago. It has devised a historical chronology that cites
the voyages of Chinese navigators, explorers, and fishermen in and across
the body of water. Premised on this historical chronology, China alleged that
its expansive maritime claim is “based on solid and undisputable historical
facts.”26 In actuality, this claim is founded simply on China’s geo-strategic
exigencies and status as a great power in East Asia. Historically speaking,

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 28

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

29

China has always been preoccupied with the control of its “Southern Seas.”
The South China Sea serves as the main corridor of Chinese maritime trade
into Southeast Asia and South Asia. China’s decline as a great power in the
late 19th century coincided with its loss of control of this sea to Western
powers especially France.27 China’s attempts to regain its great power
status in East Asia have always begun with the modernization of its navy
to ward off the encroaching Western and later Japanese power in the South
China Sea.28
The South China Sea is a focal point as China evolves a strategic rivalry
with the United States. The stretch of maritime territory from the Yellow
Sea through the East China Sea, and down to the Strait of Taiwan towards
the South China Sea is the first-island-chain (mainland Japan-Okinawathe Philippines) that forms the frontline of China’s naval defences. By
dominating these seas, China extends its security perimeter and reinforces its
influence over the maritime sea lines of communication (SLOC) linking the
Indian and the Pacific Oceans. However, US naval presence in the Western
Pacific prevents China’s reunification with Taiwan, and imperils its extended
maritime trade routes and energy supply lines from the Middle East.29 Thus,
American defence analysts have accurately observed that the People’s
Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) has been developing strategies and weapon
systems that can disrupt American US naval/air operations or slow down the
deployment of American air and naval forces to the theatre of operations.30
With a booming economy and a formidable navy, China no longer
focuses on pre-empting possible US intervention in a Taiwan Straits crisis
but on denying the US Navy access to East China Sea and South China
Sea or inside the first-island chain. China has had an annual double-digit
increase in defence spending since 2006. Consequently, in the past few years,
the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) has acquired a growing fleet
of Russian-made diesel-electric Kilo-class submarines and Sovremmenyclass destroyers, along with several types of indigenously-built destroyers,
frigates, and nuclear-powered attack submarines. The PLAN has also
improved its operational capabilities across the waters surrounding Taiwan
and has deployed two new classes of ballistic and attack submarines. Moving
beyond its strategic preoccupation on the Taiwan Straits, China has the
naval capabilities to generate regional tension by challenging the claims of
its smaller neighbouring states, and in the long run, to change the strategic
pattern of the maritime commons of East Asia and West Pacific from where
the US Navy can be eased out. Interestingly, Chinese media commentators
have emphasized the significance of China’s growing naval capabilities and
the exigency of protecting its territorial claims in the South China Sea.
With it naval prowess, China has become more assertive in the South
China Sea. In March 2009, Chinese naval and fishing vessels harassed the

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 29

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

30

Renato Cruz De Castro

U.S.S. Impeccable which was openly conducting surveying operations in
the South China Sea. The following year, China warned the US to respect
its extensive maritime claims. In March 2010, Chinese officials told two
visiting US State Department senior officials that China would not tolerate
any American interference in the South China Sea which is now part of the
country’s “core interests” of sovereignty on a par with Taiwan and Tibet.31
Recently, the Chinese government increased its defence budget by 13 per cent
to boost the PLAN’s capability to accomplish a range of military functions
including “winning local wars under information age conditions.”
Judging from its recent behaviour, China’s assertive pursuit of its
territorial claim over the South China Sea has increased in tandem with the
expansion of its navy and maritime services.32 It conducts numerous naval
exercises that utilize modern surface combatants and even submarines.33
These various naval exercises plainly demonstrate China’s intention to
unilaterally and militarily resolve the maritime issue, to flaunt its naval
capabilities, and to impress upon the other claimant states its “de facto”
ownership of the disputed territories.34
In the long run, China’s naval capabilities will be directed not only to
expand its maritime domain but to deny foreign navies – especially that of
the US – access to the East China and South China Seas. Soon, it will be
capable of limiting the 7th Fleet’s access to the Western Pacific outside of
the so-called first island chain.35 Recently, the PLAN has built an enormous
submarine base in Hainan island that places its Southern Fleet closer to
the disputed waters. In late November 2013, China’s first aircraft carrier,
Liaoning, escorted by several surface combatants, conducted sea trials in the
South China Sea to show off Chinese naval power to the littoral states that
have no or limited naval aviation capabilities. These exercises also confirmed
that the PLAN can provide air support for a future three-dimensional assault
in its coral-island-campaign against the other claimant states.36
To avoid extremely provocative naval deployment, China assigns the
regular patrolling of politically sensitive waters and land features to the
vessels and aircraft of civilian agencies such as the State Oceanic Administration, its subordinate China Maritime Surveillance Unit, and Bureau of
Fisheries Administration and Fishing Port Superintendence now integrated
under the Chinese Coast Guard.37 These civilian vessels are tasked with the
following: 1) to challenge and detain fishing boats from other littoral states;
2) to explore and identify sites for Chinese oil drilling in the disputed waters;
and 3) to prevent other claimant states from deploying their seismic ships in
energy-rich areas of the South China Sea. All these efforts are aimed toward
one specific objective in the South China Sea – “to change the (territorial)
status quo by force based on Chinese assertion, which is incompatible with
the existing order of international law.”38

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 30

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

31

In mid-2012, China engaged the Philippines in a tense, two-month standoff in Scarborough Shoal using civilian and fishing vessels supported by
the PLAN. During the stalemate, China stood its ground and controlled the
contested territory and its related resources and rights. It deployed its growing
military and paramilitary forces in the South China Sea; took certain moves
to advance its right to exploit marine and oil resources rights; strengthened
its administrative control over disputed land features; and ignored the harsh
criticism of the US, Japan and other states.39
In September 2012, China created a new administration unit for the 1,100
Chinese citizens living in the island groups of the Spratlys, the Paracels, and
the Macclessfield Bank. In addition, the Central Military Commission, China’s
most powerful military body, approved the stationing of PLA personnel to
guard these islands. These measures were designed to reinforce China’s
territorial claim over the South China Sea. No less than the president of the
National Institute of South China Sea Studies based in Hainan Island admitted
that the goal of the strategic move “is to allow Beijing to exercise sovereignty
over all land features inside the South China Sea including more than 40
islands now illegally occupied by Vietnam, the Philippines, and Malaysia.”40
Interestingly, China sees itself as an actor committed to a peaceful
settlement of the territorial row through diplomatic means. In its myopic
perspective, China insists that it always display a restrained, calm and
constructive attitude, and is determined to resolve the South China Sea
dispute.41 The crux of the matter is that China seeks ways that are predicated
on or preconditioned by bilateralism. Acceding to a joint declaration with
ASEAN on maintaining the status quo in the South China Sea, China favours
engaging the other claimant states in bilateral negotiations that pre-empt any
third-party adjudication through UNCLOS procedures or any international
organization. Going further, it is unbending in its resolve to settle the issue
through its military prowess since the early 1990s when its phenomenal
economic boom began.
4. The Small Claimant States’ Balancing Gambit
The Philippines and Vietnam fear that China might seize some of the disputed
islands in the South China Sea given the potential energy reserves of these
maritime territories, and their importance as maritime trade and communication route (SLOCs).42 These two countries find themselves in a classic security
dilemma, where the actions by one state to consolidate its claim is viewed as
extremely threatening by the other claimants, especially when such actions
are undertaken by China, the most powerful state in the dispute.43 Instead
of engaging China in an arms race, the two ASEAN states pursue a regional
balance of power where the US remains a resident Pacific power and a major

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 31

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

32

Renato Cruz De Castro

21st century strategic player. Hence, these two ASEAN member-states still
consider American military presence as crucial not only to secure the region’s
vital sea-lines of communication and commerce but also to check China’s
maritime expansion and naval assertiveness. The US, in turn, supports the
small states by thwarting Chinese attempts to alter international norms on
the freedom of navigation for military purposes, restructure the balance and
harmony of the coastal-states, and muddle international rights in coastal areas
that have been negotiated and established under the UNCLOS.44
This is especially true in the case of the Philippines. Since 2011, the
Philippines has reinvigorated its military ties with the US as a matter of
policy. This thrust started in 2011 when President Benigno Aquino III stood
up to China’s expansive claim in the South China Sea. He redirected the
Armed Forces of the Philippines’ focus from domestic security to territorial
defence; intensified Philippine-US security arrangements; and obtained
American military equipment. Conscious of its military inadequacies, the
Philippines sought for an unequivocal US commitment to Philippine defence
and security as provided for in the 1951 Mutual Defense Treaty (MDT). Even
before the Scarborough Shoal stand-off, Manila asked for American naval/
air support in the Spratlys. Philippine officials were of the opinion that an
armed attack on Philippine metropolitan territory and forces anywhere in the
Pacific, including the South China Sea, should trigger a US armed response.
In late April 2014, the two allies signed the framework agreement on the 2014
Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement (EDCA).45 The agreement allows
the strategic rotational presence of US forces in Philippine territory. In effect,
American forward deployed forces in East Asia are granted the most extensive
access to Philippine military facilities since the US vacated its vast air and
naval installations at Clark Air Base and Subic Naval Base in the early 1990s.
The agreement is designed to constrain China, particularly its expansionist
agenda in the South China Sea.
The Philippines adopts an outright balancing policy on China through
formal alliance with the US and to a certain degree, Japan, because compared
to most ASEAN countries, the Philippines is not tied to China’s huge
economy. While China’s economy matters for export-driven economies
of Singapore, Malaysia, and Thailand; it does not significantly impact the
Philippines whose economy is less export-dependent. The major markets for
Philippine products are still the US and Japan although China has become
the Philippines’ third most important trading partner. Moreover, the growth
of the Philippine economy since 2005 has little to do with trade and foreign
investments. The country’s GDP growth is fueled by domestic consumption,
supported by US$14.1 billion in remittances from Overseas Filipino Workers
(OFW), which grew by 63 per cent due to increased spending on food and
beverages, transportation, and communication.46

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 32

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

33

In contrast to most Southeast Asian countries, the Philippines (whose
export-to-GDP ratio is about 30 per cent) was less reliant on trade and
investment even during the height of the global financial crisis.47 Hence,
despite the decrease in foreign direct investment and merchandise exports
to its two major export markets (US and Japan) in 2009, the Philippine GDP
achieved modest growth generated by fiscal stimulus measures, business
processing outsourcing (BPO) (back-office accounting and payroll support
to North American clients), and growth in overseas remittances.48 In recent
years, the country’s trade deficits have been compensated by the large inflows
of remittances from OFWs, resulting, paradoxically, to balance of payment
surpluses. In addition, the aforementioned BPO industry from North America
have greatly benefited the local economy. Thus, the Philippines’ autonomy
in its economy, foreign and defence policies made it easier for the Aquino
Administration to change its view of China from presenting an economic
opportunity to posing as a security threat.49 Currently, the Philippines sees
itself as an Asia-Pacific David standing up to the Chinese Goliath.50
Vietnam also gravitates toward the US which it believes is an effective
balancer against an increasing pervasive Chinese clout and influence in
Southeast Asia. In August 2010, the U.S.S. George Washington visited
the Vietnamese port of Da Nang, followed by the port call of the Arleigh
Burke-class destroyer U.S.S. John S. McCain. Since then, Vietnamese and
American armed forces participated in a series of defence-related activities,
including cultural exchanges, and joint maritime search-and-rescue drills.
In February 2012, Vietnam and the US signed a formal Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) on defense cooperation especially American assistance
in the modernization of the Vietnamese armed forces and in maintaining
the security and stability of Southeast Asia, particularly of the South China
Sea.51 In October 2013, Vietnam and the US signed two MOUs on Vietnam’s
initial commitment to the UN Peacekeeping Operations (UNPKO), and on the
collaboration between the US and Vietnamese Coast Guards.52
Growing security relations between Vietnam and the US does mean that
the two countries will become formal treaty allies like the Philippines and
the US. From Hanoi’s point of view, the US-Vietnam strategic partnership is
a case of strategic convergence because they have to work together to deal
with the China problem. However, this strategic partnership is contingent
on Vietnam’s pursuit of an independent foreign policy and its close but
sometimes problematic relations with a fraternal socialist country, China.53
Vietnam still distrusts the US and still values its special relations with
China based on history, geography, ideology, and close economic relations.
Hanoi sees China’s expansion into the South China Sea as a result of an
internal power struggle in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) between
accommodationists versus the expansionists which will continue through

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 33

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

34

Renato Cruz De Castro

the next party congress in 2016.54 Unfortunately, the expansionists are
currently dominant in the party and this accounts for China’s aggression
in the South China Sea. This, in turn, works in favour of a US-Vietnam
security partnership.55 However, it is implied that the current Vietnamese
policy that favours a security partnership with the US will change if the
accommodationists in the CCP will become dominant and China moderates
its behaviour in the South China Sea.
With these military cooperation with the Philippines and Vietnam, the
US has found itself inevitably embroiled in the maritime dispute. Despite its
neutrality, the US expands its military presence and exerts its strategic clout
in Southeast Asia by holding joint military exercises, providing military aid,
and negotiating access arrangements with the Philippines and Vietnam.
5. The Strategic Rebalancing and Air/Sea Battle Plan
During the ASEAN Regional Forum in Hanoi on 20 July 2010, then US
Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton stated that it is vital to American interests
that the freedom of navigation, open access to Asia’s maritime commons, and
the littoral states’ respect for international maritime law in the South China
Sea are respected. She mentioned US preparedness to facilitate multilateral
negotiations to settle the dispute over the Spratly Islands. In November 2011,
the Obama Administration announced a strategic pivot to the Asia-Pacific
region. Accordingly, this refocusing of American strategic attention to the
Asia-Pacific is “to ensure that the US will play a larger and long-term role in
reshaping the region and its future.” The main gambit is backed by the efforts
to buttress its diplomatic strategy of constraining China with a stick. This
strategy does not provide a Cold War style containment of China which is
deemed simplistic and wrong, rather to make China acknowledge “America’s
strength, determination, and strategy.”56 Its ultimate goal is to shape the
norms and rules of the Asia-Pacific region and to ensure that “international
law and norms be respected, that commerce and freedom of navigation are
not impeded, that emerging powers build trust with their neighbors, and that
disagreements are resolved peacefully without threats of coercion.”57
The US strategic rebalancing to Asia entails two interconnected strategic
efforts: 1) a geographical rebalancing of America’s global priority from the
Middle East and South Asia to the Asia-Pacific; and 2) a shift away from the
army-oriented, expensive, and troop-intensive counter-insurgency campaign
to the development of robust air and naval capabilities to ensure American
technological edge in air and naval warfare.58 Despite the downside, these
courses of action signify more advantages: a) the US continued involvement in
global security affairs, notwithstanding the strategic pivot to the Asia-Pacific
where American economic and security interests are linked to the region’s

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 34

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

35

growth and dynamism;59 b) the end of the US Army’s and Marine Corps’
large-scale counter-insurgency campaigns that have preoccupied the American
military since 2001, but the uninterrupted operations and maintenance of
the US Navy’s 11 aircraft carriers; and c) less investments on new weapons
systems like the Joint Strike Jet Fighter, defence and offense in cyberspace,
high-tech arms and equipment for Special Operations forces, existing nuclear
forces, and the broad area of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance but
more resources that are likely to be for the rapid development of capabilities
essential for air and naval superiority.60 Accordingly, the emphasis on new
technologies will enable the US Navy and Air Force to counter China and
Iran’s ability to incapacitate American power projection near their shores or
airspace, through cyber-warfare, ballistic and cruise missiles, and advanced
air defences.61 Thus, the US military must invest in technology to neutralize
or disable China’s new asymmetric capabilities.
In June 2012, former Defense Secretary Leon Panetta detailed America’s
pivot to the Asia-Pacific during the Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore. He
revealed that the US Navy would have shifted 60 per cent of its maritime
assets to the Pacific by 2020. This strategic manoeuvre would involve
the deployment of six aircraft carriers, a majority of the navy’s cruisers,
destroyers, and littoral ships designed to operate closely offshore.62 It would
also move into position highly advanced war materiel such as the F-22
Raptor fighter jets, Virginia Class fast attack submarines, lightly armed but
fast Littoral Combat Ships (LCS), and a new class of destroyers labelled
DDG-1000, improved precision-guided weapons, and new electronic warfare
communication systems. Then Secretary Panetta added that the US military
is also developing new weapon systems such as an aerial-refueling tanker,
a bomber, and an aircraft for anti-submarine warfare. These new weapon
systems will provide American forces with “the freedom of maneuver in areas
which their access and freedom of action may be threatened.”63
The global restructuring of US naval and air assets to the Pacific will give
teeth to the Pentagon’s 2010 Air/Sea Battle Doctrine. The doctrine projects
that in the unthinkable case of a war with China, the US armed forces will use
combined air and naval forces to override or deter China’s anti-access system
within the first-island-chain.64 Similarly, it envisions US air and naval units
attacking Chinese surveillance and integrated air defense systems, followed
by a weighted campaign to bomb Chinese land-based ballistic and anti-ship
missile system to “seize and sustain the initiative in air, sea, space, and cyber
domains.65 As an operational concept, the doctrine proposes the development
of a new generation of naval and air weapon systems, as well as the deeper
commitments of American allies along East Asia’s northern and southern
coast, close to the South China Sea, namely Japan, Australia, South Korea,
and the Philippines.66

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 35

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

36

Renato Cruz De Castro

6. Extending the Sino-Japanese Rivalry into Southeast Asia
Japan has taken a keen interest in China’s creeping expansionism in the South
China Sea after the Mischief Reef incident between China and the Philippines
in early 1995.67 Since then, it has closely monitored the PLAN’s build-up and
sporadic flaunting of its naval prowess.68 At present, Japan is entangled in the
South China Sea dispute in which, initially, it had no direct interest. Former
Japanese Foreign Minister Katsuay Okada noted in July 2010 that the unstable
situation in the South China Sea could hamper Japan’s trade and threaten
regional peace.69 In 2012, the National Institute for Defense Studies in Tokyo
published in its China Security Report: “Being in dispute with China over the
EEZ and the boundary of the continental shelf in the East China Sea, Japan
inevitably has to pay attention to China’s action in the South China Sea.”70
There are two other reasons why the South China Sea dispute worries
Japan. First, if China succeeds in intimidating the small littoral Southeast
Asian states, it could pose the same gambit in the East China Sea where Japan
has staked a claim to the Senkaku Islands.71 Second, China’s control of the
South China Sea and the East China Sea is part strategy of depriving the US
Navy access to China’s surrounding waters, and giving the PLAN ingress
to the Western Pacific outside of the First Island Chain.72 If the US Navy is
driven out of the western part of the Pacific, the PLAN can easily dominate
the South China Sea because the navies of the Southeast Asian claimant states
cannot match Chinese naval prowess.73 Simply, Tokyo preempts Beijing’s
calculation that if Chinese belligerence can end the South China Sea dispute,
then it can similarly resolve the rivalry with Japan over the Senkaku Islands
in the East China Sea.
The US pivot to Asia provides further impetus for Japan to balance China
in the South China Sea. It entails strengthening American presence in Japan
and South Korea, which is the cornerstone of the strategy, even as the US also
builds up its security relationship with other states in and around Southeast
Asia.74 Specific to the maritime issue, the US always underscores in the
freedom of navigation in the disputed sea that can only be guaranteed if the
South China Sea remains part of the global commons, that is, it belongs to all
states and is not subject to a sovereign control by a single powerful regional
state. Hence, the Obama Administration supports the coalition of states that
can constrain China relative to the South China Sea dispute. To complement
the US effort, Japan forged separate defence partnerships and naval exchanges
with these two ASEAN member-states.75 It also promised to provide coast
guard vessels and training to both countries to boost their ability to patrol their
respective maritime territories.
More significantly, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is pushing for the reinterpretation of Article 9 (the Peace Clause) of the 1947 Japanese Constitution

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 36

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

37

to enable the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) to exercise the right of “collective
self-defense.” A loose interpretation of this vague provision will allow
Japan to extend military assistance to allies such as the US even if Japan
is not attacked. Likewise, the SDF can come to the aid of Japan’s security
partners that are under armed attack by a third party. Japan’s modern and
relatively large Maritime-Self Defense Force (MSDF), a fleet of six Aegis
combat system equipped destroyers with 39 guided missile destroyers, and
16 conventional submarines, can fill the strategic gap in the South China Sea.
The MSDF can be supported by the Air-Self-Defense Force (ASDF) with
its expanding operational reach made possible by the development of midair refueling capacity and the acquisition of the Boeing KC-767 tanker. The
Institute of International Institute for Strategic Studies observes that Japan’s
National Defense Program Guidelines for 2011-2015 contain reform measures
enabling the SDF to respond to the shifting power structure in East Asia.76
Thus, Japan can strategically address China’s assertiveness in the South China
Sea and assume an active role in the US-Japan security alliance.
7. Managing but Not Solving the Dispute
China claims almost 80 per cent of the South China Sea. However, it cannot
exercise complete territorial control over the Spratlys and its surrounding
waters since these land features are occupied by the other claimant states,
and more significantly, because of the growing involvement of the US
and Japan in the maritime dispute. The US is troubled by China’s bullying
behaviour towards the small claimant states. It also thinks that any Chinese
use of force against Vietnam and the Philippines (a formal treaty ally of the
US) challenges American military supremacy and diplomatic influence in
East Asia. Meanwhile, Japan, pressured by China over the Senkaku Islands
dispute, has become involved in the South China Sea dispute as well. The
stable but fragile security situation can be described as an old-fashioned
strategic balancing of a major regional power by two small powers that
depend on external maritime powers to maintain the status quo in the South
China Sea for the foreseeable future.77 On the dynamics of this balance of
power system in Southeast Asia, the Australian-based Lowy Institute for
International Policy notes:
Balancing can serve Washington’s interests by allowing it to husband US
national power and focus increasingly limited resources where they will be
most effective. …In an overwhelmingly maritime theatre the United States
can continue to play to its maritime strengths, drawing on its long-range
surveillance and strike capabilities to maintain its forces ‘over-the-horizon’
and projecting power forward should the regional balance of power falter.78

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 37

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

38

Renato Cruz De Castro

Characterizing the system further, the Lowy Institute continues:
The system assumes competition between states and hence the ever-present
risk of aggression and conflict … in which the participants agree, if only
tacitly, to curb competition for influence in the interest of maintaining
system-wide stability.
Key to the system is its inherent dynamism. If the power of one state
grows disproportionately, the system adjusts through a realignment of the
relationships among the others. Some states – those most susceptible to the
gravitational pull of the growing power – will be attracted closer to it. Others
will respond by drawing closer to each other and to an alternative pole or
poles in the system. Some states will attempt a mix of both, as is evident in
Southeast Asia today.
The choice states make in response to a balance of power dynamic need
not be based solely on power considerations: questions of how benign they
perceive a powerful state to be also influence their decisions about balancing
or bandwagoning.79

Thus far, the balance of power system in the South China Sea has
prevented an armed conflict among the claimant states, prompting Professor
David Scott to state that “the benefits of such balancing may become apparent
because balancing is itself a stabilizing process.”80 However, the balance of
power situation has two major flaws. One, it generates a very fluid situation
wherein any error or miscalculation by any claimant state may trigger an
armed confrontation that may escalate and may drag the other maritime
powers into a major systemic war. Two, while the balance of power system
has stabilized the situation, it has simply failed to resolve the dispute, and
creating a tense impasse. The claimant states might use this lull to build-up
their respective military capabilities for any eventuality.
As a case in point, China has consistently delayed the resolution of the
dispute to establish its control of the contested areas and deter the other
states from strengthening their claims.81 This rules out any possibility of
compromises. As a counter-measure, the Philippines and Vietnam adopt a
balancing strategy that draws the US and Japan into the fray. Interestingly,
these external maritime powers are anxious to curtail China’s growing
strategic clout in East Asia. At present, China finds itself trapped in its own
security dilemma as it faces increasing American and Japanese naval presence
and pressure in the South China Sea. Despite almost decades of restructuring
and modernization, the Chinese leadership is not yet entirely confident that its
untried (and inexperienced) armed forces can win wars under high technology
conditions when confronted by the US Navy supported by Japan’s Maritime
Self-Defense Force.82 The International Institute for Strategic Studies observes
that despite the PLA’s blue-water navy ambitions, China yet has to put in
place all the assets necessary to form an effective carrier task group for bluewater aspirations.83

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 38

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

39

If the balance of power works against its interests, China might use
force on any of the claimant states who have strengthened their security ties
with the US and Japan. Nonetheless, such manoeuvring by China will invite
possible intervention by these two maritime powers especially if Chinese
forces make the strategic push against American (and Japanese) naval
presence in the first-island-chain. In effect, the current balance of power
system can become the proverbial “calm before the storm.” Looking at the
possibility of a direct armed conflict between China and the US (and its
allies), an American academic notes:
Should Beijing and Washington find themselves in a conflict, the huge
US advantage in conventional forces would increase the temptation for
Washington to threaten to or actually use force. Recognizing the temptation
facing Washington, Beijing might in turn feel pressure to use its conventional
forces before they are destroyed. Although China could not reverse the
military imbalance, it might believe that quickly imposing high costs on
the United States would be the best way to get it to back off. …Under
such circumstances, both Beijing and Washington would have incentives to
initiate an attack.84

It is imperative, therefore, to look into the prospect of resolving this
maritime conflict at the most opportune time. This goal must be pursued
amidst the emerging power reconfiguration in East Asia.
8. From Conflict Irresolution to Stable Peace?
The paralysis of conflict irresolution in the South China Sea dispute requires
transforming the balance of power system into a schema of stable peace.
Stable peace can be concretized in a state system where the probability of
war, especially among the major states, is minimized.85 From an interactive
perspective, it means a greatly reduced probability of political units (states)
resorting to violence to achieve their political and strategic ends. When
applied to the South China Sea dispute, the process involves the following
stages.
The first stage necessitates one party in the dispute to initiate a unilateral
accommodation by sending a message of benign intent to the other parties
and offering an unambiguous concession on a matter of common interest
or concern to them. In this case, the party that should effect a unilateral
accommodation is China. This unilateral accommodation requires the
following set of actions on the part of China.
1)		China needs to modify, if not abandon, its strategy of delaying the
resolution of the dispute to consolidate its expansive claim, and to
prevent other claimant states from cementing their own claims.86 Such

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 39

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

40

Renato Cruz De Castro

modification obliges China to recognize the legitimacy of the small
littoral states’ maritime claims based on traditional and contemporary
international laws.
2)		China should transform its sovereign claim over the islands and waters
of the South China Sea to historic title, and respect the claimant states’
territorial rights under the UNCLOS. China can initiate a forum in
Beijing among the claimant states to discuss their conflicting claims and
respective territorial rights under international law while defining China’s
historic title (not sovereignty) over the South China Sea.
3)		 China should also refrain from further militarizing its claims in the South
China Sea and must live up with its mantra of Good Neighbour Policy
by “shelving disputes and conducting joint development with a modified
provision that setting aside disputes requires the other claimant states
recognizing China’s historic (not sovereignty) title over the South China
Sea.”87
4)		 China should also convey the message that it is willing to work with the
other claimant states for conflict resolution, and is no longer interested
settling the dispute from its position of preponderant power. It should also
initiate unilateral actions that include reduced presence or altered rules
of engagement of Chinese civilian ships in the contested areas. It should
revive the negotiations with ASEAN on a Code of Conduct on the South
China Sea.
Through these moves, China deliberately makes itself vulnerable to
exploitation by the small claimant states. However, such demonstration of
vulnerability is important for two reasons:88 First, by undertaking unusual and
costly actions, the initiating state increases the chances that its actions will
be noticed and correctly interpreted by the other claimant states. Second, the
initiating state takes a calculated risk that it will not be taken advantage of by
the other claimant states, as well as proves and believes that it and the other
states respectively do not have predatory intent.89
The second stage involves the implementation of individual acts of
unilateral accommodation paving the way for reciprocal restraint by the
other disputing states. All parties should readily practice accommodation and
expect reciprocity; cautious testing gives way to a purposeful effort to dampen
rivalry and advance reconciliation. At this stage, China and the ASEAN states
should consider signing a Code of Conduct on the South China Sea and even
an Incident at Sea Agreement (INCSEA) that will define how their naval
and coast guard units should operate in the disputed waters. Hotline between
naval commanders, and even among heads of states should be opened. The
claimant states should also convene a multilateral forum to discuss the
resolution of maritime disputes through bilateral or multilateral mechanisms

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 40

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

41

such as the International Tribunal for the Law of Sea in Hamburg; the
International Court of Justice in The Hague; ad-hoc arbitration in accordance
with Annex VII of UNCLOS; or special arbitral tribunal.90 They should also
establish a cooperative maritime regime or authority in China to facilitate the
mutual adjustment of maritime claims and sharing of resources. This body
can regulate the behaviour of claimant states according to agreed rules and
norms, which will substantiate the notion of common good.91 At this stage,
the smaller claimant states will become more sensitive to China’s strategic
interests of making the waters within the first-island-chain a buffer against
external maritime powers.
Unilateral accommodation by a major power, reciprocal restraints by
all the parties, the winding down of geo-strategic competition, and mutual
manifestation of benign intention should usher in the third stage – the
intensification of direct contact of the claimant states’ civil societies. This
societal integration can lead to joint economic ventures in the disputed waters
such as joint development of hydrocarbon and fisheries resources by the
claimant states’ private companies and their foreign partners.
Given the complexity of the South China Sea dispute, the settlement of
the sovereignty issue is not easy. It is frequently suggested that claimant states
put aside their territorial claims and instead, engage in the exploration and
exploitation of oil, gas, hydrocarbon, and fishery resources.92 However, there
has been no progress in this area. The claimant states and private companies
expect the dispute to be resolved first before starting oil exploration and
drilling operations to prevent harassment or armed confrontation. Unfortunately, the claimant states refuse to abandon their long-held positions
or denounce the use of force in settling the dispute. China’s unilateral
accommodation and reciprocal restraint by the small claimant states can set
clear maritime demarcations, and generate norms on joint resource exploration
and development. The operations of offshore private enterprises in the
disputed waters specifically for the offshore oil and gas could increase the
current reserves in the world market.
The joint exploration of natural resources in the South China Sea is not a
means to circumvent the territorial disputes or a prerequisite for cooperative
political relations. Rather, it should be the result of improving relations among
the disputing states that can further enhance reconciliation among them.
Cooperative joint development ventures involve domestic bureaucracies,
private companies, ordinary citizens, and other interest groups in the process
of conflict resolution. Private companies will seize the opportunity to increase
trade and investments that foster integration among the disputing states’
civil societies as their citizens interact with their counterparts from the other
claimant states through business contacts, tourism, scientific and cultural
links, and academic exchanges.93 Paraphrasing Kupchan, “Joint development

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 41

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

42

Renato Cruz De Castro

ventures in the South China Sea will create powerful constituencies among
the claimant states that will have vested interests in the stable peace, and will
lobby within their countries for policies of reciprocal restraint and economic
integration.”94
The fourth and final stage in the establishment of a stable peace in
the South China Sea is the generation of a new narrative about how the
disputing states’ relations are transformed from conflict to reconciliation. It
will show adversarial or neutral references to their relations giving way to
a rhetoric that connotes images of partnership and friendship.95 The most
basic modification of the narrative is China’s behavioural change in the
South China Sea dispute – a litmus test of its determination and sincerity to
effect a peaceful emergence in East Asia. Another narrative can be aligned
with President Xi Jinping’s idea of “China-ASEAN Having One Common
Destiny.” In his speech before the Indonesian Parliament on 2 October 2013,
President Xi Jinping proposed the formation of a China-ASEAN community
with a common destiny and a new blueprint for a new 21st century maritime
silk road.96 He commented that China and the ASEAN member states should
revive the ancient concept of a maritime silk road as a comprehensive strategy
of “Maintaining a Stable Environment among Neighbours.”
Expounding the idea, President Xi stressed that the seaway has always
been a bridge between China and Southeast Asia. Since ancient times, the
maritime Silk Road has linked China to the Southeast Asian region which
became an important commercial hub. Through this historic trade route,
China traded silk, ceramics and tea to its overseas market that reached as far
the Roman Empire. A new maritime silk road in the 21st century will reflect
the shared aspiration of both China and its Southeast Asian neighbours and
the culmination of their long and common history. The resolution of the
South China Sea can be narrated as the two sides’ determined efforts to
forge a common destiny, and to revive the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road
which will make their surrounding waters a common link among East Asian
countries.
9. A Stable Peace or a Systemic War?
The necessary condition before the process leading to a stable peace could
commence is the willingness of one party in the dispute to initiate a unilateral
accommodation by sending a message of benign intent to the other parties
and offering an unambiguous concession on a matter of common interest or
concern to them. With its size and location in East Asia, a robust economy and
military might, China is the most able to initiate a unilateral accommodation.
Such course of action will confirm that China does not want a geo-strategic
completion in the South China Sea. Thus, China should be conciliatory and

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 42

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

43

flexible to prevent the small littoral rivals from regularly adopting a balancing
stance buttressed by both the US and Japan.97 Looking at the prospect of
China effecting a unilateral accommodation in the South China Sea dispute,
Professor Taylor observes:
Compromise is possible because pressing a claim to another state’s land
carries some price or opportunity costs, usually unrealized military,
economic or diplomatic assistance. When these costs outweigh the value of
land at stake, compromise becomes more attractive than delay, and a state
will trade concession for aid from territorial opponent to counter the more
pressing threat that it faces.
In the South China Sea, China should be most likely to compromise
when improved ties with claimant states become more important that the
islands or maritime rights being contested.98

In his 2008 book Strong Borders Secure Nation, Professor Taylor argues:
China is most likely to consider compromise in off-shore disputes in
response to external threats. Looking forward, however, compromise is
unlikely, as whatever external threats occur will have to outweigh the value
of petroleum and sea-lane security is linked to these islands. One possibility
for compromise might stem from heightened tension between China and the
United States for influence in Southeast Asia. In this scenario, China might
be more than willing to trade concessions in the Spratlys or Paracels for
improved ties with regional states.99

Unfortunately, instead of being conciliatory to the small Southeast Asian
powers, China is currently embarking on a policy of maritime expansionism
as its claimed sovereignty not only on Taiwan but also Japan’s Senkaku Island
and most of the 1.7 million square miles that make up the East China and
South China Seas, where five small powers assert territorial and maritime
claims. The current Chinese leadership feels confident that with their country’s
new political and economic clout and the strong People’s Liberation Army
(PLA), China can boldly advance its “core interests” in the maritime domain.
This is reflected by China’s insistence on the “Air Defense Identification
Zone (ADIZ)” in the East China Sea, the conduct of live-fire exercises by
the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN), and the People’s Liberation
Air Force (PLAAF) in the West Pacific, and the hardline response of PLAN
and other maritime law enforcement agencies during several confrontations
with the Philippine and Vietnamese civilian ships in the South China
Sea.100 China’s long-term goal is to enable the PLAN to extend its combat
capabilities into the far seas or the sea areas adjacent to the outer rims of the
first island chain, and those of the north Pacific.101 This will enable China
to rapidly respond to diverse challenges or threats emanating from the far
seas, to protect economic interests in or transiting through the far seas, and

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 43

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

44

Renato Cruz De Castro

to dissuade potential adversaries operating in the far seas from intervening in
contingencies involving China.102
Driven by its ambition to become a major naval power in East Asia
coupled with its growing wealth and naval prowess, China is convinced that
it can resolve its territorial row with the small claimant states according to its
own terms. It can also relay an implicit message to the US Navy to steer clear
of the South China Sea and other contested maritime areas around China’s
periphery. Its naval build-up, along with other Chinese realpolitik tactics, has
generated tense or sometimes crisis situations. Nevertheless, China’s assertive
power-based approach in imposing its claim over the South China Sea has
rekindled American strategic attention and interest in the dispute.103 When
push comes to shove, China’s use of force against any of the claimant states
in the South China Sea dispute will generate two perceptions among Southeast
Asian countries:104 a) that China is challenging American naval supremacy
in East Asia’s maritime periphery; and b) that an armed clash in the South
China Sea will determine the future security dynamics of the region. China’s
use of force against any of the small claimant states can trigger a major
regional conflict. Instead of a stable peace in East Asia, current developments
in the South China Sea tragically point to the prospect that the region will
experience an outbreak of a major systemic conflict.
10. Conclusion
Since 2009, China has taken an aggressive approach in pursuing its expansive
maritime claim in the South China Sea. This approach uses the strategy
of delaying the resolution of the dispute as it imposes its sovereignty over
the contested territories while deterring the small claimant states from
strengthening their own claims. Small claimant states such as the Philippines
and Vietnam have responded to China’s gambit by enlisting the diplomatic
and strategic support of the US and Japan in an effort to balance China.
Both external maritime powers have shown interest in the dispute and have
extended military assistance to the Philippines and Vietnam. This, in turn,
raises the prospect of the three major powers militarily confronting each other
in the South China Sea.
At stake in this territorial dispute is not simply the control of a huge
and strategic maritime area. More importantly, it is the future of East Asia.
Will the region avoid the various competitions, conflicts, and wars that
Europe experienced prior to 1945? Or will Europe’s past be East Asia’s
future? And more significantly, will East Asia experience a stable peace or
a systemic war? Unfortunately, China’s delaying tactic and geo-strategic
agenda inevitably direct the region towards the second scenario where “Asia’s
uncertain future will be Europe’s bellicose and violent past.” However, this

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 44

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

45

worst-case scenario is avoidable if a stable peace will break out in East Asia.
This process will start if China changes its approach to the dispute. The
long-term resolution of the imbroglio will only begin by China’s unilateral
accommodation of the views and interests of the small claimant states to
prevent them from forming a counterbalancing coalition led by the US. and
supported by Japan. Professor Taylor has observed that China has extended
certain concessions to improve ties with these states.105 Taking this first
step entails enormous constraints as well as diplomatic flexibility, and more
importantly, humility on the part of an emergent power. Nevertheless, Chinese
foreign policy has yet to manifest fully that like a seasoned warrior, China
understands and appreciates the sagacity of Sun Tzu’s ancient aphorism in
warfare:
As water changes its course in accordance with the contours of the terrain,
so a warrior changes his tactics in accordance with the enemy’s changing
situation. There is no fixed tactic in war, just as there is no constant course
in the flow of water. He who wins modifies his tactics in accordance with
the changing enemy situation and this works miracle.106

Notes
* 		 Renato Cruz De Castro is a professor in the International Studies Department,
De La Salle University, Manila, and the holder of the Charles Lui Chi Keung
Professorial Chair in China Studies. He was the US State Department ASEAN
Research Fellow from the Philippines, and his expertise includes PhilippineUS security relations, Philippine defense and foreign policies, US defense and
foreign policies in East Asia, and International politics of East Asia. <Email:
renato.decastro@dlsu.edu.ph>
1. E.H. Carr, The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919-1939 (Hampshire, New York:
Palgrave, 2001), p. 191.
2. Clive Schofield and Ian Storey, The South China Sea Dispute: Increasing Stakes
and Rising Tension (Washington, D.C.: The Jamestown Foundation, November
2009), p. 1.
3. Michael A. Glony, “Getting Beyond Taiwan? Chinese Foreign Policy and PLA
Modernization,” Strategic Forum No. 261 (January 2011), p. 5.
4. See Fravel M. Taylor, “China’s Strategy in the South China Sea,” Contemporary
Southeast Asia, Vol. 33, No. 3 (December 2011), pp. 292-319 <http://search.
proquest.com/docview/921618988/accountid=28547>.
5. Michael Klare, “The Growing Threat of Maritime Conflict,” Current History,
Vol. 112, No. 750 (January 2013), p. 2 <http://search.proquest.com./printview?
file? accountid=28547>.
6. See Mark E. Manyin et al., “Pivot to the Pacific? The Obama Administration’s
‘Rebalancing’ toward Asia,” Congressional Research Service (Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Research Service, 28 March 2012).

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 45

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

46

Renato Cruz De Castro

7. See Robert Kaplan, “The South China Sea is the Future of Conflict,” Foreign
Policy, No. 188 (September/October 2011), pp. 76-88 <http://search.proquest.
com/docview/888030576?accountid=28547>.
8. For example see Robert Beckman, “The United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and the Maritime Disputes in the South China Sea,” The American
Journal of International Law (2012) Vol. 107, pp. 142-163; Dong Manh
Nguyen, “Settlement of Disputes under the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea: The Case of the South China Sea Dispute,” University
of Queensland Law Journal (2006), pp. 145-180 <http://search.proquest.com/
printviewfile?accountid=28547>; and Thang Nguyen Dang, “Fisheries Cooperation in the South China Sea and the (Ir)relevance of the Sovereignty
Question” Asian Journal of International Law, Vol. 2, No. 1 (January 2012), pp.
59-88 <http://search/proquest.com/docview/912371551?accountid=28547>.
9. Carlyle A. Thayer, “China’s New Wave of Aggressive Assertiveness in the South
China Sea,” International Journal of China Studies, Vol. 2, No. 3 (December
2011), pp. 555-583; Fravel M. Taylor, “China’s Strategy in the South China
Sea,” Contemporary Southeast Asia, Vol. 33, No. 3 (December 2011), pp.
292-319 <http://search/proquest.com/docview/921618988?accountid=28547>;
Huai-Feng Ren and Fu-Kuo-Liu, “Transitional Security Pattern in the South
China Sea and the Involvement of External Parties,” Issues and Studies, Vol.
49, No. 2 (June 2013), pp. 103-145; Leszek Buszynski, “The South China Sea
Maritime Dispute: Legality, Power, and Conflict Prevention,” Asian Journal
of Peacebuilding, Vol. 1, No. 1 (2013), pp. 39-63 <http://search.proquest.
com/docview/1501429784?accountid=28547>; and David Scott, “Conflict
Irresolution in the South China Sea” Asian Survey, Vol. 56, No. 6 (November/
December 2012), pp. 1019-1042.
10. Klare, op. cit., p. 2.
11. Scott, op. cit., p. 1040.
12. Sheldon W. Simon, “Conflict and Diplomacy in the South China Sea: The View
from Washington,” Asian Survey, Vol. 52, No. 6 (November/December 2012),
p. 1008.
13. Taylor, op. cit., p. 13.
14. See Paul B. Goodwin, and Alice Miller, China’s Forbearance as its Limits: Chinese Threat and Retaliation, Signaling and Its Implications for Sino-American
Military Confrontation (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University, April
2013).
15. Scott, op. cit., p. 1019.
16. Charles A. Kupchan, How Enemies Become Friends: The Sources of Stable
Peace (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2010), p. 20.
17. Ibid., p. 6.
18. Ibid., p. 20.
19. See Kupchan, op. cit., pp. 1-15.
20. Kupchan, op. cit., pp. 29-30.
21. Ibid., pp. 35-36.
22. Carr, op. cit., pp. 191-192.

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 46

3/5/2016 10:00:40 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

47

23. Alice D. Ba, “Staking Claims and Making Waves in the South China Sea:
How Troubled are the Waters?, Contemporary Southeast Asia, Vol. 33, No. 3
(December 2011), p. 269.
24. Marc Lanteigne, Chinese Foreign Policy: An Introduction (Oxon and New York:
Taylor and Francis Group, 2009), p. 121.
25. David Scott, China Stands Up: The PRC and the International System (Oxon;
New York: Routledge, 2007), p. 104.
26. Robert Sutter and Chin-Hao Huang, “Managing Rising Tensions in the South
China Sea,” Comparative Connections: A Triannual E-Journal on East Asia
Bilateral Relations (September 2011), p. 6.
27. James A. Gregor, In the Shadow of the Giants: The Major Powers and the
Security of Southeast Asia (Stanford, California: Hoover Press Publication,
1989), p. 89.
28. Ibid., p. 89.
29. Buszynski, op. cit., p. 39.
30. See Roger Cliff, Mark Burles, Michael S. Chase, Derek Eaton, and Kevin L.
Pollpeter, Entering the Dragon’s Lair: Chinese Anti-Access Strategies and Their
Implications for the United States (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2007),
p. xvii.
31. Edward Wong, “China Asserts Role as a Naval Power,” International Herald
Tribune (23 April 2010), pp. 1 and 4.
32. Peter Dutton, “Three Disputes and Three Objectives: China and the South China
Sea,” Naval War College Review (Autumn 2011), Vol. 54, No. 4, p. 6.
33. For details on China’s Training Exercises in its surrounding waters see National
Institute for Defense Studies, NIDS China Security Report (Tokyo: National
Institute for Defense Studies, 2011), pp. 14-21.
34. See the International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2011:
The Annual Assessment of Global Military Capabilities and Defence Economics
(London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2011), p. 196.
35. Yoichi Kato, “China’s Naval Expansion in the Western Pacific,” Global Asia,
Vol. 5, No. 4 (Winter 2010), p. 19.
36. Daniel J. Kostecka, “From the Sea: PLA Doctrine and the Employment of SeaBased Airpower,” Naval War College Review, Vol. 64, No. 3 (Summer 2011),
pp. 4-5 <http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?index=448did=2355404271&Sr...>
37. Ibid., p. 11.
38. National Institute for Defence Studies, NIDS China Security Report 2013
(Tokyo, Japan: National Institute for Defense Studies, January 2014), p. 2.
39. Robert Sutter and Chin-hao Huang, “China-Southeast Asia Relations: Beijing
Shifts to the Positive, Downplays Disputes,” Comparative Connection: A
Triannual E-Journal on East Asian Bilateral Relations (January 2014), p. 1
<http://csis.orga/files/publication/1303qchina_seasia.pdf>.
40. Jane Perlez, “Stand-off Over South China Sea Shoal Eases: Beijing and
Manila Pull Their Ships from Area, but the Dispute is Not Settle,” International Herald Tribune (19 June 2012), p. 4 <http://search.proquest.com/
docview/1020884288/1386FC0C1134>.

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 47

3/5/2016 10:00:41 AM

48

Renato Cruz De Castro

41. BBC, “Article Cites Historical Arguments to Defend China’s Stance on Spratly
Islands,” BBC Monitoring Asia-Pacific (14 August 2011), p. 6 <http://proquest.
umi.com/pqdweb?index=33&did=2424108731&Src...>
42. Michael A. Glony, “Getting Beyond Taiwan? Chinese Foreign Policy and PLA
Modernization,” Strategic Forum, No. 261 (January 2011), p. 4.
43. Taylor, op. cit., p. 5.
44. Dutton, op. cit., p. 9.
45. The Philippines News Agency, “New Defense Agreement Enhances Philippines,
U.S. Alliance on Security Challenges—DND,” Philippine News Agency (28
April 2014), p. 1 <http://search.proquest.com/docview/1519443096?accountid=
28547>.
46. Asian Development Bank, Asian Development Outlook 2008: Workers in Asia
(Hong Kong: Asian Development Bank, 2008), p. 215.
47. Ibid., p. 215.
48. Asian Development Bank, Asian Development Bank 2009 (Update): Broadening
Openness for a Resilient Asia (Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2009), p.
151.
49. Sheena Chestnut Greitens, “The U.S.-Alliance with the Philippines: Challenges
and Opportunities,” in Ashley J. Tellis, Abraham Denmark, and Greg Chaffin
(eds), Strategic Asia 2014-15: U.S. Alliances and Partnership at the Center
of Global Power (Seattle and Washington, D.C.: National Bureau of Asian
Research, 2014), p. 127.
50. Ibid., p. 127.
51. Scott, op. cit., p. 1030.
52. Carl Thayer, “Vietnam in 2013: Domestic Contestation and Foreign Policy
Success,” Southeast Asian Affairs 2014 (Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian
Affairs, 2014), p. 365.
53. Nguyen Manh Hung, “U.S.-Vietnam Relations: Evolving Perceptions and
Interests,” in Ashley J. Tellis, Abraham Denmark, and Greg Chaffin (eds),
Strategic Asia 2014-15: U.S. Alliances and Partnership at the Center of Global
Power (Seattle and Washington, D.C.: National Bureau of Asian Research,
2014), p. 305.
54. Ibid., p. 305.
55. Ibid., p. 305.
56. Mark Landler, “How Obama Switched to Tougher Line with China,” International Herald Tribune (21 September 2012), p. 1-1.
57. Mark E. Manyin et al., “Pivot to the Pacific? The Obama Administration’s
‘Rebalancing’ toward Asia,” Congressional Research Service (Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Research Service, 28 March 2012), p. 1.
58. Thomas Fargo, “The Military Side of Strategic Rebalancing,” in Roundtable:
Turning to the Pacific: U.S. Strategic Rebalancing toward Asia in Asia Policy
(July 2012) 14, pp. 27-28.
59. Jim Lobe, “U.S.: Less Counter-Insurgency, More Asia in New U.S. Strategy,”
Global Information Network (5 January 2012), p. 2 <http://search.proquest.com/
docview/914716594/13818EF83BE5CF...>.

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 48

3/5/2016 10:00:41 AM

Conflict Resolution in the South China Sea Dispute

49

60. Thom Shanker and Elizabeth Bumiller, “Downsizing is Key Word in Planning at
Pentagon,” International Herald Tribune (6 January 2012). pp. 1-16 and Ibid.,
p. 29.
61. Chicago Tribune, “President Obama Unveils Leaner Pentagon Budget: The Navy
is Expected to Keep its Current Aircraft Carriers,” The Herald (6 January 2012)
<http://search.proquest.com/docview/914461902/13818EF83BE5CF...>.
62. Jane Perlez, “U.S. Gives Explanation for its “Pivot” to Asia,” International
Herald Tribune (4 June 2012), p. 1 <http://search.proquest.com/doc/view/
1018261286/13818EF8BE5C...>.
63. David S. Cloud, “Panetta Out to Reassure Allies Defense Chief Says U.S.
Commitment, Asian Pivot Real,” South Florida Sun Sentinel (2 June 2012), p.
1 <http://search.proquest.com/docview/1018147535/13818EF8BE5C...>.
64. Simon, op. cit., p. 1012.
65. T.X. Hammes and D. Hooker, “America’s Ultimate Strategy in a Clash with
China,” National Interests (June 10, 2014), p. 1 <http://nationalinterest.org/
feature/americas-ultimate-strategy-clash-china-10633>.
66. Simon, op. cit., p. 1012.
67. Michael Richardson, “Japan Asserts Rights in South China Sea: Signs of
Expansionism by Beijing Draw Veiled Warning from Tokyo,” International
Herald Tribune (04 April 1995), p. 4.
68. National Institute of Defense Studies, NIDS China Report 2011 (Tokyo: National
Institute of Defense Studies, 2011), p. 17.
69. “Japanese FM Airs Concern over Territorial Disputes in South China Sea,” BBC
Monitoring Asia Pacific (27 July 2010), p. 1 <http://search.proquest.com/docvi
ew/724504192/131A739EA)562...>.
70. National Institute of Defense Studies, NIDS China Security Report 2012 (Tokyo:
National Institute of Defense Studies, 2012), p. 26.
71. Ian Storey, “Japan Steps Up to the South China Sea Plate: Tokyo is Confronting
Beijing and Increasing Defence Ties with ASEAN Members to Protect Maritime
Trade,” Wall Street Journal (09 July 2012), p. 1 <http://search.proquest.com/
docview.1024132884/131979D7E21C...>.
72. Yoichi Kato, “China’s Naval Expansion in the Western Pacific,” Global Asia,
Vol. 5, No. 4 (Winter 2010), p. 19.
73. National Institute for Defense Studies, op. cit., p. 26.
74. Michele Flournoy and Janine Davidson, “Obama’s New Global Posture,”
Foreign Affairs, Vol. 91, No. 4 (July/August 2012), p. 59.
75. Robert Ross, “The Problem of the Asia Pivot,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 91, No. 6
(November/December 2012), p. 79.
76. The International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2012:
The Annual Assessment of Global Military Capabilities and Defence Economics
(London: The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2012), p. 212.
77. Scott, op. cit., p. 1041.
78. See Malcolm Cook, Raoul Heinrich, Rory Medcalf, and Andrew Shearer, Power
and Choice: Asian Security Futures (Sydney, Australia: Lowy Institute, June
2010), p. 36.

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 49

3/5/2016 10:00:41 AM

50

79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.

Renato Cruz De Castro

Ibid., pp. 25-26.
Scott, op. cit., p. 1042.
Taylor, op. cit., p. 12.
Ren and Liu, op. cit., p. 7.
The International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2012:
The Annual Assessment of Global Military Capabilities and Defence Economics
(London: The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2012), p. 213.
Avery Goldstein, “China’s Real and Present Danger: Now is the Time for
Washington to Worry,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 95, No. 5 (September/October
2013), pp. 138-139.
John Vasquez, The War Puzzle (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1993), p. 264.
Taylor, op. cit., p. 1.
Historic Title requires the other claimant states to recognize China’s historical
narrative of Chinese voyages in the South China Sea, and to inform Beijing of
their plans to conduct exploration and exploitation of marine resources in the
disputed waters.
Ibid., p. 38.
Kupchan, op. cit., p. 38.
Buszynski, op. cit., p. 5.
Ibid., p. 3.
Thang, op. cit., p. 1.
Kupchan, op. cit., p. 46.
Ibid., p. 47.
Ibid., pp. 50-51.
Xinhua News Agency, “Commentary: High Time to Build New Maritime Silk
Road,” Xinhua News Agency (03 October 2013), p. 1 <http://search.proquest.
com/1439253864?accountid=28547>.
Scott, op. cit., p. 1042.
Taylor, op. cit., p. 12.
Fravel Taylor, Strong Borders Secure Nation: Cooperation and Conflict in
China’s Territorial Dispute (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
2008), p. 299.
National Institute for Defense Studies, NIDS China Security Report 2014
(Tokyo, Japan: National Institute for Defense Studies, 2015), p. 3.
Christopher H. Sharman, China Moves Out: Stepping Stones toward a New
Maritime Strategy (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press, April
2015), p. 4.
Ibid., p. 6.
See Dutton, op. cit., pp. 9-11.
Goodwin, and Miller, op. cit., p. 46.
Taylor, op. cit., p. 11.
Sun Zi, The Art of War (Beijing, China: People’s China Publishing House, 1995),
p. 40.

IJCS 7-1 De Castro_South China Sea dispute.indd 50

3/5/2016 10:00:41 AM

