Asia-Pacific Social Science Review
Volume 17

Issue 1

Article 5

6-30-2017

Why Collective Identity Matters: Constructivism and the Absence
of ASEAN’s Role in the Rohingya Crisis
Mohamad Rosyidin
mohamad.rosyidin@undip.ac.id

Follow this and additional works at: https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/apssr

Recommended Citation
Rosyidin, Mohamad (2017) "Why Collective Identity Matters: Constructivism and the Absence of ASEAN’s
Role in the Rohingya Crisis," Asia-Pacific Social Science Review: Vol. 17: Iss. 1, Article 5.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.59588/2350-8329.1122
Available at: https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/apssr/vol17/iss1/5

This Research Article is brought to you for free and open access by the DLSU Publications at Animo Repository. It
has been accepted for inclusion in Asia-Pacific Social Science Review by an authorized editor of Animo Repository.

M. Rosyidin

52
Asia-Pacific Social Science Review (2017) 17(1): 52-65

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Why Collective Identity Matters:
Constructivism and the Absence of ASEAN’s Role
in the Rohingya Crisis
Mohamad Rosyidin
Universitas Diponegoro, Indonesia
mohamad.rosyidin@undip.ac.id

Abstract The debate over the gap between theory and practice in international relations has been neglected by the vast
majority of scholars. This paper is aimed to examine whether or not constructivist consideration has a place within ASEAN
policy-making process regarding the Rohingya crisis. The absence of ASEAN’s role in managing Rohingya’s refugee crisis
post-sectarian conflict in Myanmar has raised criticism on its effectiveness in dealing with regional problems. Despite the fact
that ASEAN has already had a number of human rights instruments such as the ASEAN Charter, ASEAN Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights and ASEAN Declaration of Human Rights, the organization arguably, did not do much to
intervene in and try to overcome the Rohingya crisis. This paper offers possible contributions of constructivism in diagnosing
and providing policy recommendations for ASEAN to solve such problem. From the constructivists’ standpoint, ASEAN
did not do much intervention due to the lack of collective identity among its member states. As a consequence, there has
not been enough “institutional commitment” to carry out collective action. Furthermore, constructivists’ perspectives may
also provide strategic measures by suggesting that all member states should give priority to the process of collective identity
building before any institutional arrangements are made.
Keywords constructivism, theory and practice, ASEAN, collective identity, Rohingya crisis

One of the issues raised following the Rohingya
crisis is the absence of ASEAN’s role. As a regional
organization, it was expected that ASEAN should
have taken steps to take care of major interstate flow
of refugees. ASEAN is held responsible because
the organization has been known to uphold a
strong commitment towards regional human rights
enforcement as laid in the ASEAN Charter of 2008,
in the establishment of ASEAN Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights (AICHR) in 2009, and
the declaration to support human rights in 2012. Instead
of being carefully managed by the Association, the flow

of Rohingya refugees was taken over by host countries
such as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand. ASEAN
did not even discuss the issue at the 26th ASEAN
Summit on 26-28 April 2015 in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. Arakan Rohingya National Organization
(2015) released a press statement asserting that “It
is a disappointment that the Rohingya issue was
not discussed in the recent 26th ASEAN Summit
held between 26-28 April in Malaysia, although the
issue is a regional issue since bulk of refugees had
fled to Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia” (par. 4).
The responsibility to resettle Rohingya refugees was

Copyright © 2017 by De La Salle University

Why Collective Identity Matters

deemed at the disposal of individual members instead
of the regional organization. Without intending to
exaggerate and over-generalize, this is indicative
of ASEAN’s failure to create security, stability, and
respect for human rights in Southeast Asia.
This fact demands an explanation from the field
of international relations (IR). There are at least three
approaches that can be employed to address ASEAN’s
failure in managing the Rohingya crisis—realism,
institutionalism, and the English School. Realists are
very skeptical of any form of cooperation aimed at
the common good, let alone dealing with normative
issues such as human rights. The premise that
interstate relations based on self-help capacity is seen
inappropriate to provide a solution to the problem of
collective action. The anarchic structure of international
politics, as well as the tendency of states to pursue
national interests, are two main factors why realists
tend to avoid talking about human rights (Dunne &
Hanson, 2012, p. 63). Unlike realists, neo-liberal
institutionalists argue that multilateral institutions
are a solution to minimize the effects of international
anarchy in which relations between countries are always
suspicious and distrustful (see for example Keohane,
1984; Axelrod & Keohane, 1985; Keohane & Martin,
1995). Neo-liberal institutionalists would assume
that the failure of ASEAN is caused by the absence
of international regimes that facilitate cooperation
among states. This is supported by the fact that there
have not been any regional regimes that specifically
address the issue of refugee and asylum seekers in
Southeast Asia. Instead, ASEAN puts refugees and
asylum seekers into the human rights issue. Seeing
this fact, neo-liberal institutionalists would suggest
that ASEAN should establish a regime that specifically
deals with the issue. Meanwhile, the adherents of the
English School would argue that ASEAN’s failure is
a result of the norm of non-interference in order to
preserve member state’s national interests (see for
example Narine, 2006). Southeast Asian countries have
long adopted the Westphalian concept of sovereignty
stressing state-centred diplomacy (Katsumata, 2009,
p. 622). Intervening domestic matters of any member
states would violate a long lasting principle called the
“ASEAN Way.” Like the realists who put a strong
emphasis on sovereignty and national interest, the

53

English School cannot offer any specific policy
recommendations.
None of these three approaches is appropriate
to provide a strategic framework to help ASEAN in
addressing the Rohingya crisis. Both realists and the
English School tend to support ASEAN’s reluctance
in facing the issue. Suggestions provided by neoliberal institutionalists—forming regional refugee
regime—seems reasonable, but crafting an institutional
arrangement like this would be challenged by all
member states. Myanmar, as a country held responsible
for the case of Rohingya, would definitely reject this
proposal. Aside from this, ASEAN has the tendency
to make an agreement but is reluctant to implement it.
In contrast to three approaches described before, this
paper will analyze ASEAN’s failure on Rohingya issue
using constructivist approach. Existing literature from
the perspective of constructivism tend to neglect how
to bridge the gap between theory and practice. Most
literature have tried to test constructivist logic to explain
ASEAN as a regional actor as well as encompassing
issues. For example, constructivism can be applied
to understand security issues in Southeast Asia other
than realism (Busse, 1999). Furthermore, Peou (2002)
went further by arguing that constructivism is more
insightful than realist balance of power in explaining
security issues in Southeast Asia. Meanwhile, with
respect to ASEAN as a regional actor, Eaton and Stubbs
(2006) had compared neo-realism and constructivism
in explaining ASEAN’s role in the region and beyond.
They argued that while neo-realists are skeptical about
the efficacy of the Association’s role, constructivists
are optimistic that ASEAN has a positive impact on
the development of regional arrangements. The work
of See Seng Tan (2006) criticized the constructivist
explanation of Southeast Asian international relations.
He entered deeply into the ontological foundation by
arguing that constructivists are “granting ontological
priority to states” that make it fails to keep its promise
“to take us beyond the shortcomings of rationalism”
(p. 254). Another work focuses on the issue of peace in
the region such as an article written by Timo Kivimäki
(2012) who argued that peaceful condition in Southeast
Asia cannot be built on objective conditions but rather
“imagined realities.” Even though this article provides
policy recommendation on how to create a long-lasting

M. Rosyidin

54

peace in the region by using constructivist point of
view, it tends to overlook the underlying factor that
contributes to peace, for example, collective identity.
This paper seeks to fill the gap in existing literature
by examining the contribution of constructivism
in bridging the gap between theory and practice
with regard to the absence of ASEAN’s role in the
Rohingya crisis. In IR academic circles, it is argued
that constructivism is focused on the accumulation of
knowledge—science for science—rather than how
a body of knowledge has an implication to policy—
science for practice (Rosyidin, 2015, p. 195). This
paper argues that constructivism can bridge the gap
between theory and practice that has long been debated
among scholars. Using ASEAN’s failure in addressing
the Rohingya crisis as a test case, this paper will not
only be able to analyze why ASEAN is incapable of
dealing with the flow of refugees from Myanmar, but
also to provide recommendations for decision makers.
In other words, constructivism is not only capable
of diagnosing fundamental problems that undermine
ASEAN’s effectiveness in managing the issue but also
suggesting strategies regarding what action should be
taken to overcome those problems.
This paper is divided into four parts. The first part
discusses the gap between theory and practice as one of
the enduring debates in IR. The gap is there partly due
to the fact that most academics dwell with theoretical
debates while forgetting its implementations on the
ground. They are working for their own interests but
do not attempt to create theories that could be useful
for decision makers. The second section deals with
the policy-making dimension of constructivism.
This claim is supported by the argument that
constructivism is paying attention to ideas that
explain the behavior of international actors, including
international organizations. Constructivists believe
that by manipulating this non-material dimension,
international relations is actually a practical field
that can be controlled. The third part is a test case
of whether or not constructivism is able to prove
its promise. This section analyzes two things:
constructivism diagnostic capability to identify
problems and strategic capability to offer a practical
solution. The fourth part is conclusion and policy
recommendation.

Bridging the Gap Between Theory
and Practice in IR
Despite efforts in making IR be more applicable for
decision makers, there has been a wide gap between
academics and practitioners in this field. Alexander
George (1994, p. 149), American IR scholar who
worked at the RAND Corporation and is known
for his research on diplomacy and foreign policy,
acknowledged that the gap between academics and
practitioners in the field is rooted from divergent
professional objectives; academics want to develop the
base of knowledge while practitioners want to influence
and control events that they face. The distinction
between the “world of thought and the world of
action” (Mahnken, 2008) is also unbridgeable because
of differing perceptions of time. For academics, time
does not really matter; what matters is the quality of
research they are working on. On the contrary, time
is very important for practitioners so that despite the
quality of a report or research, they will be considered
good enough and eventually used as the basis for the
policy-making process by decision makers (Nye, 2008,
p. 598).
The gap between theory and practice is not actually
new in IR. Much earlier, leading realist scholar Hans
Morgenthau was fully aware of this issue. In his book,
Morgenthau (1946, p. 10) argued that “politics is an art
and not a science, and what is required for its mastery is
not the rationality of the engineer, but the wisdom and
the moral strength of the statesman.” Politics, including
IR, requires practical skills rather than theoretical
expertise. The ideal theory, he continued, is a theory
that is not only useful to understand the world but
also able to guide policy (Morgenthau, 1946, p. 40).
Consequently, IR theories should provide applicable
prescriptions for decision makers.
To understand the utility of a theory in a practical
sense, we need to distinguish between policy-relevant
theory and policy-orientated theory (Fox, as cited in
Garnett, 1985, pp. 52-53). The policy-relevant theory
is a theory useful for improving our understanding
of phenomena in world politics. The term “relevant”
means that it can help policymakers understand the
problem they are facing before making any decisions.
Thus, the utility of this type of theory is indirect. Most

Why Collective Identity Matters

IR theories are the policy-relevant theory. Meanwhile,
a policy-orientated theory is a theory that is intended
directly to provide input to governmental policies.
Theories in the strategic studies are examples of
this type of theory because they are more practical
than analytical. Deterrence theory, for example, was
developed by RAND Corporation to counter threats to
the US national security since the Cold War to postSeptember 11 (Long, 2008).
In the same categorization, it is important to
distinguish between instrumental and contextual theory
(Lepgold & Nincic, 2001). The instrumental theory is
akin to policy-oriented theory, while the contextual
theory is similar to policy-relevant theory. With regard
to our interest in the contribution of IR theories to
policy, we need to focus on the second type theory.
Contextual theory defined as a theory that provides
the basis for policy implementation. If we expect our
actions to conform to our goals then we need to know
the extent to which our action might be successful.
For example, imagine we expect social assistance
we give to poor people to not lead to the culture of
consumerism. To prevent this from occurring, we need
to understand the mindset, habits, and culture of the
target communities. Thus, before taking any decisions,
we need to identify underlying factors that potentially
distort our goals. In foreign policy, the government
should consider factors that determine the effectiveness
of diplomacy. Economic sanctions, for example,
need to consider factors such as a country’s level of
dependence on imports from other countries, characters
of the government and society, as well as the pattern
of foreign relations so that sanctions can be effective
in suppressing target states. It is the duty of foreign
policy and IR specialists to understand these factors.
There are several conditions that bridge the gap
between theory and policy (Walt, 2005). The first is
the ability to diagnose. “Diagnosis is the ability of a
theory to identify the problem or the root cause of a
phenomenon. For instance, why does ethnic conflict
occur? Why do states commit war crimes? Why
do economic sanctions fail? Why can’t democracy
foster peace? Those are typical questions that require
theoretical explanation. The second requirement is an
ability to predict. The predictive capability plays a role
as an anticipatory strategy against the impact of an event.

55

If it is said that war crimes occurred due to military
cultures, then the government should undermine it in
order to prevent violations of military personnel against
the laws of war. The third requirement is the ability to
provide prescriptive or policy recommendations. This
provision has been described previously in the context
of the deterrence theory. The fourth requirement is
evaluative capacity; the ability of a theory to evaluate
governmental policies. For example, the failure of
economic sanctions might be due to the negligence
of the government to consider domestic factors of
the target state. All of those conditions are commonly
found in most IR theories.

Constructivism as a Policy-Relevant Theory
A proponent of constructivism, Emanuel Adler
(2002, p. 111) once suggested that “constructivism still
needs to be bridged between metaphysics and social
theory, between research and methodology, as well as
between theory and practice.” The task of bridging
the gap between theory and practice in constructivism
is not easy. This is due to constructivism’s focus of
analysis on theory and metatheory. Some of the issues
that sparked heated debates among constructivist
adherents are the epistemological debate between
rationalism and interpretivism (see for example Adler,
1997), the relationship between constructivism and
critical theory (see for example Price & Reus-Smit,
1998), the positivist method in constructivist research
(see for example Dessler, 1999; Dessler & Owen,
2005), support for interpretive approach (see for
example Guzzini, 2000), pros and cons regarding the
creation of a “world state,” and critics toward moderate
constructivism strand (see for example Wendt, 2003;
Shannon, 2005; Guzzini & Leander, 2006). Debates
that lead to real policy-making process is quite rare.
The only contribution constructivism made in practical
terms is to carry the visions of ethical foreign policy
and campaign on global ethics (see for example Price,
2008).
As explained before, for a theory to be able to
contribute to a policy-making process, it has to have
at least two things: the ability to diagnose problems
and to prescribe policies. To meet the requirements,

56

constructivism must have a set of basic assumptions
that can be used to understand world politics.
Generally, constructivism contains two main premises:
first, non-material elements that are more important
than the material ones, and second, that the actions
of international actors are determined by these nonmaterial elements (see Wendt, 1999, p. 1). “Nonmaterial elements” refer to ideas that shape identities
and interests, norms, as well as languages that, in
return, form social environments in which actors are
embedded.
The rationalists, primarily consist of realists and
liberals, have a strong belief in material conditions
such as defense, military muscle, natural resources,
population, geography, economic performance,
and so on, to gain national interests. Conversely,
constructivists argue that material conditions have no
significant impact on state actions. Instead of stressing
on the physical resources, constructivists look at the
meaning behind it. For example, as Wendt (1995)
illustrated, five North Korean nuclear weapons are
quite frightening for the US than 500 British nuclear
weapons because North Korea is (perceived) as an
“enemy” while the UK is a “friend” (p. 73). Another
example, the Iraq war in 2003 was not solely due to
the existence of weapons of mass destruction that was
objectively threatening the West but because Iraq was
labeled as a “rogue state” and “sponsor of terrorism.”
The meaning of “objective reality” determines state
action. International politics is more about what is
thought by the actors, rather than about what happens
in real life.
From this understanding, we can conclude that
non-material elements such as identity, norms, and
language can be used to diagnose policy problems.
We will test this argument by taking identity as an
explanatory variable. “Identity” in constructivist terms
is defined as “a property of intentional actors that
generates motivational and behavioral dispositions”
(Wendt, 1999, p. 224). The influence of identities on
states policy is very crucial because identities will
define goals and actions. In other words, identities
shape national interests, which in turn shape policies.
Thus, for constructivists, national interests are not
taken for granted but constantly changing, depending
on the nature of interactions.

M. Rosyidin

Let us consider the role of identity in Indonesia’s
foreign policy. Part of Indonesia’s national identity
is “peacemaker” which shapes Indonesia’s national
interest “to create and maintain world peace” in
accordance with the constitutional mandate set out in
Paragraph 4 of the 1945 Constitution (The 1945 Const.
of the Republic of Indonesia, Par. 4). This interest, in
turn prompts the government to send Garuda Troops to
conflict-torn regions. Another example is Indonesia’s
decision to abstain from the UN Security Council vote
in 2008 to impose sanctions on Iran over its nuclear
program. From the constructivists’ lens, the decision
reflects Indonesia’s identity as the “largest Muslim
country in the world” leading to interest to “maintain
solidarity with fellow Muslim countries” (see for
example Gindarsah, 2012).
It is important to note that identity is not a single
analytical framework. Conceptually, there are many
kinds of identity. Constructivism distinguished four
kinds of identity: corporate, type, role, and collective
identity (Wendt, 1999, pp. 224-229). Corporate identity
is physical attributes that characterize a country.
For example, Indonesia is both a maritime country
and an archipelagic state. Type identity refers to the
typology—mainly political system—that defines a
country. The political system of a country deemed to
affect foreign policy style. For example, Indonesia
is a democratic country with the largest Muslim
population in the world, Saudi Arabia is a monarchy,
Iran is a theocracy, and so on. Role identity is the social
position of a country in the international environment.
This identity is closely related to the obligation or
responsibility of the state in international system. For
example Indonesia’s role as a peacemaker, Japan’s
role as a “stabilizer” in East Asia, Australia’s role as
a “sheriff” in Asia Pacific, India’s role as a “bridge
between civilizations”, and many others. Collective
identity is synchronized thoughts and feelings between
one country and another. Although proponents of realist
theory believe that the state is selfish in nature, many
states have shared feelings which created solidarity
among them. Take for example the transatlantic
relations between the US and the UK, which allow
them to build a cohesive cooperation with each other
in addressing international issues. The next discussion
will focus on this type of identity.

Why Collective Identity Matters

Constructivist scholars argue that identity is a
socially constructed entity. Using “looking glass self”
theory borrowed from American sociologist Charles
Horton Cooley, constructivist asserted that identity
is formed through a series of actions and reactions
involving interpretation between actors (Wendt, 1992,
pp. 404-406). Imagine State A and State B interacting
with each other. State A’s action is a gesture that will
be interpreted by State B and used to give response
to State A. Conversely, a response from State B is a
gesture that will be interpreted by State A. This actioninteraction process occurs continuously and creates
intersubjectivity between State A and State B, which in
turn defines the nature of the relationship between them.
For example, State A interprets the gesture of State B
as hostile and vice versa. This would create animosity
and perceived inimical identities between A and B.
The question is: what if one of the parties interprets
the action of its counterpart differently? The answer
is there will be no intersubjectivity; there is only the
subjectivity of each party. The term inter-subjectivity
requires shared knowledge between actors involved.
Without intersubjectivity, there is no meaningful
interaction. Without meaningful interaction, there is no
such thing as “international relations.” For example,
a marriage will not be meaningful if the man does not
consider the woman as wife and the woman does not
consider the man as husband. Thus, identity shapes
relationship and relationship shapes identity (mutually
constituted).
Similarly, collective identity is formed through
social processes. The similarity of perceptions and
feelings among actors engender shared interests and
actions. Wendt (1999, p. 343; see also Wendt, 1994)
mentioned four variables that promote a collective
identity among countries which he described as
master variables; they are: interdependence, common
perception, homogenization, and the principle of selfrestraint. Interdependence is a mutual relationship
between countries which commonly refers to economic
partnerships. The higher the degree of interdependence,
the stronger the collectivity that would occur between
countries. Common perception will be clearly evident
when a group of states is faced with threats. As an
alliance, the security and survival of each party
will be determined by the security and survival of

57

the alliance as a whole. Homogenizing factor refers
to intrinsic similarities between countries such as
ideology, socio-cultural characteristics, geography,
and so on. Countries that have similarities in these
aspects tend to be easier in establishing solidarity rather
than with countries that do not have those traits. The
last factor is the principle of self-restraint; non-use
of force in managing interstate conflicts. It becomes
a crucial factor to build a collective identity. In other
words, interdependence, common perception, and
homogeneity are necessary but not sufficient conditions
for collective identity building. Without self-restraint,
a group of states would not be successful in creating
international solidarity.
This argument implies that IR are dynamic. Two
or more states that have been hostile to each other can
turn their relationship into a friendship and vice versa.
The key is how states change their relationships from
enmity into amity through the processes that have
been mentioned before. To do so, the four conditions
above are required. Interdependence alone cannot
automatically create a friendship. The relationships
between China and Japan are always filled with
hostility though both are equally dependent in terms of
economy and trade. Even Indonesia-Malaysia relations
are complicated by enmity despite the fact that both are
fairly dependent as well as culturally identical.
To build a collective identity, states need to
undertake comprehensive strategies covering the four
conditions above. Perhaps the difficult task is how
to change homogeneity since it is a congenital factor
instead of socially constructed entities. However,
homogeneity is not only indicated by relatively stable
conditions such as ethnic composition or geographic
similarities but also other features like ideology
or political principles. Japan and Australia may be
culturally different but are friends since they equally
embrace the liberal democratic system. Constructivists
thus suggested that states focusing on this collective
identity building would provide the foundation of
international peace. Collective identity is not a goal in
itself but a means to achieve stability and prosperity
in an anarchic world.
The constructivist assumption that stresses on
identity in analyzing cooperation within the region
is relevant to provide policy framework in Southeast

58

Asia. With respect to the humanitraian crisis in
Myanmar, constructivist offers different perspective
compared to other theoretical lens, for example, realism
and liberal-institutionalism. Constructivist would
argue, as mentioned earlier, that the Rohingya issue
cannot be explained solely by the traditional concept
of national interest as well as the absence of regional
institutional arrangement that facilitate cooperation.
Instead, it reflects identity conflict and, in some
occasions, regional norms. International community
recognizes that the government of Myanmar has
committed crimes against humanity due to the fact that
the ethnic minority of Rohingya is not the Burmanese;
they are an outsider because of their origins and
culture (see for example Biver, 2014; Boon, 2015;
Jones, 2015). In addition, identity-driven foreign
policy is also salient in the case of ASEAN member
states assistance to the Rohingya people. For example,
Indonesia’s diplomatic and humanitarian assistance
to the Rohingya people recently were influenced by
the identity as a world largest Muslim country (see
for example Satria & Jamaan, 2013; Rosyidin, 2016).
Thus, the concept of identity can also be employed as
a framework to formulate ASEAN policy in dealing
with the Rohingya issue.

Constructivism in Practice: Strategies to Build
ASEAN Collective Identity
The 26 th ASEAN Summit in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, held on 26-28 April 2015, was a very
timely moment to address the Rohingya issue. It had
been argued that the Rohingya issue has become a
sort of “thorn in the flesh” to the regional stability.
Therefore, the current ASEAN summit was a test
case to prove whether ASEAN is able to deal with the
issue. Unfortunately, the forum did not include the
Rohingya issue into the meeting at all. ASEAN seemed
to deliberately overlook non-traditional security issues
such as refugees since Myanmar seemed hesitant to
discuss the issue. The meeting had only produced
declarations of cooperation among members, especially
in economic issues. One declaration produced at the
meeting was “Kuala Lumpur Declaration on a PeopleOriented, People-Centered ASEAN.” This declaration
reflects the commitment of the member states to

M. Rosyidin

strengthen the three pillars of the ASEAN Security
Community, namely, political-security, economy,
and socio-cultural. Ironically, despite the fact that the
declaration asserts that the member states “... need to
confront the challenges to promote peace, security and
prosperity in Southeast Asia” (Vietnam Plus, 2015, par.
6), the content of the declaration does not contain the
word “refugee” even if it intersects directly with the
political-security pillar.
ASEAN’s negligence towards the Rohingya issue
shows the organization’s failure as an instrument to
create regional security and stability, as well as to
uphold the ideals of ASEAN Community. The failure
to take a responsible action towards the Rohingya
issue will “undermine ASEAN’s efforts towards
integration by spoiling mutual trust and confidence in
each other” (Kundu, 2015, par.11). The Kuala Lumpur
Declaration’s focus on “people” falls short in reality.
ASEAN should have demonstrated its commitment to
human rights in the region by taking the responsibility
to help Rohingya refugees. Yet, as a former diplomat
at the ASEAN, Secretariat Termsak Chalermpalanupap
acknowledged that the ASEAN has always faced the
dilemma of being caught between national sovereignty
and regional commitment. He asserted that when
ASEAN sets new goals or higher aspirations, the
member states will deal with a lot of domestic change
while officials are reluctant “to do extra work just to
fulfill regional commitments” (in Quayle, 2013, p.
68). In short, ASEAN passivism represents a “moral
tragedy” for the institution itself (Davies, 2015).
The widely-perceived ASEAN’s failure in enforcing
respect for human rights at the regional level is not only
about its negligence over the Rohingya issue but also
due to its remissness to implement its existing human
rights regimes. Aside from the fact that until now
ASEAN has not had any special regime on refugees
and asylum seekers, ASEAN has demonstrated its
commitment to human rights issues as reflected in the
ASEAN Charter, in the establishment of the AICHR,
and ASEAN Human Rights Declaration. The ASEAN
Charter which was signed in 2008 is an institutional
framework which became the foundation of the
establishment of the ASEAN Community by 2015.
The declaration clearly stated that member states are
committed to “respect for and protection of human

Why Collective Identity Matters

rights and fundamental freedom: (ASEAN, 2008, p. 2).
Following this commitment, in 2009 ASEAN formed
a special institution to deal with human rights issues,
namely the AIHCR. AICHR is “The overarching body
with a cross-cutting mandate that handles matters
related to human rights cooperation with other ASEAN
Bodies, external partners and stakeholders” (ASEAN,
2009, p. 1). When the Rohingya issue came up, AICHR
could not do anything. A Western observer criticized
the agency as being no more than “a toothless tiger”
(Bowen, 2015).
The reflection of ASEAN human rights commitment
culminated in 2012 when the organization signed the
ASEAN Human Rights Declaration in Phnom Penh.
The declaration proves that ASEAN stepped forward
to show their seriousness in upholding human rights.
The Rohingya issue falls within the purview of the
Article 28 of the declaration which states that:
Every person has the right to an adequate
standard of living for himself or herself and his
or her family including: a) The right to adequate
and affordable food, freedom from hunger
and access to safe and nutritious food; b) The
right to clothing; c) The right to adequate and
affordable housing; d) The right to medical care
and social services necessary; e) The right to
safe drinking water and sanitation; f) The right
to a safe, clean and sustainable environment.
(ASEAN, 2013, pp. 8-9)

Although it is quite obvious that everyone must be
protected and guaranteed their rights, ASEAN does
not undertake any concrete steps to prove it. The
declaration seems to be no more than an exhortation
and not a shared commitment between member states
to respect human rights principles.
Why did ASEAN’s human rights institutions
become ineffective in addressing the Rohingya
issue? Why were there were no efforts dedicated
to establishing a regime that specifically addresses
the issue of refugees and asylum seekers? The basic
assumption of this article is that the absence of such
efforts is due to the dearth of collective identity
among ASEAN members has resulted in the lack of
commitment to their own institution. Identity matters
in regional cooperation because it plays a role as

59

a glue to consolidate action in a certain issue. The
problem is, ASEAN has not achieved “the kind of
regional identity that would last forever, but there
has been a significant and self-conscious effort at
regional identity-building” (Acharya, 2005, p. 104;
see also Acharya, 1997). In other words, ASEAN
has no pre-determined identity but “an identity in the
making.” As a consequence, ASEAN member states
cannot act collectively during this identity building
process. Nevertheless, constructivists believe that the
existence of collective identity is a precondition for
collective actions. Conversely, collective actions will
strengthen collective identity. If ASEAN states stop
acting like a group which operates under a collective
identity, then they will never be one. Thus, there is
a reciprocality (mutually constituted relationships)
between collective identity and its practices among
ASEAN member states.
Collective identity creates solidarity or “communityregion” (Adler, 2005, p. 181) where states in a region
have the same perceptions and interests that underlie
collective action. The collective action represents
the “logic of community”, not “logic of anarchy”
which reflects self-interested behavior (Adler &
Barnett, 1998). The logic of community is related to a
“commitment institution” (Matlii, 1999); the political
will of the member states to implement institutional
obligations. Simply put, in order to play its role in
the region, ASEAN should first establish a collective
identity.
Constructivists’ framework of collective identity
formation can be used as a road map for ASEAN to
build a long-term foundation of regional cooperation.
As explained in the previous section, there are four
variables that are required to do so: interdependence,
common perception, homogeneity, and the principle of
self-restraint. Let us start from interdependence. The
level of interdependence among ASEAN members,
especially in terms of economy and trade is quite high.
Quantitative indicators such as trading volumes among
fellow members of ASEAN is considered the biggest
in the region. The top 10 ASEAN trading partners
are dominated by the ASEAN countries themselves,
followed by China, the EU, Japan, and the United
States. Until August 2016, the total volume of export
from ASEAN to its own members was US$ 305,565,20

60

million or 25.9% of total export volume in a year. This
number is more than twice the total volume of export
from ASEAN to China that is only 11.3% (ASEAN,
2016). This shows that in terms of trade, ASEAN
countries still rely on fellow members as the most
important trading partners. Thus, ASEAN has met the
first requirement to form a collective identity. ASEAN
only needs to increase the frequency and intensity of
interdependence among them in the future.
The second variable is common perception,
especially perception of threat in the region. However,
the perception of threat in Southeast Asia is yet to be
fully formed. This is indicated by the existence of a
strong distrust among ASEAN members on security
issues. The context was completely different during
ASEAN’s early formation period, where the level of
trust among member states was high. At that time,
the threat of communism played a role as a glue to
bind countries in the region and to build a sense of
solidarity (see Acharya, 1998, 2001). In the post-Cold
War era, ASEAN incorporated transnational crimes
as a common threat resulted in the emergence of the
Declaration on Transnational Crime in 1997. Then in
2001 when terrorists attacked US soil, terrorism soon
became a common threat that must be confronted
collectively. In addition to threatening world security,
ASEAN also saw terrorism as “a direct challenge to
the attainment of peace, progress, and prosperity of
ASEAN and the realization of ASEAN Vision 2020”
(Pushpanathan, 2003).
However, it seems that the perception of a common
threat is limited to non-traditional issues. Traditional
security issues originating from state actors remain
unchanged. For example, the security issue in the
South China Sea that weakens ASEAN as a regional
organization. The main problem faced by ASEAN in
the South China Sea issue concerns China’s aggressive
intention. ASEAN is divided in welcoming China in the
region. Countries like Malaysia and Brunei welcome
China’s presence in the picture, while countries like
Vietnam and the Philippines reject it. The Philippines’
reservation further worsens the situation because
it would automatically invite the US as an ally to
intervene in the region. Needless to say, what would
happen in the future if vital interests of two major
powers collide in the region?

M. Rosyidin

In addition, ASEAN is also divided in managing the
South China Sea conflict. There is a thought that China
should be involved in the formulation of the Code of
Conduct while others, particularly Vietnam and the
Philippines, firmly opposed the suggestion. According
to Indonesian foreign policy expert Rizal Sukma, the
failure of ASEAN to unite with regard to the South
China Sea crisis “will weaken ASEAN’s position and
image” (Sukma, 2012). Hostilities and incidents can
easily spark an arms race among ASEAN countries
(Rosyidin, 2014). As a result, the level of distrust in
the region is quite high. So it can be concluded that
ASEAN has not had a common perception regarding
traditional threats.
The third factor is homogeneity that is similarity of
intrinsic elements that contribute to interstate relations.
Although united by historical experience as a colony
(Reid, 2010), Southeast Asian countries have a weak
commitment to human rights and democracy. The
commitment of Southeast Asian countries to human
rights is characterized by an action-identity gap
(Davies, 2013). ASEAN countries tend to preserve
the rationalist’s mindset that norms are only useful if
it can be used to achieve political goals. This explains
why human rights violations in Southeast Asia are still
abundant. The UN Human Rights body, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
reported, “Although Southeast Asia is one of the most
ethnically diverse regions in the world, protection
mechanisms are not in place to promote and protect
the rights of minorities and indigenous peoples”
(OHCHR, n.d.).
Similarly, ASEAN does not have any unified
concept of democratic values. Although the vast
majority of ASEAN countries had adopted the
principles of democracy, ASEAN does not include
liberal democratic values into it. As a consequence,
ASEAN does not have a regional consensus regarding
the fundamental principles of democracy such as
respect for the rule of law and protection of human
rights (Gomez & Ramcharan, 2014). With regard to
the third requirement to establish a collective identity,
it is clear that ASEAN is yet to fully adopt democratic
principles. In short, there are no shared values among
ASEAN members concerning democracy and human
rights.

Why Collective Identity Matters

The final and considerably most crucial requirement
is the principle of self-restraint. Compared with the
two previous requirements—a common perception
and shared values—Southeast Asian countries may be
quite successful in preventing conflict escalation into
an open confrontation that could lead to war. Acharya
(1998, 2001) was correct when he argued that ASEAN
member states have long been consistently applying
dialogue and cooperation rather than the use of military
force to resolve disputes or conflicts. The principle of
non-use of force may be the only indicator of ASEAN
as a security community in Deutsch-ian sense that
“there is a real assurance that the members of that
community will not fight each other physically, but
will settle reviews their disputes in some other way”
(Deutsch, 2003, p. 124). In the case of South China
Sea disputes, for instance, ASEAN has long agreed to
not use violent means and instead resort to dialogue in
the Code of Conduct format. The agreement was set
in 2002 and stated that,
The parties undertake to exercise selfrestraint in the conduct of activities that would
complicate or escalate disputes and affect
peace and stability including, among others,
refraining from action of inhabiting on the
presently uninhabited islands, reefs, shoals,
cays, and other features and to handle reviews
their differences in a constructive manner.
(ASEAN, 2002)

The fact that ASEAN member states tend to avoid the
use of force in resolving conflicts shows that ASEAN
has been successfully practicing the principle of
self-restraint even though suspicion and distrust still
pervade interstate relations in the region.
Unfortunately, the four variables are yet to
be realized in Southeast Asia. Of the four factors
mentioned above, only interdependence and the
principle of self-restraint are present, while common
perception and homogeneity of shared values are still
absent in the region. It has been conveyed before that
ASEAN has not been looking at the state as a common
threat. Although traditional-militaristic threats are
increasingly displaced by non-traditional threats such
as terrorism, transnational crimes, environmental
degradation, disease, and so forth, traditional threats

61

will not disappear as long as the state remains. One
of the main obstacles to the formation of a common
perception of traditional threats in the region is the
band-wagoning of Malaysia and Brunei with China
concerning the South China Sea. In addition, US
involvement in the region complicates the picture.
Changing perceptions and preferences of the foreign
policy of the member states has never been easy.
ASEAN countries should carefully re-consider their
option to have the presence of superpowers in the
region which ultimately poses a threat to all of them.
The second task is also hard to do. In terms of
identity, Southeast Asia consists of a wide variety
of cultural groups which make it hard to find any
similarities. Nonetheless, the slogan of “unity in
diversity” needs to be strengthened by means of the
reconceptualization of democratic values and human
rights. Theoretically, ASEAN has adopted these values,
though there is no agreement on how to implement
it at the practical level. As mentioned before, each
country has its own definition and policy regarding
democracy and human rights principles. Promoting
democratic values and human rights as well as
strengthening the institutional structures both at the
domestic and regional levels should become ASEAN’s
core agenda. Bali Democracy Forum is a step forward
in this direction. Perhaps one of the biggest obstacles
is how to persuade Myanmar to adopt these values.
Just like the first task, uniting divided conceptions
over democracy and human rights also takes time.
ASEAN is presumably still facing internal problems
in achieving this goal.
This raises a critical question—how can ASEAN’s
collective identity solve the problem of the humanitarian
crisis in Myanmar? The answer to this question requires
further study since this article only focuses on the
absence ASEAN’s role on the issue as well as how to
build a sense of community among ASEAN members.
The answer to that question is definitely counterfactual,
which means to put forward an argument deriving from
the “what if” question. As stated by methodological
scholars, counterfactual method is important to make
predictions, to answer the what if question, and
estimate the causal impact (King & Zeng, 2007). In
other words, the methodology of counterfactual is the
“thought experiment” in which the researcher propose

M. Rosyidin

62

the hypothetical argument because it is contrary to
reality (see for example Fearon, 1991; Tetlock &
Belkin, 1996).
Using the logic of counterfactual method, this paper
argues that ASEAN collective identity could facilitate
the settlement of communal conflict in Myanmar even
if not a determining factor. If ASEAN had a robust
collective identity, then ASEAN would have sufficient
bargaining power to influence the government of
Myanmar to stop the persecution of the Rohingya
people. Given ASEAN still adheres to the principle
of non-interference, ASEAN could socialize human
rights norms in Myanmar. According to Acharya and
Johnston (2007), international institutions can play a
role as an agent of socialization for its members through
delegates representing the country in a regional forum.
Socialization itself is a process in which the actors are
invited to internalize the values and norms in order to
become part of a larger community. As demonstrated by
Jeffrey T. Checkel (2005) in his study of the European
Union, regional institution plays role as an agent of
socialization that creates the sense of community for
its members. Despite the prevailing norms in ASEAN
are not human rights and democracy—in contrast
to the European Union—but non-interference and
regional autonomy (see Acharya, 2011), ASEAN could
continuously be able to persuade Myanmar to resolve
its domestic problems with a constructive approach
without the need to involve external powers. Yet,
playing role as an agent of socialization can only be
done if ASEAN has a strong collective identity.

Conclusion
The absence of ASEAN’s role in addressing the
Rohingya issue is not only rooted in the norm of
non-interference but also in the dearth of collective
identity among ASEAN member states. The absence
of collective identity led to national interest-oriented
political processes rather than a regional-oriented
one. Despite the fact that ASEAN has had several
human rights regimes, member states seem reluctant
to implement it. It is not surprising that ASEAN was
unable to do anything because member states are
lacking commitment to the institution they built.

Identifying the problem of inter-state cooperation
is one of the major problems that has long been
debated among IR scholars. The absence of shared
commitment between members of a regional group
is a classic problem known as the “logic of collective
action” (Olson, 2002). In contrast to rationalists who
assume that a major barrier to collective action is the
principle of self-interested behavior reflected from the
phenomenon of “free rider,” constructivists assume
further that the main problem is the lack of “sense of
community” among members. In other words, if the
rationalists claim egotism as a state of nature which is
given, the constructivists claim it as a result of a lack
of shared understanding between countries. Thus, the
constructivists view that the behavior of a country is
dynamic that changes continuously.
This paper has shown that constructivism is able to
identify problems that led to the absence of ASEAN’s
role in addressing the Rohingya issue. The lack of
ASEAN solidarity due to the absence of collective
identity may be the greatest obstacle to forming a
community. For their long-term interests, ASEAN
needs to focus more on how to build collective identity
among themselves rather than on paper-signings
at conference tables. Collective identity formation
requires ASEAN to establish interdependence,
common perception, homogeneity of shared values,
as well as the principle of self-restraint. The most
difficult task is uniting ASEAN perception towards the
common enemy as well as the conception of democracy
and human rights that, of course, compatible with the
region. This is important to create a community that
acts based on collectivity.

References
Acharya, A. (1997). Ideas, identity, and institution-building:
From the ‘ASEAN way’ to ‘Asia Pacific way’. The
Pacific Review, 10(3), 319–346.
Acharya, A. (1998). Collective identity and conflict
management in Southeast Asia. In E. Adler & M. Barnett
(Eds.), Security communities (pp. 198–227). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Acharya, A. (2001). Constructing security community in
Southeast Asia: ASEAN and the problem of regional
order. London: Routledge.

Why Collective Identity Matters
Acharya, A. (2005). Do norms and identity matter?
Community and power in Southeast Asia’s regional
order. The Pacific Review, 18(1), 95–118.
Acharya, A. (2011). Asian regional institutions and the
possibilities for socializing the behavior of states (ADB
Working Paper No. 82). Manila: Asian Development
Bank.
Acharya, A., & Johnston, A. I. (Eds.). (2007). Crafting
cooperation: Regional international institutions in
comparative perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Adler, E. (1997). Seizing the middle ground: Constructivism
in world politics. European Journal of International
Relations, 3(3), 319–363.
Adler, E. (2002). Constructivism and international relations.
In W. Carlnaes, T. Risse, & B. Simmons (Eds.),
Handbook of international relations (pp. 95–118).
London: SAGE Publication.
Adler, E. (2005). Communitarian international relations:
The epistemic foundations of international relations.
London: Routledge.
Adler, E., & Barnett, M. (1998). Security communities in
theoretical perspectives. In E. Adler & M. Barnett (Eds.),
Security communities (pp. 3–28). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Arakan Rohingya National Organization. (2015). Save
Rohingyas from the hands of the human traffickers and
greedy exploiters [Press release]. Retrieved from http://
www.rohingya.org/portal/index.php/arno/arno-pressrelease/1099-press-release-save-rohingyas-from-thehands-of-the-human-traffickers-and-greedy-exploiters.
html
ASEAN. (2002). Declaration on the conduct of parties
in the South China Sea. Retrieved from http://asean.
org/?static_post=declaration-on-the-conduct-of-partiesin-the-south-china-sea-2
ASEAN. (2008). ASEAN charter. Jakarta: ASEAN
Secretariat.
ASEAN. (2009). AICHR: What you need to know. Jakarta:
ASEAN Secretariat.
ASEAN. (2013). ASEAN Human Rights Declaration
(Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat).
ASEAN. (2016). Top ten ASEAN trade partner countries.
Retrieved from http://asean.org/storage/2016/06/
table20_as-of-30-Aug-2016-2.pdf
Axelrod, R., & Keohane, R. (1985). Achieving cooperation
under anarchy: Strategies and institutions. World
Politics, 38(1), 226–254.
Biver, E. (2014). Religious nationalism: Myanmar and
the role of Buddhism in anti-Muslim narratives
(Unpublished masteral thesis). Lund University,
Sweden.

63
Boon, R. (2015). Nationalism and the politization of
identity: The implications of Burmese nationalism for
the Rohingya (Unpublished undergraduate thesis).
Universiteit Leiden, Netherlands.
Bowen, J. (2015, May 15). Refugee crisis tests limits of
Southeast Asian cooperation. Global Observatory.
Retrieved from http://theglobalobservatory.org/2015/05/
asean-rohingya-refugees-myanmar/
Busse, N. (1999). Constructivism and Southeast Asian
security. The Pacific Review, 12(1), 39–60.
Checkel, J. T. (2005) International institutions and
socialization in Europe. International Organization,
59(4), 801–826.
Const. of the Republic of Indonesia (1945).
Davies, M. (2013). ASEAN and human rights norms:
Constructivism, rational choice, and the action-identity
gap. International Relations of the Asia Pacific, 13,
207–231.
Davies, M. (2015). The Rohingya and regional failure.
Retrieved from http://asiapacific.anu.edu.au/
newmandala/2015/05/16/the-rohingya-and-regionalfailure/
Dessler, D. (1999). Constructivism within a positivist
social science. Review of International Studies, 25(1),
123–137.
Dessler, D., & Owen, J. (2005). Constructivism and the
problem of explanation. Perspectives on Politics, 3(3),
597–610.
Deutsch, K. (2003). Political community and the North
Atlantic area. In B. Nelsen & A. Stubb (Eds.), The
European Union: Readings on the theory and practice
of European integration (3rd ed., pp. 121–143). Boulder,
CO: Lynn Rienner.
Dunne, T., & Hanson, M. (2012). Human rights in
international relations. In M. Goodhart (Ed.), Human
rights: Politics and practice (pp. 61-76). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Eaton, S., & Stubbs, R. (2006). Is ASEAN powerful?
Neo-realist versus constructivist approaches to power
in Southeast Asia. The Pacific Review, 19(2), 135–155.
Fearon, J. D. (1991). Counterfactuals and hypothesis testing
in political science. World Politics, 43(2), 169–195.
Garnett, J. (1985). Commonsense dan teori politik
internasional [Commonsense and the theory of
international politics] ( M. Marbun, Trans). Jakarta:
Pustaka Abardin.
George, A. (1994). The two cultures of academia and policymaking: Bridging the gap. Political Psychology, 15(1),
143–172.
Gindarsah, I. (2012). Indonesia’s democratic politics and
foreign policy-making: A case study of Iranian nuclear
issue, 2007-2008. RSIS Working Paper, No. 236.

64
Gomez, J., & Ramcharan, R. (2014). Democracy and human
rights in Southeast Asia. Journal of Current of Southeast
Asian Affairs, 33(3), 3–17.
Guzzini, S. (2000). A reconstruction of constructivism in
international relations. European Journal of International
Relations, 6(2), 147–182.
Guzzini, S., & Leander, A. (Eds.). (2006). Constructivism
and international relations: Alexander Wendt and its
critics. London: Routledge.
Jones, W. (2015). Myanmar’s Rohingya: Culture, violence,
and human rights abuses. Retrived from https://www.
westeastinstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/
William-J.-Jones.pdf
Katsumata, H. (2009). ASEAN and human rights: Resisting
Western pressure or emulating the West? The Pacific
Review, 22(5), 619–637.
Keohane, R. (1984). After hegemony: Cooperation and
discord in the world political economy. New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.
Keohane, R., & Martin, L. (1995). The promise of
institutionalist theory. International Security, 20(1),
39–51.
King, G., & Zeng, L. (2007). When can history be our guide?
The pitfalls of counterfactual inference. International
Studies Quarterly, 51(1), 183–210.
Kivimäki, T. (2012). Southeast Asia and conflict prevention:
Is ASEAN running out of steam? The Pacific Review,
25(4), 403–427.
Kundu, S. (2015). The Rohingyas: Security implications
for ASEAN and beyond. Retrieved from http://www.
idsa.in/issuebrief/TheRohingyas_skundu_280515
Lepgold, J., & Nincic, M. (2001). Beyond the ivory
tower: International relations theory and the issue
of policy relevance. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Long, A. (2008). Deterrence: From Cold War to long war.
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Mahnken, T. (2008). Bridging the gap between the world of
ideas and action. Orbis, 54(1), 4–13.
Matlii, W. (1999). The logic of regional integration:
Europe and beyond. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Morgenthau, H. (1946). Scientific man vs power politics.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Narine, S. (2006). The English School and ASEAN. The
Pacific Review, 19(2), 199–218.
Nye, J. (2008). Bridging the gap between theory and policy.
Political Psychology, 29(4), 593–603.
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
(n.d). Human rights context. Retrieved from http://
www.ohchr.org/EN/Countries/AsiaRegion/Pages/
SouthEastAsiaSummary0809.aspx

M. Rosyidin
Olson, M. (2002). The logic of collective action: Public
groups and the theory of groups. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Peou, S. (2002). Realism and constructivism in Southeast
Asian security studies: A review essay. The Pacific
Review, 15(1), 119–138.
Price, R. (2008). Moral limit and possibility in world politics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Price, R., & Reus-Smit, C. (1998). Dangerous liaison?
Critical international theory and constructivism.
European Journal of International Relations, 4(3),
259–294.
Pushpanathan, S. (2003). ASEAN efforts to combat
terrorism. Retrieved from http://www.asean.org/
resources/item/asean-efforts-to-combat-terrorismby-spushpanathan
Quayle, L. (2013). Southeast Asia and the English school of
international relations: A region-theory dialogue. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Reid, A. (2010). Imperial alchemy: Nationalism and
political identity in Southeast Asia. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rosyidin, M. (2014). ASEAN in(security) community?
Arms race and collective identity building in Southeast
Asia. Paper presented at the International Conference
on ASEAN Studies (ICONAS), Yogyakarta, 1-2
October.
Rosyidin, M. (2015). The power of ideas: Konstruktivisme
dalam Studi Hubungan Internasional. Yogyakarta: Tiara
Wacana.
Rosyidin, M. (2016). Etika Kebijakan Luar Negeri Indonesia
dalam Isu Rohingya [The ethics of Indonesia’s foreign
policy in the Rohingya issue]. Analisis CSIS, 44(2),
163–179.
Satria, N., & Jamaan, A. (2013). Islam dan Kebijakan Luar
Negeri Indonesia: Peran Indonesia dalam Konflik di
Rakhine, Myanmar [Islam and Indonesia’s foreign
policy: The role of Indonesia in the conflict in Rakhine,
Myanmar]. Jurnal Transnasional, 5(1), 945–964.
Shannon, V. (2005). Wendt’s violations of the constructivist
project: Agency and why a world state is not inevitable.
European Journal of International Relations 11(4),
581-587.
Sukma, R. (2012). ASEAN dan sengketa Laut China
Selatan [ASEAN and the South China Sea dispute].
Retrieved from http://internasional.kompas.com/
read/2012/04/11/02542066/ASEAN.dan.Sengketa.Laut.
China.Selatan
Tan, S. S. (2006). Rescuing constructivism from the
constructivists: A critical reading of constructivist
interventions in Southeast Asia. The Pacific Review,
19(2), 239–260.

Why Collective Identity Matters
Tetlock, P. E., & Belkin, A. (Eds.). (1996). Counterfactual
thought experiments in world politics: Logical,
methodological, and psychological perspectives. New
Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Vietnam Plus. (2015). Kuala Lumpur declaration on a
people-oriented, people-centered ASEAN. Retrieved
from http://en.vietnamplus.vn/kuala-lumpur-declarationon-peopleoriented-peoplecentred-asean/75186.vnp
Walt, S. (2005). The relationship between theory and policy
in international relations. Annual Review of Political
Science, 8, 23–48.

65
Wendt, A. (1992). Anarchy is what states make of it: The
social construction of power politics. International
Organization, 46(2), 391–425.
Wendt, A. (1994). Collective identity formation and the
international state. The American Political Science
Review, 88(2), 384–396.
Wendt, A. (1995). Constructing international politics.
International Security, 20(1), 71–81.
Wendt, A. (1999). Social theory of international politics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wendt, A. (2003). Why a world state is inevitable. European
Journal of International Relations 9(4), 491-542.

