Asian Regionalism
Author(s): Mark Beeson
Source: Pacific Affairs , September 2019, Vol. 92, No. 3 (September 2019), pp. 515-523
Published by: Pacific Affairs, University of British Columbia
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/48541729
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/48541729?seq=1&cid=pdfreference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Pacific Affairs, University of British Columbia is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve
and extend access to Pacific Affairs

This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Asian Regionalism:
Not so New, Not so Effective
Mark Beeson

Keywords: East Asia, regionalism, multilateral institutions, ASEAN, rise of
China
DOI: 10.5509/2019923515

W

hen Paul Bowles wrote his influential article on the “new
regionalism” in 1997, it looked like a thesis whose time had come.1
Bowles was writing not that long after the end of the Cold War,
when many of the supposedly immutable “structural” certainties and features
of the old order had disappeared and new patterns of international politics
seemed to be emerging. Even more tellingly, perhaps, political economy of
a sort to which Bowles has subsequently been a prominent contributor was
newly ascendant as both a scholarly endeavour and as the central goal of
policy makers the world over.2 As Bill Clinton memorably observed, it’s the
economy, stupid. Little wonder that the states of Southeast Asia and the more
expansive Asia-Pacific were exploring innovative ways of capitalizing on a
new era in which economic imperatives and opportunities were paramount.
Bowles’ article was one of the first to highlight this rapidly evolving policy
reality.
How times change, though. Prescient as Bowles’ analysis was, what is
striking in retrospect is the relatively limited impact of the new regionalism,
the shifting policy agendas of some of the region’s most important actors,
and the dramatic change in the fortunes of some of the Asia-Pacific’s great
powers in the intervening twenty years or so. These changes are
interconnected; revisiting them tells us much about the prospects for
regionalism in Asia and beyond. The most consequential of these changes,
which I explore in more detail below, is the rise of China and the relative
decline of Japan. In Bowles’ original article China barely merits a mention
____________________
Mark Beeson is professor of international politics at the University of Western Australia. Before
joining UWA, he taught at Murdoch, Griffith, Queensland, York (UK) and Birmingham, where he
was also head of department. He is the founding editor of Critical Studies of the Asia Pacific. His latest
book is Rethinking Global Governance (Palgrave, 2019). Email: mark.beeson@uwa.edu.au
1
Paul Bowles, “ASEAN, AFTA and the ‘New Regionalism,’” Pacific Affairs 70, no. 2 (1997):
219–244.
²
Andrew Gamble, “The New Political Economy,” Political Studies 43, no. 3 (1995): 516–530.

© Pacific Affairs: Volume 92, No. 3 September 2019
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

515

Pacific Affairs: Volume 92, No. 3 – September 2019
and is just part of a supporting cast of regional would-be industrializing
economies: Japan still seemed to be the lead goose driving the region’s overall
economic development.3 The other striking feature of regional development
then and now is just how much old-fashioned geopolitics has returned to
the forefront of regional relations. 4 Thinking about the causes and
implications of some of these changes helps to explain why some of the
expectations of the new regionalism remain unfulfilled.
Regional Political Economy
The primary focus of Bowles’ original article was economic, especially
development, integration, and trade. Given that the region’s remarkable
economic transformation was—and to a significant extent, still is—the
principal reason for so much scholarly interest in East Asia (as opposed to
the Asia-Pacific), a preoccupation with political economy was entirely
understandable and welcome. In some ways, it is surprising that there had
not been more examinations of the East Asian experience until then,
especially ones that took the links between politics and economics seriously.5
However, it is worth remembering that this article appeared before the idea
and, to a lesser extent, the reality of the “Asian miracle” was brought low by
the region’s very own financial crisis. Ironically it was mobile capital from
outside the region that was partly responsible for creating the preconditions
for the “Asian” crisis.6
Hindsight is a wonderful thing, of course, and looking back it is clear that
the general preoccupation with highly desirable foreign direct investment
(FDI) of a sort that is central to Bowles’ paper caused many analysts to
overlook the potential dangers as well as the opportunities of “globalization,”
or the general integration of complex economic forces and processes across
national borders. In this regard, Southeast Asia was both notionally poised
to take advantage of heightened economic integration in the 1990s, as well
as being especially exposed to the whims of the “international investment
____________________
3
Mitchell Bernard and John Ravenhill, “Beyond Product Cycles and Flying Geese:
Regionalization, Hierarchy, and the Industrialization of East Asia,” World Politics 47 (1995): 179–210;
Walter Hatch and Kozo Yamamura, Asia in Japan’s Embrace: Building a Regional Production Alliance
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
⁴
R.D. Kaplan, Asia’s Cauldron: The South China Sea and the End of a Stable Pacific (New York:
Random House, 2014).
⁵
Having said that, there were some seminal contributions, which alerted us to the region’s
distinctive political economy. See, for example, Chalmers Johnson, MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The
Growth of Industry Policy 1925−1975 (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1982); Alice H. Amsden,
Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989);
Robert Wade, Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Government in East Asian
Industrialization (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990).
⁶
Jeffrey A. Winters, “The Financial Crisis in Southeast Asia,” in Politics and Markets in the Wake
of the Asian Crisis, eds. Richard Robison et al. (London: Routledge, 2000): 34–52.

516
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Asia’s Ineffective Regionalism?
community.” The region’s economies learned painful and salutary lessons
about the dangers of relying on highly mobile finance capital and borrowing
in foreign currencies. Even relatively well-run economies could be undone
by shifts in the external economic environment over which they had limited
control.7 In retrospect it is also striking that not only have the economic
fortunes of the principal ASEAN states recovered,8 but that they are once
again major targets for foreign direct investment (FDI).9
Having said that, it is important to recognize that the Southeast Asian
region’s entire postcolonial development experience has been overlaid by
the search for security, be it strategic or economic. The very formation of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) was a reflection of this
reality, as the region’s newly independent, strategically vulnerable, and
economically marginal states banded together in the pursuit of security and
political presence.10 It is highly debatable whether much progress has been
made on either front in the intervening half century. To be sure ASEAN is
a much invoked and acknowledged part of the burgeoning literature on
comparative regionalism,11 but its principal claim to fame has arguably been
its longevity rather than its achievements. Other authors—including Richard
Stubbs—take a more positive view, and ASEAN’s relative status, performance,
and prospects remain surprisingly contentious as a result.12
To be sure, a number of analyses point to the fact that that FDI has, indeed,
continued to expand since the formation of the ASEAN Free Trade Area
(AFTA), and in this context ASEAN’s regional initiatives look to have
succeeded.13 No doubt such signalling devices have had some impact on the
investment decisions of the controllers of footloose capital, but the big
question is just how much. Much of the economic success that the Southeast
Asian economies have enjoyed has come from being in the right place at the
right time: their location adjacent to Northeast Asia—the most dynamic
economic region on the planet, as first Japan and latterly China took off—
meant they could hardly have been unaffected. The surprise, perhaps, is that
____________________
⁷
Robert Wade and Frank Veneroso, “The Asian Crisis: The High Debt Model Versus the Wall
Street-Treasury-IMF Complex,” New Left Review 228, Mar/Apr (1998): 3–23.
⁸ M. Beeson, “Southeast Asia’s post-crisis recovery: So far, so good,” in Unexpected Outcomes: How
Emerging Markets Survived the Global Financial Crisis, eds. C. Wise, L. Armijo, and S.N. Katada
(Washington: Brookings Press, 2015): 102–122.
⁹ S. Roughneen, “Southeast Asia bucks trend of sinking global foreign investment,” Nikkei Asian
Review, 4 February 2019.
10
Mark Beeson, “Southeast Asia and the Politics of Vulnerability,” Third World Quarterly 23, no.
3 (2002): 549–564.
11
See, for example, Tanja A. Borzel and Thomas Risse, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Comparative
Regionalism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).
12
In addition to Stubbs’ contribution to this collection, see R. Stubbs, “ASEAN sceptics versus
ASEAN proponents: evaluating regional institutions,” The Pacific Review (forthcoming): 1–28.
13
Mondher Cherif and Christian Dreger, “Do Regional Trade Agreements Stimulate FDI?
Evidence for the Agadir, Mercosur and AFTA Regions,” Review of Development Economics 22, no. 3
(2018): 1263–1277.

517
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Pacific Affairs: Volume 92, No. 3 – September 2019
they have not managed to do rather better than they have. It is striking that
the emergence of “Factory Asia” has come about largely as a consequence
of the investment decisions of multinational corporations, rather than the
far-sighted and influential collective actions of the Southeast Asian states.
Indeed, Southeast Asia’s economic development remains largely dependent
on and subordinate to the actions and preferences of its larger Northeast
Asian neighbours.14 Political economy matters in just the way Bowles argued,
but it is increasingly overlaid with geopolitical considerations that continue
to determine the course of development for the Southeast Asian laggards.
The consequences of such dependency were evident when it was Japan
rather than China that sat atop the region’s evolving production hierarchy,
a reality that explains its prominence in Bowles’ analysis. Now, however, China
has replaced Japan as both the world’s second largest economy and by far the
East Asian region’s most consequential economic and strategic actor.15 This is
a profoundly important difference from the picture Bowles painted in the
1990s, and he can be forgiven for not foreseeing quite how much China’s rise
would overturn the old order. Who did? It has become a cliché to highlight
the speed and scale of China’s rise, but it is remarkable and unpreceded
nevertheless. Equally importantly, China is not prepared to play the sort of
subordinate strategic role that Japan has done since the Second World War,16
something that explains the relative absence of geopolitical concerns in
Bowles’ original article. Now, by contrast, such considerations are inescapable
and especially consequential for Southeast Asia.
The Return of Geopolitics
The seemingly transformational impact of the Cold War’s abrupt and
unexpected ending may help to explain the attention given to economic
development in the 1990s, but it is surprising, nevertheless. After all, it can
be plausibly argued that the entire history of East Asia’s “miraculous”
development cannot be understood without taking the geopolitical
calculations and policies of the United States into account.17 In both Europe
and to a lesser extent Asia, the newly hegemonic United States attempted
to create a successful capitalist international order, from which states on the
right side of history could benefit. Ironically enough, American policies were
____________________
14
Richard Baldwin and Javier Lopez-Gonzalez, “Supply-Chain Trade: A Portrait of Global Patterns
and Several Testable Hypotheses,” The World Economy 38, no. 11 (2014): 1682–1721; Greg Felker, “The
Political Economy of Southeast Asia,” in Contemporary Southeast Asia: The Politics of Change, Contestation,
and Adaptation, eds. Mark Beeson and Alice Ba (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2018): 70–90.
15
Scott L. Kastner, “Buying Influence? Assessing the Political Effects of China’s International
Trade,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 60, no. 6 (2016): 980–1007.
16
Kenneth B. Pyle, Japan Rising: The Resurgence of Japanese Power and Purpose (New York: Public
Affairs, 2007).
17
Richard Stubbs, Rethinking Asia’s Economic Miracle (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2005).

518
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Asia’s Ineffective Regionalism?
all too successful as highly competitive economies were created in former
foes Germany and Japan. The paradoxical impact of American policy
continues to redound to this day, as a resurgent China benefits from the
open international order that the United States largely created. It is precisely
this reality and the perception that it is somehow unfair that is so central to
the current economic dispute between China and the US.18
Bowles was correct, and among the first, in arguing that what he called
the new regionalism was “intimately linked to the current phase of capitalism.”
This basic insight still holds true, although the current phase of “multiple
regionalism” reflects more than simple economic determinacy and
paramountcy. On the contrary, the proliferation of regional initiatives is
driven in part by a more encompassing view of the nature of foreign policy
and security. It is worth remembering that former US defence secretary Ash
Carter described the original Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) as being “as
important as another aircraft carrier.”19 Unsurprisingly, China has been keen
to promote the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP),
which excludes the US, in the aftermath of the Trump administration’s
withdrawal from the TPP. Whether the RCEP or the reconfigured
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
(CPTPP), which also excludes the US, can revitalize regional trade remains
to be seen, but China’s economic importance to East Asia in particular looks
to have been furthered at America’s expense.
Such an outcome may further destabilize the established international
order which seemed secure when Bowles wrote his original article. Although
many observers have rightly drawn attention to the more “comprehensive”
conceptualization of security among East Asian states,20 an historically
informed geopolitical perspective reminds us that the United States also took
a more broad-based view of such issues at the height of the Cold War. The
most consequential expression of regionalism—the European Union (EU)—
was, after all, first and foremost an expression of the desire to shore up regional
economies and strategic allies in the face of the very credible threat and
developmental alternative posed by the Soviet Union and its allies.21
China may not have been an especially important part of this geopolitical
jigsaw at that particular moment in history, but it is now. The current plethora
of frequently competing regional initiatives in the broadly conceived Asia____________________
18
James Anderlini, “Donald Trump Is Right: China Must Play by the Rules,” Financial Times, 25
April 2018.
19
P. Parameswaran, “TPP as Important as Another Aircraft Carrier: US Defense Secretary,” The
Diplomat, 8 April 2015.
20
Muthiah Alagappa, “Asian Practice of Security: Key Features and Explanations,” in Asian
Security Practice: Material and Ideational Influences, ed. M. Alagappa (Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1998), 611–676; Mark Beeson, “Security in Asia What’s Different, What’s Not?” Journal of Asian Security
and International Affairs 1, no. 1 (2014): 1–23.
21
Victor D. Cha, Powerplay: The Origins of the American Alliance System (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2016).

519
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Pacific Affairs: Volume 92, No. 3 – September 2019
Pacific region is a reflection of the very different policy agendas and ambitions
states have about what the membership and extent of regional institutions
should be. In this context, it is noteworthy that the more narrowly conceived,
and thus potentially more effective, Southeast Asian initiatives such as AFTA
and ASEAN have been no guarantee of effectiveness or success. On the
contrary, it is possible to argue that not only have Southeast Asian sponsored
initiatives all been disappointing, but so have the wider regional initiatives
that followed in their wake: all subsequent regional initiatives have felt
compelled to emulate the so-called “ASEAN Way” of regional diplomacy to
keep the sensitive Southeast Asians onside.22 Again, Bowles was entirely
correct to highlight the importance of “ASEAN centrality” in this regard,
but he may have under-estimated its potentially debilitating consequences.
Two issues illustrate the unhelpful consequences of the ASEAN Way. First,
as noted, other institutions such as the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) organization and—more consequentially, perhaps—the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) have all succumbed to the politics of the lowest
common denominator: the need for achieving face-saving consensus and
the aversion to binding commitments, means that no regional organization
in East Asia has been able to achieve much of substance. A number of them,
such as APEC, have laboured under the additional burden of unresolved
identity crises: their all-encompassing memberships and uncertain rationales
and goals have added to an underlying existential uncertainty that has
undermined their always modest prospects for success. Given the existence
of a number of competing regional and global trade bodies (not least the
World Trade Organization), this is no great loss, perhaps—except for the
waste of limited diplomatic resources in an overburdened Southeast Asian
region. In the ARF’s case, however, organizational shortcomings are
potentially tragic: it is the only body of its sort with the notional capacity to
address nearly all of the region’s growing list of security problems.23
This second failing of the ASEAN model is nowhere more visible than
within the grouping itself, which has spectacularly failed to come to terms
with the rise of China as a strategic actor. In this case Bowles may have been
right to suggest that the new regionalism was connected to the development
of global capitalism, but not quite in the way he envisaged. Even twenty-odd
years ago, few people foresaw quite what an impact “communist” China
would have on the global capitalist economy, of course. But it is precisely
the ability of China’s policy elite to navigate a successful course of integration
into the global economy that has transformed both an increasingly
____________________
22
Mark Beeson, “East Asia’s Institutional Inadequacies and Great Power Rivalry in the South
China Sea,” in Us-China Competition and the South China Sea Disputes, eds. Huiyun Feng and Kai He
(London: Routledge, 2018), 134–150.
23
David Martin Jones, Michael Lawrence Rowan Smith, and Nicholas Khoo, Asian Security and
the Rise of China: International Relations in an Age of Volatility (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing,
2013).

520
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Asia’s Ineffective Regionalism?
interconnected regional economy and the PRC’s place within it. The
economic prospects of all of the region’s economies, including Japan, are
dependent on China to greater or lesser degrees, which gives the People’s
Republic a great deal of geoeconomic influence over its neighbours, which
it has skilfully exploited in Southeast Asia in particular.24
The New Regional Order
It is not just China’s surprising economic importance, however, that
distinguishes this era from the one Bowles described when Japan was still
the dominant influence. Unlike Japan, China is not inhibited by its strategic
relationship with the United States. On the contrary, the intensifying
geopolitical rivalry between the US and China is having a major impact on
intra-regional relations and the very construction of regional identities
themselves. One of the reasons that multiple regionalism has become such
a distinctive feature of the “Asian region” is because the extent of, and
membership in, the region itself remains in doubt. China’s support for the
ASEAN Plus Three grouping, which also includes South Korea and Japan,
emanates from its potential to become a vehicle for the export of Chinese
policy preferences25—or it did, at least. Recently, competing initiatives such
as the East Asia Summit, which includes extra-regional powers such as the
US and India, provides a form of balancing against possible Chinese
domination.26
Unsurprisingly, none of these rival regional institutions has actually
amounted to much as a result, 27 which helps to explain the proliferation of
bilateral, and minilateral trade agreements across the region—however it is
defined.28 Significantly, China has been at the forefront of such initiatives,
striking deals with the ASEAN grouping and more recently championing
the RCEP, an ambitious, broadly based vision that notably includes American
allies such as Australia and Japan, but not the United States itself.29 Whatever
ambivalence the likes of Australia and Japan may feel about their principal
____________________
24

Aaron L. Friedberg, “Globalisation and Chinese Grand Strategy,” Survival 60, no. 1 (2018):

7–40.
25
Terada Terada, “ASEAN Plus Three: Becoming More Like a Normal Regionalism?” in The
Routledge Handbook of Asian Regionalism, eds. Mark Beeson and Richard Stubbs (London: Routledge,
2012), 364–375.
26
Mark Beeson and Fujian Li, China’s Regional Relations: Evolving Foreign Policy Dynamics (Boulder:
Lynne Rienner, 2014).
27
David M. Jones and Michael L.R. Smith, “Making Process, Not Progress: ASEAN and the
Evolving East Asian Regional Order,” International Security 32, no. 1 (2007): 148–184; John Ravenhill,
“East Asian Regionalism: Much Ado About Nothing?” Review of International Studies 35, no. S1 (2009):
215–235.
28
Mireya Solís and Jeffrey D. Wilson, “From APEC to Mega-regionals: The Evolution of the
Asia-Pacific Trade Architecture,” Pacific Review 30, no. 6 (2017): 923–937.
29
Jeffrey D. Wilson, “Mega-Regional Trade Deals in the Asia-Pacific: Choosing between the TPP
and RCEP?” Journal of Contemporary Asia 45, no. 2 (2015): 345–353.

521
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Pacific Affairs: Volume 92, No. 3 – September 2019
strategic partner’s absence in such groupings, it has clearly been subordinated
to the recognition that China’s economic importance compels a degree of
compliance with its wishes. The efficacy of the PRC’s growing geoeconomic
leverage could have no clearer demonstration.30 China’s skilful policy of
divide and rule has effectively bought the support, if not fealty, of the likes
of Cambodia and Laos, and effectively nullified Southeast Asian opposition
to its expansive territorial ambitions in the process.31
This is not to say that there has not been growing pushback against Chinese
ambitions, even amongst the Southeast Asian states. In the aftermath of
unexpected domestic regime change, Malaysia is proving surprisingly
resistant to Chinese influence32—or it did for a while, at least.33 More
predictably and consequentially, the United States and a number of its allies
are attempting to create a new strategic order in response to the China
challenge. In yet another possible variant of regional identity and logic—from
which the compromised, strategically insignificant Southeast Asians are
notably excluded—the unpredictable administration led by Donald Trump
appears to have settled on the “Indo-Pacific” as its preferred way of thinking
about complex geopolitical realities and relationships to its west. In this
vision, the so-called quad states of the US, Australia, Japan, and—the others
hope—India will provide a strategic bulwark against the rise of China as the
region’s principal indigenous security actor.34
Whatever one may think about the possible efficacy of the emerging
security architecture in a region that still resists easy definition, it is striking
that old-fashioned strategic concerns remain so central. This would be
noteworthy under any circumstances, but it is especially galling for the
Southeast Asians: not only are they unable to focus collectively and fully on
economic issues, but their claim to have been central to maintaining the
“long peace of Asia” looks rather implausible, too.35 In reality, the ASEAN
states have been and remain hostage to the actions and preferences of the
great powers: if China and the US decide to have a trade war, or even a war
of the more traditional, military variety, there is precious little the ASEAN
states, or anyone else for that matter, can do about it.
____________________
30
William J. Norris, Chinese Economic Statecraft: Commercial Actors, Grand Strategy, and State Control
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2016).
31
Mark Beeson, “Can ASEAN Cope with China?” Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs 35,
no. 1 (2015): 5–28.
32
Hannah Beech, “‘We Cannot Afford This’: Malaysia Pushes Back on China’s Big Projects,”
New York Times, 20 August 2018.
33
Malaysia’s wily leader, Mahathir Mohamad, seems to be exploiting the region’s rapidly evolving
geopolitical context to win a better deal from China, but one which will further entrench the PRC’s
influence. See S. Nambiar, “What next for Mahathir’s pivot to China?” Nikkei Asian Review, 6 June
2019.
34
Troy Lee-Brown, “Asia’s Security Triangles: Maritime Minilateralism in the Indo-Pacific,” East
Asia 35, no. 2 (2018): 163–176.
35
See Timo Kivimäki, The Long Peace of East Asia (Farnham: Ashgate, 2014).

522
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Asia’s Ineffective Regionalism?
Concluding Remarks
One of the most surprising conclusions that emerges from a retrospective
view of the new regionalism, therefore, is just how much it looks like some
of the older iterations. Economic development and the creation of a
facilitating institutional architecture to encourage it certainly remain
priorities, but they continue to occur within a challenging geopolitical
context. Expectations about the primacy of economic issues and the relative
decline of strategic questions have not proved accurate. On the contrary, it
is equally striking how many of the region’s security problems remain
unresolved, or have actually intensified. Whether it is the Korean Peninsula,
the fate of Taiwan, or China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea, there
is much to be concerned about.36 When we add the most erratic, unpredictable
and unreliable American administration in recent history into the mix, the
idea that we can consider economic regionalism in relative isolation from
larger geopolitical questions looks rather fanciful.
None of this is meant as a criticism of Bowles’ original article, which stands
up remarkably well given some of the unprecedented and essentially
unforeseeable changes that have swept the region and the world over recent
years. The big question now, though, is whether any form of regionalism can
have a salutary impact on economic issues, let alone geopolitical ones, when
the very foundations of the old order appear to be eroding before our eyes.
This is especially the case given the problems that currently afflict the EU
and its consequent potential as a role model.37 Bowles can’t really be blamed
for failing to foresee the relative decline of American power or the
unprecedentedly rapid re-emergence of China; not many did. No matter
how we choose to define the region, though, it is plain that we will all have
to reckon with a wider array of political, economic, and strategic dynamics
than we did in the 1990s if we want to try and make sense of an inherently
unpredictable international order.
University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia, June 2019

____________________
36
Robert D. Kaplan, Asia’s Cauldron: The South China Sea and the End of a Stable Pacific (New York:
Random House, 2014).
37
Mark Beeson and Diane Stone, “The European Union Model’s Influence in Asia after the
Global Financial Crisis,” European Journal of East Asian Studies 12 (2013): 167–190.

523
This content downloaded from
146.110.152.11 on Wed, 03 Sep 2025 13:20:37 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

