Special Issue

Special Issue

Religion, Culture and Governance

Intellectual Discourse
Volume 27

Special Issue

Editor

2019

Associate Editors

Ishtiaq Hossain (Malaysia)

Anke Iman Bouzenita (Oman)
Khairil Izamin Ahmad (Malaysia)
Saodah Wok (Malaysia)

Guest Editor

M. Moniruzzaman

Book Review Editor

Mohd. Helmi Bin Mohd Sobri

Editorial Board
Abdul Kabir Hussain Solihu (Nigeria)
Badri Najib Zubir (Malaysia)
Daniel J. Christie (USA)
Habibul H. Khondker (UAE)
Hazizan Md. Noon (Malaysia)
Hussain Mutalib (Singapore)
Ibrahim M. Zein (Qatar)
James D. Frankel (China)
Kenneth Christie (Canada)
Nor Faridah Abdul Manaf (Malaysia)
Rahmah Bt Ahmad H. Osman
(Malaysia)
Serdar Demirel (Turkey)

Syed Farid Alatas (Singapore)
Thameem Ushama (Malaysia)
International Advisory Board
Anis Malik Thoha (Indonesia)
Chandra Muzaffar (Malaysia)
Fahimul Quadir (Canada)
Habib Zafarullah (Australia)
John O. Voll (USA)
Muhammad al-Ghazali (Pakistan)
Muhammad K. Khalifa (Qatar)
Redzuan Othman (Malaysia)
Founding Editor
Zafar Afaq Ansari (USA)

Intellectual Discourse is a highly respected, academic refereed journal of the
International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM). It is published twice a year by
the IIUM Press, IIUM, and contains reflections, articles, research notes and review
articles representing the disciplines, methods and viewpoints of the Muslim world.
Intellectual Discourse is abstracted in SCOPUS, ProQuest, International Political
Science Abstracts, Peace Research Abstracts Journal, Muslim World Book Review,
Bibliography of Asian Studies, Index Islamicus, Religious and Theological
Abstracts, ATLA Religion Database, MyCite, ISC and EBSCO.
ISSN 0128-4878 (Print); ISSN 2289-5639 (Online)
http://journals.iium.edu.my/intdiscourse/index.php/islam
Email: intdiscourse@iium.edu.my; intdiscourse@yahoo.com
Published by:
IIUM Press, International Islamic University Malaysia
P.O. Box 10, 50728 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Phone (+603) 6196-5014, Fax: (+603) 6196-6298
Website:http://iiumpress.iium.edu.my/bookshop

Intellectual Discourse
Vol. 27, Special Issue, 2019
Theme
Religion, Culture and Governance
Guest Editor
M. Moniruzzaman

CONTENTS
Note from the Guest Editor
M. Moniruzzaman

689

Research Articles
Demystifying the Contractual Duty of Care
of Islamic Banks in Malaysia
Noor Mahinar Binti Abu Bakar and
Norhashimah Binti Mohd Yasin

695

Good Governance in Malaysia: Assessing public
perceptions on the implementation of National
Transformation Policy, 2011-2016
Norhaslinda Jamaiudin

719

Religion, Society and Gendered-Politics in
Central Asia: A comparative analysis
M. Moniruzzaman and Kazi Fahmida Farzana

745

Halal Food Industry in Southeast Asia’s Muslim
Majority Countries: A reference for non-Muslim countries
Sigid Widyantoro, Rafika Arsyad and Mochammad Fathoni

767

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in Diplomatic Neutrality
Kazi Fahmida Farzana and Md. Zahurul Haq

783

Policy and Strategies for Quality Improvement:
A study on Chittagong City Corporation, Bangladesh
SM Abdul Quddus and Nisar Uddin Ahmed

799

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, (2019) 783–798
Copyright © IIUM Press
ISSN 0128-4878 (Print); ISSN 2289-5639 (Online)

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in
Diplomatic Neutrality
Kazi Fahmida Farzana*
Md. Zahurul Haq**
Abstract: In practical terms, the word “neutrality” means a policy of avoiding
interactions with nations that are engaged in armed conflict, or of trying to
cure war while avoiding their contamination. In Malaysia, politicians and
government officials often use expressions such as that Malaysia will continue
its stance of neutrality, or that it wants to remain neutral and friendly to
everyone. This study critically examines Malaysia’s stance on diplomatic
neutrality, with particular focus on its past and present. It argues that neutrality
is used as a political concept to avoid conflict with major powers. Malaysia will
remain effectively neutral so long as there is no major outbreak of any war in
the region. It exercises its rights through endurance and avoidance.
Keywords: Malaysia, Sovereignty, Diplomatic neutrality, China, ASEAN.
Abstrak: Secara praktikal, perkataan “berkecuali” bermaksud satu dasar untuk
mengelakkan berinteraksi dengan negara-negara yang terlibat dalam konflik
bersenjata, atau cuba mendamaikan peperangan di samping mengelakkan
kekusutan antara mereka. Di Malaysia, ahli-ahli politik dan pegawai-pegawai
kerajaan sering menggunakan ungkapa seperti Malaysia akan meneruskan
pendirian berkecuali, atau bahawa ia mahu untuk kekal berkecuali dan bersikap
mesra kepada semua orang. Kajian ini secara kritikal meneliti pendirian
Malaysia terhadap sikap berkecuali secara diplomatik, dengan tumpuan khusus
kepada masa lalu dan akan datang. Ia menjelaskan bahawa prinsip berkecuali

Kazi Fahmida Farzana, Visiting Senior Lecturer, Department of International
Affairs and Research Fellow at the Asian Institute of International Affairs and
Diplomacy in University Utara Malaysia. Email: fahmida@uum.edu.my.
**
Visiting Faculty Member, School of Law and Head of International Law
Research Unit, University Utara Malaysia. Email: md.zahurul@uum.edu.my.
*

784

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

adalah digunakan sebagai konsep politik untuk mengelak konflik dengan
kuasa-kuasa besar. Malaysia akan kekal berkecuali secara berkesan selagi tidak
meletusnya sebarang peperangan yang besar di rantau ini. Ia melaksanakan
haknya melalui ketahanan dan penghindaran.
Kata Kunci: Malaysia, Kedaulatan, Berkecuali secara diplomatik, China,
ASEAN.

Introduction
Neutrality could be a permanent status independent of any armed
conflict (Kolb & Hyde, 2008). This status may arise from a treaty, as in
the case of Switzerland; could originate from a unilateral act; or possibly
in executing an operative international agreement, as was the situation
in Turkmenistan, Costa Rica and Malta (Ronzitti, 2011). Permanent
neutrality requires that the state carry out duties which applied prior to
the armed conflict. For example, a state that is permanently neutral is
obliged not to participate in any armed conflict when it breaks out. Also,
it must not undertake any military obligations and must abstain from
acts which could make its neutrality obligations impossible in the event
of an armed conflict, such as if it were to join a military alliance (Bothe,
2013). However, the general law of neutrality applies strictly only in
international matters. In general, in non-international armed conflicts,
third states may not intervene on behalf of any of the insurgents, based
on the principle against intervening in the internal affairs of other states.
The word “neutrality” can also apply so as to avoid the contagion
of the pre-war madness. It can reasonably mean “the relation of nonparticipants toward hostilities, which they view as permissible trials
of right or clashes of policy between equals” (Wright, 1930, p. 85).
The policy to avoid ensnaring economic and similar interactions with
belligerents, or to try to cure angry combatants while avoiding their
contagion, is frequently termed neutrality, or “neo-neutrality” (Cohn,
1939, p. 62). In reality, such dogmas ought to be called war avoidance
policies (Wilson, 1940).
In international relations, Malaysia as a state strives to maintain a
‘neutral’ position in its cooperation with other nations. This is attested by
repeated claims from politicians and government officials that Malaysia’s

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in DIPLOMATIC Neutrality

785

intention is to remain neutral—and friendly—to all countries, with
neutrality being a political shield, indicating that it does not take sides.
Thus, the question arises as to how Malaysia can be effectively neutral
in the absence of an outbreak of war. Legally, Malaysia is not bound by
any international treaty or agreement to maintain a permanently neutral
status. Muhammad Muda, a former Malaysian diplomat and currently
director of Institute of Asian Studies and Diplomacy at Universiti Utara
Malaysia, noted that:
Neutrality has legal implications; it requires a country to
sign treaties and abide by the rule, whereas Malaysia adopts
a policy of non-alignment, which allows flexibility; on the
one hand, you may express your right by taking sides for
a particular purpose to suit the circumstances. On the other
hand, you may not side with anybody, nor give preference to
any particular country, because the consequence would be
greater. Diplomatically, we are friendly to all.1

This study examines what diplomatic neutrality means for Malaysia,
with particular focus on its past and present. It argues that neutrality
is used as a political concept to avoid conflict with major powers.
Malaysia will remain effectively neutral, so long as there is no major
outbreak of war in the region. It exercises its rights through endurance
and avoidance.
Historical Background
Except during the immediate post-independence period between
1957 and 1969, when Malaysia signed the Anglo-Malayan Defence
Agreement (AMDA) with the United Kingdom, and Five Power
Defence Arrangements (FPDA) with Britain, Australia, New Zealand
and Singapore (Saravanamuttu, 2011) and adopted a pro-West and an
anti-communist foreign policy, Malaysia’s approach has always been
to maintain political neutrality and avoid conflicts with all external
powers. This is not surprising, given the country’s colonial experiences
and its abandonment by the United Kingdom at a time when the region
Muhammad Muda served in the diplomatic service for 28 years, representing
Malaysia in Russia, South Korea, and several African countries. He is currently
teaching in the Department of International Affairs at Universiti Utara Malaysia in Malaysia. The points and quotations in this paper are from an interview
the author conducted with Mr. Muhammad on June 10, 2018.
1

786

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

was rife with Cold War conflicts (Shuib, Keling, & Ajis, 2009). In
the mid-1960s, under its first Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman,
Malaysia gradually began to tilt towards a neutral foreign policy when it
established diplomatic relations with communist countries in the Soviet
bloc2 based largely on the aim of strengthening trade ties (Mitsuomi,
2015; Saravanamuttu, 2010). Since then, Malaysian leaders have taken
numerous initiatives to achieve regional stability. In 1967, it helped
found the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) so that
the region could chart its own course. In 1970, Malaysia joined the
Non-alignment Movement (NAM), expressing its solidarity to ensure
sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of non-aligned countries
in their “struggle against imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism,
racism, and all forms of foreign aggression, occupation, domination,
interference or hegemony as well as against great power and bloc
politics” (Fidel Castro’s speech, 1979) (The Havana Declaration,
1979). A year later, in 1971, Malaysia signed a declaration “Zone of
Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN)” with the Foreign Ministers
of ASEAN member states in Kuala Lumpur, indicating its wish to
ensure that the Southeast Asian region becomes “a zone of peace and
neutrality” amidst rivalry among larger powers. Thus, Malaysia’s
‘neutrality’ can best be interpreted as continuation of a political, as well
as diplomatic, neutrality as this was the most suited option for many
third world countries during the Cold War when they found themselves
on the frontlines between the United States and Soviet allies (Wyss,
Hanhimaki, Bott, & Schaufelbuehl, 2016).
This approach of ‘collaboration and cooperation’ to achieve
regional stability was again reflected in ASEAN’s Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia in 1976, though there have been
limitations. Felix Chang argued that ASEAN countries restrained
“themselves from using either political coercion or military force. The
way they ultimately chose to do so was to adopt a very strict form of
national sovereignty that brooked no interference in the internal affairs
of other countries” (Chang, 2014). This may also explain why, when
ASEAN, as a community, chose to remain neutral in regards to genocide
in Cambodia in the 1970s and, more recently, in Myanmar against the
This included communist countries Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, Romania
and Bulgaria, which was a bold attempt indicating a political shift from a proWestern (meaning pro-British) policy, to a neutral foreign policy.
2

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in DIPLOMATIC Neutrality

787

Rohingya Muslim minority. One may also question the effectiveness of
ZOPFAN, given that it is just a declaration, which generally does not
create binding legal obligation, but only indicates certain aspirations;
and, secondly, for ZOPFAN to survive, ASEAN states must have the
support of the “big powers.” Ideally, there must be in effect an agreement
with the big powers to respect national sovereignty; that they subscribe
to it, and will not venture into the area. This may be highly unlikely,
given that neither China, Japan nor the United States of America
subscribe to ZOPFAN. So, political neutrality later became subject to
tacit alignment with the ‘big powers,’ at least partially, signifying limits
in the roles of big power, and the capability of small or middle powers.
Neutrality under International Law
In international law, ‘neutrality’ means the legal status of a country
which does not partake in a war waged by other countries, in that the
country in question neither supports nor opposes any of the sovereign
countries involved in the armed conflict and, in the case of civil war, the
rebels, who had been recognized as belligerents. The existence of a war
is, therefore, a precondition here. This means that under both customary
and treaty-based international law, a neutral country maintains the right
not to be adversely affected by the conflicts; in the same way, they are
also obliged to ensure non-participation if they wish to maintain their
position of neutrality. However, in general, states have no obligation
to remain neutral under international law, and any non-participating
state is always entitled to use their right of self-defence against direct
intervention (Bindschedler, 1982s).
The major sources of international law of neutrality are the Paris
Declaration Respecting Maritime Law 1856, which allow for the
capture of enemy ships and cargo as a prize of war and to regulate
the relationship between belligerent and neutral vessels; the 1907
Hague Convention No. V Respecting the Rights and Duties of Neutral
Powers and Persons in Case of War on Land, which laid down more
clearly the rights and duties of neutral powers in case of war on land,
and regulating the position of the belligerents who have taken refuge
in neutral territory; the 1907 Hague Convention No. XIII concerning
the Rights and Duties of Neutral Powers in Naval War; the four 1949
Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocol I of 1977; this body of

788

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

international law contains provisions regarding neutrality and regulates
the conduct of armed conflict and seeks to limit its effects.
Law of neutrality in armed conflict (initially for sea warfare)
began to develop in the late Middle Ages, although such provisions
were unable to prevent interference in neutral shipping in many cases.
Gradually, those provisions grew into customary law on neutrality
and became solidified under the 1856 declaration. Later, neutrality
was viewed as a symbol of peace, as this would assist in keeping war
within its locality by preventing its spread on several fronts involving
third countries. This also helped strengthen the concept of ‘respect for
territorial integrity’ and ‘sovereignty’ of neutral state. However, there
were as yet no restrictions on waging war by any state; this became
possible only when the League of Nations was founded and the concept
of ‘collective security’ was introduced under Article 16 of its Covenant
(Bindschedler, 1982, pp 10-11).
Legal provisions contained in Article 16 of the Covenant of
the League of Nations, along with Article 2 (5) of the UN Charter
post-World War II, were actually parts of the movement toward the
prohibition of war on the international plane, as both refer to ending
international disputes without resorting to violence. This may further be
noted here that the Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928 sponsored by the USA
and France (and signed subsequently by most other European powers)
also sought to place limitations upon the traditional liberty of states to
wage war (Tucker, 2006). However, what is important to note here is the
concept of ‘collective security’ contained in the core of these treaties.
These provisions limited the status of neutrality of state to some extent,
by modifying the existing international legal provisions on neutrality,
as mentioned earlier. Virtually, either they counterbalanced the choices
of neutrality of a state, or proposed a new dimension in the idea of
neutrality in international relations.
The purpose of Article 16 was to indicate military and economic
measures as part of ‘collective security’ against a covenant-breaking
state, in that such a state had failed to exhaust the mechanisms laid down
under Articles 12, 13 and 15 of the Covenant for peaceful settlement of
dispute before resorting to war. Similar provisions were also found in
Article 2(5) of the UN Charter:

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in DIPLOMATIC Neutrality

789

[a]ll Members shall give the United Nations every assistance
in any action it takes in accordance with the present Charter,
and shall refrain from giving assistance to any state against
which the United Nations is taking preventive or enforcement
action.

The adoption of this provision perhaps, as many scholars believe,
‘superseded neutrality by imposing the framework of collective security’
(Lanovoy, 2016, p. 30), and as we just observed, Article 2 (5) actually
obliges members to provide direct assistance to the UN-led action
initiated under Chapter VII of the Charter and also to abstain from
rendering any support to the country against which such preventive or
enforcement action is being planned or taken. This provision, therefore,
indicates the binding UN Security Council resolutions (not mere
declarations or recommendations) passed under Chapter VII of the
Charter, which members must comply with, by opting to remain neutral
in case of UN-led military action against a jurisdiction.
Do all these mean that no states are eventually allowed to hold
its neutral position in international relations? During the Iraq-Kuwait
conflict of 1990, the UNSC adopted resolutions 666 and 669, among
others, reaffirming international sanctions on Iraq; however, India,
Pakistan and the Philippines were allowed to provide humanitarian
assistance to their citizens. Earlier, in 1966, when UNSC resolution 232
was adopted, imposing some mandatory economic sanction on Rhodesia
(formerly Zimbabwe), Zambia was exempted from implementing
this resolution (Lanovoy, 2016) on grounds that the UN Resolutions
‘involved great economic cost to Zambia since Rhodesia was the
country’s biggest lowest-cost supplier’ (Libby, 2014, p. 230). Because of
special economic considerations, a state may be excused from carrying
out a specific obligation in this regard, as laid down under Article 50
of the UN Charter, although such state’s obligation not to provide any
support to belligerent still remains (Lanovoy, 2016). Besides, the UN
Security Council, as mentioned in Article 48 (1), may call upon only
some countries under special agreement (Article 43) between UNSC
and the country concerned to carry out any decision in regards to taking
military action against a state. However, the question still remains as to
whether a state can assume a permanent neutral position in international
relations.

790

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

When a state accepts a legally binding obligation under international
law to remain permanently neutral and other states also recognize this
obligation, then the state is considered a ‘permanently neutral’ state,
regarded as a special international status. According to the Swiss
interpretation, there are three principal obligations of a permanently
neutral state “in time of peace: to abstain from starting a war, to defend
its neutrality, and to avoid policies and actions that might on some
future occasion involve it in hostilities’ (Black & Falk, 2015, pp. 2223). Unless such permanently neutral state becomes the victim of any
act of aggression, they cannot abandon their permanently neutral status
on short notice without consulting the powers recognized its neutrality.
Then again, a non-signatory of any such legal instrument may also be
considered ‘permanently neutral’ based on a state’s unilateral act or
long practice of neutrality recognized by others, for example, neutrality
of Sweden, Ireland and Finland (Bindschedler, 1982). The most
commonly cited example of permanent neutrality is Switzerland, which
is a combination of both unilateral declaration and a guarantee provided
by five great powers in 1815 (Black & Falk, 2015).
Post-Cold-war period and Malaysian Neutrality in 21st Century
For Malaysian leaders, the best way for their country and other countries
in the region to achieve regional stability is by avoiding conflicts,
and creating an international environment in which all countries are
interested in good relations with one another. This was echoed, for
instance, when the International Court of Justice (ICJ) rendered its
judgment on May 23, 2008 in regards to a disputed island between
Malaysia and Singapore. Malaysia, as a law abiding and responsible
member of the international community, followed the international rule
of peace and stability and ended the Pedra Branca/Pulau Batu Putih
dispute with Singapore. This indicates the extent to which Malaysia is
prepared to go to achieve solutions with its neighbors over land and
maritime boundaries.
Following this, Malaysia continues to pursue its bilateral relations,
maintaining neutrality with others, such as the Middle-Eastern countries.
During the Qatar Gulf Crisis (during which the Arab nations suspended
political, economic and diplomatic ties with Qatar over an accusation
of support for extremist groups), Malaysia emphasized its ‘policy of
neutrality’ by not taking sides with any party, choosing instead to take a

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in DIPLOMATIC Neutrality

791

constructive role by maintaining constant contact with all of the countries
involved, and communicating with their counterparts across the Muslim
world, an action which Wisma Putra (the Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
defined as “active neutrality” (Ram, 2017). However, it supported and
respected the decision reached by the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC),
mediated by the Emir of Kuwait, to resolve their difficulties within their
regional framework.
Though some Arab nations maintained economic sanctions on Qatar,
Malaysia bucked the trend by continuing to maintain its generally good
bilateral relations with Qatar and other GCC countries. In another recent
event (June 2018), Malaysia manifested its wish to preserve its ambit of
neutrality when it decided to withdraw its soldiers from Saudi Arabia,
where troops were on standby to evacuate Malaysians in Yeman. The
Defence Minister Mohamad Sabu expressed clearly: “We (Malaysians)
do not want to be drawn into any conflict in the Middle East. We want
to make friends with all nations …” (The Star, June 29, 2018, p. 11).
Subsequently, he also added that “the Malaysian government will only
heed requests from United Nations (UN) for peacekeepers and security
forces, and will not aid any nation in its war with another country”
(Malay Mail, April 20, 2019). These examples iterate that Malaysia has
long advocated and adopted good relations with other countries beyond
Asia.
Nevertheless, there may be limits to staying neutral; in 2016,
for instance, Malaysia broke its traditional neutrality stance within
the ASEAN framework and voiced out strongly against Myanmar’s
genocide towards the Rohingya ethnic minority (Ng, 2016). Malaysia’s
position on this particular issue places ASEAN in a diplomatic debacle,
since ASEAN leaders could not come up with a joint statement, and yet,
the organization remained a silent bystander in the face of genocide.
On a more practical note, Malaysia could not be expected to remain
silent, as Myanmar’s refugee population continues to increase, many of
whom Malaysia is hosting,3 which has led to heighted concern within
Malaysia is currently hosting 175,760 refugees and asylum seekers (as of June
30, 2019), majority of whom are from Myanmar, with others from Syria, Yemen, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Iraq, Afghanistan and Palestine. Among Myanmar
refugees, Rohingya comprise 95,110 registered with the UNHCR, while another estimated 30,000-40,000 remain undocumented.

3

792

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

over national security. In this case, Malaysia’s diplomatic neutrality
has fluctuated between universal standards of values and rights, and
economic interests. ASEAN as a group maintained its neutrality, but for
Malaysia, that neutrality has meant a balancing act between humanity
and national security.
Similarly, on another occasion, Malaysia could not remain neutral
in the face of a diplomatic rupture with North Korea over Kim Jongnam’s assassination at Kuala Lumpur airport on February 13, 2017. The
fallout between the two countries came about when Malaysia wanted to
launch an investigation on the killing by carrying out an autopsy, while
North Korea merely wanted the body to be returned. Later, Malaysia
rejected North Korea’s suggestion for a joint investigation. The dispute
further escalated when the North Korean ambassador to Malaysia,
Kang Chol, accused Malaysia of acting with “hostile forces” to bring
harm to Pyongyang (Izzuddin, 2017). Afterwards, Kang was expelled
and declared persona non grata, as his action disregarded diplomatic
norms and he disrespected Malaysia’s sovereignty by failing to show
up when summoned by Wisma Putra (New Vision, 2017). Before his
expulsion, Malaysia also recalled its diplomat to North Korea for fear
of his safety. These moves were necessary, as North Korea prevented
Malaysians from leaving the country, and Malaysia also faced domestic
pressure when Malaysians protested outside the North Korean embassy
(New Straits Times, February 23, 2017). Subsequently, with China’s
intervention, a reciprocal arrangement was reached: Malaysia deposited
the corpse of Kim Jong-nam in Beijing for North Korea to collect (The
Guardian, 2017); Malaysians in North Korea were then allowed to
return home safely. This marked a serious but not permanent rupture
in the Malaysia-North Korea diplomatic relations. After the April 2018
inter-Korean summit and June 2018 North Korea-United States summit
in Singapore (Loh, 2018), and following a sign of commitment by
North Korea that they were moving towards peace, Malaysia responded
by allowing North Korea’s embassy to reopen and relations between the
two countries resumed (Menon & Schuettler, 2018). What this incident
indicates is that neutrality does not mean ineffectiveness. When it comes
to matters of ‘national interest,’ Malaysia does not hesitate to exercise
its rights over sovereignty, territorial integrity, and security.

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in DIPLOMATIC Neutrality

793

Maintaining Neutrality with Major Powers
In its relations with major powers, Malaysia maintains its traditional
cooperative and friendly foreign policy approach that enables it to avoid
conflicts with all major powers. It wants to keep its strategic options
open. It has numerous economic and military cooperation activities with
big powers, such as the United States, the European Union, Australia,
China and Japan. All of these countries are sources of investment for
Malaysia; therefore, they are important economic partners. However,
defense and military cooperation are mostly on an ad hoc basis,
rather than occurring as part of a highly official arrangement, because
Malaysian leaders are reluctant to exhibit long-term involvement with
major powers.
Over the last several decades, Malaysia has maintained cordial ties
with China, and avoided conflict. For instance, when the Philippines filed
suit with the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on its growing concern
over China’s build-up of military infrastructure in the South China Sea
(Corr & Tacujan, 2013), Laos and Cambodia (the client state of China)
understandably remained silent on the issue, as did Malaysia. There
were many reasons as to why Malaysia chose not to be vocal against
China at this point. Firstly, Malaysia desires to resolve things peacefully
in accordance with international law. As a claimant state, it indicates its
clear position on the South China Sea issue, that all claims must be
based and resolved in accordance with international law; in particular,
the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
upon which China and ASEAN seek to advance a 2002 Declaration of
Conduct (DoC) of Parties in the South China Sea, which commits to
follow the UNCLOS. Now as China continues to aggressively pursue
its sphere of influence in the South China Sea,4 Malaysia wants to focus
on collective security and have close relations with countries including
Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, who have common
cause in countering growing Chinese influence in the region.

When the Philippines brought the South China Sea case to ICJ, the advisory
opinion of ICJ was completely ignored by China on the ground that it is not
bound by any international binding. China wants to keep its sphere of influence
in the South China Sea passage and has established infrastructures in many of
those islands.
4

794

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

Secondly, China’s fastest economic growth was of interest to
Malaysia. China is currently Malaysia’s largest trading partner.
According to Malaysia’s Department of Statistics report for May 2018,
Malaysia’s bilateral trade with China increased, with exports totaling RM
795.3 million (nearly US$196.5 million), and imports RM 1.13 billion
(nearly US$278.8 million).5 This indicates that Malaysia wants to put its
immediate economic and diplomatic interests ahead of potential security
concerns. Thirdly, as Malaysia maintains a certain distance from the
West, relations with China would provide a strategic balance. Fourthly,
Malaysia wants to avoid any potential ethnic riots, as experienced in
1969 when its Chinese community took offense over the government’s
affirmative policies favoring the majority Malay community over
Chinese-Malaysians. Maintaining a good relationship with China may
be an imperative for Malaysia to tackle local discontents.
We see the same approach toward India concerning recent Jammu
and Kashmir, a northern Indian state, which has been the subject of
dispute between India, Pakistan and China since 1947. In August 2019,
India revoked the special status of Kashmir through a decree abolishing
Article 370 of the Indian Constitution. This action resulted in the
people of India-controlled Kashmir no longer able to have their flag,
constitution and a certain degree of autonomy over state administration
(BBC, 2019). During a bilateral meeting with Indian Prime Minister
Narendra Modi in the Eastern Economic Forum on September 7 2019,
Tun Mahathir avoided pledging support to any party and mentioned that
both India and Pakistan should adhere to the UN resolutions on the issue
(The Star Online, 2019).
However, in regards to issues involving ‘national interest’ and
‘territorial sovereignty,’ Malaysia will not hesitate to state its position.
For instance, when the Philippines-based terrorist group attacked
Malaysia’s Lahad Datu District of Sabah in February 2013, Malaysia
strongly suppressed the militants and took control of its territory a
month later. In another incident, when Chinese and American warships
came into the Straits of Melaka in June 2018 (The Straits Times, June
12, 2018), the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency (MMEA)
expressed its concern. Prime Minister Tun Mahathir made his position
clear when he stated: “No restriction on movement of ships, except for
5

For details see Department of Statistics press release (July 05, 2018).

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in DIPLOMATIC Neutrality

795

warships” (Tan & Nakano, 2018). Defence Minister Mohamad Sabu
further clarified: “We do not want to place warships there. But we need
patrol boats to maintain security, especially from pirates as we want
the shipping lanes in the Straits of Malacca and the South China Sea
kept safe” (The Straits Times, June 12, 2018). These incidents indicate
that Malaysia will not hesitate to make clear its position vis-à-vis other
countries, particularly when it affects Malaysian interests.
Malaysia’s neutrality, however, has been overwhelmed by its
economic concerns recently. Under its previous regime, the country
seemed to tilt more than favorably towards China on economic issues.
During this time, many state-related contracts were given to China,
and Japanese investment in Malaysia fell. This was substantiated by
economic agreements between China and Malaysia, such as joint petrol
projects, the East Coast Rail Link (ECRL), and a large new China-styled
city in Johor (Mahrotri & Choong, 2016). One example is the extent to
which the previous regime allowed China to dictate where it wants its
ports located in Malaysia under the One Belt & One Road Initiative
(OBOR), which created suspicion and anxiety in terms of maritime
safety. Many of these projects are now subject to review by the current
Mahathir government (Anis & Kaos, 2018). The new government wants
to bring the country to its original position: that Malaysia is friendly
to all, and not giving preferential treatment to any particular country.
However, the apparent neutrality position vis-à-vis China is perhaps
tainted by Malaysia’s tilt towards Japan, as it revives the Look East
Policy (LEP). It appears that on economic issues, Malaysia follows a
different standard with regard to neutrality. Arguably, favoring Japan
over China is likely to put Malaysia’s diplomacy in a more challenging
frontier.
Conclusion
In conclusion, Malaysia’s stated desire to maintain political neutrality
and avoid conflict with other countries is admirable. Recent events,
such as the Rohingya crisis in Myanmar, has evoked in Malaysia a
tendency to be vocal, even if it requires overlooking political neutrality
in favor of universal human rights. In this regard, both its current and
immediate past leaderships maintain the same standing on this: that it
will remain effectively neutral, so long as there is no major outbreak of
war in the region. As the Dean of the Australian Diplomatic Corps in

796

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

Canberra observed: “Malaysia can maintain neutrality only as far as it
is not being touched… At this point, it is a pure leadership judgment for
the highest level of government.”
References:
Anis, M. N. & Kaos, J. (24 May 2018). “Mega projects to be reviewed”, The
Star (Malaysia), section Nation, page 11.
BBC. (5 August 2019). “Article 370: India strips disputed Kashmir of special
status”. URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49231619.
Bothe, M. (2013). ‘The Law of Neutrality’, in Fleck, D. (3rd Ed.), The Handbook
of International Humanitarian Law, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Bindschedler, I. R. (1982). ‘Neutrality, Concept and General Rules’, in
Bernhardt, R. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Public International Law, instalment
4, New York, USA.
Black, C. E., & Falk, R. A. (2015). Neutralization and World Politics. New
Jersey, USA: Princeton University Press.
Chang, F. K. (Summer 2014). “Limits to the ‘ASEAN Way’: Economic and
Security Interests in Southeast Asia,” Orbis 58:3, pp. X-X.
Cohn, G. (1939). Neo-Neutrality, New York, US: Columbia University Press.
Corr, A. S. & Tacujan, P. A. (2013). Chinese Political and Economic Influence
in the Philippines: Implications for Alliances and the South China Sea
Dispute, Journal of Political Risk, 1(3): X-X.
Department of Statistics press release. (July 05 2018). “Malaysia External
Trade Statistics May 2018,” Office of Chief Statistician Malaysia, URL:
https://www.dosm.gov.my/v1/index.php?r=column/ctwoByCat&parent_
id=83&menu_id=azJjRWpYL0VBYU90TVhpclByWjdMQT09
Fidel Castro’s speech to the UN, in his position as chairman of the non-aligned
countries movement, “Meets officials at UN: departs for home,” 12
October 1979.
ICJ (2008) Sovereignty over Pedra Branca/Pulau Batu Puteh, Middle Rocks
and South Ledge (Malaysia/Singapore) URL: http://www.icj-cij.org/en/
case/130
Izzuddin, M. (8 May 2017). Reviewing Malaysia’s Relations with North Korea,
Perspective, ISEAS Yusof Ishak Institute, Issue 2017, no. 30. ISSN 23356677.
Kolb, R. & Hyde, R. (2008). An Introduction to the International Law of Armed
Conflicts, Oxford, UK: Hart Publishing.

Malaysia’s Political Orientation in DIPLOMATIC Neutrality

797

Lanovoy, V. (2016). Complicity and its Limits in the Law of International
Responsibility, Oxford, UK: Hart Publishing.
Libby, R. T. (2014). The Politics of Economic Power in Southern Africa, New
Jersey, USA: Princeton University Press.
Loh, J. (12 June 2018). “Malaysia PM Mahathir says the world can learn from
Kim Jong Un’s ‘new attitude’ and decision to meet Trump”. Business
Insider Malaysia.
Mahrotri, P. T. & Choong, E. H. (November 22, 2016). “$100 Billion ChineseMade City Near Singapore ‘Scares the Hell Out of Everybody,” Bloomberg.
Menon, P., & Schuettler, D. (12 June 2018). “Malaysia to reopen embassy in
North Korea: Mahathir”. Reuters.
Shuib, M. S., Keling, M. F. & Ajis, M. N. (2009). The Implications of Cold
War on Malaysia State Building Process, Asian Culture and History, 1(2):
89-98.
Mitsuomi, I. (2015). The Path of Malaysia’s Neutral Foreign Policy in the
Tunku Era, SARJANA Journal of the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences,
30(2): 71-79.
Malaymail (20 April 2019). “Mindef to only heed UN’s requests for soldiers,
after withdrawing from Yemen conflict”, Section Malaysia. URL:https://
www.malaymail.com/news/malaysia/2019/04/20/mindef-to-only-heeduns-requests-for-soldiers-after-withdrawing-from-yemen/1745152.
Ng, E. (4 December 2016). Malaysia’s prime minister leads protest against
‘genocide’ against Muslims in Rohingya, Independent.
New Vision (5 March 2017). “Malaysia expels North Korea ambassador over
Kim murder”. Agence France-Presse.
New Straits Times, (February 23, 2017). “BN Youth stage protest at N. Korean
embassy”.
Ram, B. S. (June 29, 2017). Malaysia takes “active neutrality” approach on
spat between Qatar and Arab nations, New Straits Times.
Ronzitti, N. (2011). Diritto internazionale dei conflitti armati (International
law of armed conflicts), 4th Ed. Giappichelli, Torino, pp. 114-115.
Saravanamuttu, J. (2011). ‘Malaysian Foreign Policy and the Five Power
Defence Arrangements’, in Ian Storey, Ralf Emmers, Daljit Singh (Ed.)
Five Power Defence Arrangements at Forty, ISEAS Publishing, page 3640.
Saravanamuttu, J. (2010). Malaysia’s Foreign Policy: The First Fifty Years:
Alignment, Neutralism, Islamism, ISEAS, Singapore, page 53-55.
The Havana Declaration of 1979 < http://lanic.utexas.edu/project/castro/
db/1979/19791012.html>

798

Intellectual Discourse, Special Issue, 2019

Tucker, R. W. (2006). The Law of War and Neutrality at Sea. New Jersey, USA:
The Law Book Exchange, Ltd.
The Star (Malaysia) (29 June 2018). “Ministry, army to decide Yeman pullout”,
section Nation, page 11.
The Guardian (31 March 2017). “Kim Jong-nam’s body arrived back in North
Korea”.
The Star Online. (7 September, 2019). “Kashmir issue dominates Dr
M-Modi talks in Russia”. URL: https://www.thestar.com.my/news/
nation/2019/09/07/kashmir-issue-dominates-dr-m-modi-talks-in-russia.
The Straits Times (June 12, 2018). “KL: Warships in Malaysian waterways
send wrong signals”.
Tan, C. K. & Nakano, T. (June 11, 2018). ‘In his own words: Mahathir
Mohamad speaks to the Nikkei Asian Review, Malaysia’s leader discusses
China deal, TPP, North Korea and succession plan’, Nikkei Asian Review.
The Straits Times (June 12, 2018). “KL: Warships in Malaysian waterways
send wrong signals”.
Wilson, G. G. (1940). ‘Leased Territories’, The American Journal of
International Law, Vol. 34, no. 4.
Wright, Q. (1930). ‘Neutrality and Neutral Rights following the Pact of Paris’,
Proceedings of the American Society of Internal Law, Vol. 24.
Wyss, M., Hanhimaki, J. M., Bott, S., & Schaufelbuehl, J., (2016). ‘Introduction:
a tightrope walk- neutrality and neutralism in the global Cold War’, in
Neutrality and Neutralism in the Global Cold War: Between or Within the
Blocs?, (Ed.) Bott, S., Hanhimaki, J. M., Schaufelbuehl, J., & Wyss, M.
New York, USA: Routledge.

