JGPG (2021) 10(2): 51-72
DOI 10.14666/2194-7759-10-2-004

PAPER

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications
Nghiem Tuan Hung* • Nguyen Xuan Cuong**
Abstract The South China Sea (SCS) is one of the busiest maritime areas in the
world. In the SCS, there are several outstanding non-traditional security issues. After
reviewing perspectives of Vietnam on non-traditional security issues, the article
focuses on newly emerging issues, such as maritime security, freedom of navigation,
marine environment, and resources exploitation in the SCS. The article argues that
China’s main factor making the situation more complicated is its territorial and
resource ambitions. However, when it comes to the SCS issue, it is about differences,
disputes, and complicated developments and about cooperation. Although the benefits
are diverse, efforts to build confidence and promote cooperation between countries
should be recognized. Among the disputing parties, Vietnam always seeks to resolve
the issues as soon as possible with the most actively proposed idea called the
cooperation model for mutual development.
Keywords: South China Sea, Vietnam, China, non-traditional security

1. Introduction
The South China Sea (SCS) is either one of the busiest maritime areas in the world or
“an important nexus for regional and global economic activity” (Panda, 2017). Oil and
commercial goods from the Middle East and Southeast Asia to Japan, South Korea, and
China are transported through SCS, where there are many important straits such as the
Strait of Malacca, Sunda and Lombok, and Makassar. On the military side, SCS is also
an essential route for the movement of US military forces from the Western Pacific to
the Indian Ocean and the Gulf. In addition, freedom of navigation, which is considered
another important principle of international relations, is the principle of conduct in the
world’s seas. This principle is sometimes briefly referred to as freedom of navigation
within the seas. Vietnam is located on the west coast of the SCS. For Vietnam, the SCS
Nghiem Tuan Hung*, Nguyen Xuan Cuong**( )
*
PhD, Research Fellow at the Institute of World Economics and Politics, Vietnam Academy of Social
Sciences, Vietnam
E-mail: hungnt.iwep@vass.gov.vn, tuanhung3110@gmail.com
**
PhD, Director-General of the Institute for Chinese Studies, Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences, Vietnam
E-mail: xuancuong@vnics.org.vn

52

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

plays a vital role in the process of national construction and defense in history, present
and future. The SCS has created a favorable strategic position for Vietnam. The SCS
provides a vital source of aquatic resources, which contribute to making the fisheries
sector one of the country’s key economic sectors. The SCS is a source of seafood and
a gateway for Vietnam to develop tourism, attract international visitors, and is a place
for exchange and integration between many cultures. Oil and gas are the two largest
resources found under the Vietnamese continental shelf. Up to now, many sedimentary
basins have been identified and exploited with significant oil and gas reserves. Given
the importance of the SCS to Vietnam’s socio-economic development and security, any
move in the SCS is carefully considered by Vietnam.
While traditional security issues have appeared and existed for a long time in
the SCS, non-traditional security issues in the SCS have also become increasingly
harsh. There are two groups of non-traditional security issues in the SCS. The first
one contains issues that originated from the relationships between social communities,
including state actors and non-state actors. The second one cover issues deriving from
the interactions between social communities and the natural world. The paper analyzes
the complexity of non-traditional security in the SCS, thereby drawing some policy
implications for Vietnam in the coming time.

2. Non-traditional security in Vietnam’s formal documents and academic
perspectives
2.1 Non-traditional security in Vietnam’s strategic documents
According to Vietnam’s legal perspective, non-traditional security is an integral
part of national security and defense; thus, ensuring national security is a strategic
task in any time period. Non-traditional security threats have challenged Vietnam’s
national independence, sustainable development, socio-political stability, national
independence, sovereignty, and national security.
The Ministry of Defence of Vietnam (2004, p. 2) affirms:
“Unresolved issues related to border, territorial, maritime and land disputes as well
as other non-traditional security issues, such as drug trafficking, weapons trafficking,
piracy, transnational organized crime, terrorism, illegal immigration and migration,
ecological degradation, etc., are also Vietnam’s security concerns.”
The Ministry of Defence of Vietnam (2009) emphasized that non-traditional
security issues such as the illegal trade and transportation of weapons, drugs, piracy,
organized crime, terrorism, illegal immigration and migration, environmental
degradation, climate change, epidemics, etc. were also frequent security concerns of
Vietnam. In addition to the potential regional security risks of tension and conflict,
the Ministry of Defence (2009) stated that many natural disasters heavily impacted
southeast Asia; although terrorism and piracy had been curbed, there were still

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

53

potential threats to regional security; thus, those threats were common concern of
Southeast Asian nations and many other countries; besides, climate change, natural
disasters, epidemics, transnational crime were increasingly affecting the security of
nations in the region. In 2019 Vietnam National Defence, the Ministry of National
Defence (2019, pp. 11) once again reaffirmed the list of non-traditional security issues
“as seen in cyberspace, terrorism, energy, food, climate change, natural disasters,
epidemics, drug trafficking, people smuggling, illegal migration, transnational crime,
and maritime piracy.”
In the 11th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam, the Party
(2011, pp. 182-183) considered that non-traditional security threats and high-tech
crime continued to increase; global issues such as financial security, energy security,
food security, climate change, natural disasters, and epidemics would continue
developing. The Party also listed a number of non-traditional security issues, namely
religious conflict, ethnical issue, separatism, local wars, political riots, interference,
subversion, terrorism, high-tech crime in the fields of finance and monetary, electronic
telecommunications, biology, environment, and so on. According to the Party, those
issues would continuously intensify in the coming years. At the 12th National Congress,
the Communist Party of Vietnam (2016, pp. 33-34) asserted its consistent perception
and perspective on national security strategies in general, including traditional and
non-traditional security. The Party illustrated that Vietnam must strengthen national
defence and security to firmly defend the fatherland and keep the environment of peace
and stability for the country’s development. Otherwise, Vietnam must be well-prepared
to respond to traditional and non-traditional security threats. Lately, the Communist
Party of Vietnam (2021) illustrated that:
“Non-traditional security issues are increasingly diverse, complex, and
impactful; Increased natural disasters, epidemics and climate change, and the use of
transboundary water resources, especially the Mekong River’s water source, poses
many unprecedented challenges for sustainable development.”
2.2 Non-traditional security in the studies of the Vietnamese research community
Besides the formal perception of the ruling party and Ministry of National Defence,
the Vietnamese research community also introduced many notions of non-traditional
security. Le Van Cuong (2008) argues that there were 17 non-traditional security issues,
including extreme nationalism, terrorism, financial security, energy security, science,
and technology security, ecological environment security, drug trafficking, infectious
disease, organized crime, transnational crime, money laundering, cyber attacks,
illegal immigrants, population explosion, depletion of water resources, piracy, and
the underground economy. Another author named Luan Thuy Duong (2010) divided
the non-traditional security that Vietnam needs to address into seven forms, namely
environmental security, energy security, economic security, human security, maritime

54

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

security, natural disasters, and epidemics. According to Pham Gia Khiem (2010), nontraditional security issues must include climate change, energy security, natural disasters,
and epidemics, etc. Those issues are becoming a tough challenge to the security of
Vietnam today. According to Tran Thi Ha (2017), in recent years, Southeast Asia has
faced serious challenges originating from non-traditional security issues, such as climate
change, pirates, and terrorism, etc. Those issues strongly affect regional countries in
every aspect of the economy, security, politics, culture, and society. Besides, Southeast
Asian nations develop a mechanism to deal with those new challenges.
Other authors focus on specific issues. For example, Dam Huy Hoang (2018)
paid attention to the environmental pollution in the SCS. The issue of environmental
pollution in the SCS has caused deep concern for either coastal countries or other
countries using transport routes across the SCS. According to Dam Huy Hoang,
ASEAN has launched cooperative efforts to protect the environment, including
cooperation to protect the waters from being polluted by human activities since 2003,
and ASEAN also works with many partners to look for solutions. However, up to now,
due to many problems, cooperation in the control of discharge in the SCS among the
concerned countries is still limited. Meanwhile, Vo Xuan Vinh (2018) considered the
issue of piracy as a top concern. The author argued that as a region characterized by
archipelago and island terrain, the world’s most important sea route in terms of trade
in goods, the waters in Southeast Asia are the birthplace and the ideal environment
for piracy when maritime control capacity of regional countries is limited. During the
post-Cold War period, when the world’s commercial activity became more bustling
due to regionalization and globalization, piracy developed rapidly and turned itself into
a primary security concern of the region. Due to these challenges, Southeast Asia’s
anti-piracy cooperation mechanisms have been formed at various levels.
In short, the Party and the State of Vietnam revealed its views on non-traditional
security issues through the documents of the Party Congress and the Vietnam White
Book of National Defence. Additionally, Vietnamese scholars have also shown
their interest in non-traditional security. In general, Vietnam has identified nontraditional security as a complex and diverse challenge that needs to be addressed to
ensure national security, independence, and territorial integrity. From the studies of
Vietnamese authors on the non-traditional security issues which the world has to face,
those issues can be classified into two groups:
The first group includes issues associated with the relationship between the basic
human social communities. Those are the relationships between groups of countries of
which political and economic interests are the same or relatively similar. At the heart
of the group, it is the fierce confrontation between major powers. While the likelihood
of major wars, or the risk of direct collision, between major powers is low, the risk of
a conflict to some extent cannot be completely ruled out. That confrontation occurs
not only in bilateral interactions but also in multilateral aspects, or traditional political

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

55

and security issues, but also extends to maritime security and safety. Additionally,
individuals or human groups as sub-state actors, namely marine crime and piracy,
also carry undeniable threats to maritime security and safety, which have been very
common for a long time.
The second group includes issues arising from the interactions between human
society and the natural world. The group of issues is associated with the limitation of
the natural environment when the environment is too strongly and frequently impacted
by diversified activities, especially economic activities, of humans. Those are also
issues related to the capability to provide energy, fuel, natural resources, etc. to meet
the needs of human activities and serve societies’ production. The group also includes
protecting natural resources, preserving the human living environment, rational
exploitation and saving of marine resources, and international cooperation to exploit
sea ​​surface serving the purpose of peace and prosperity.

3. Non-traditional security complex in the SCS
There are two layers of non-traditional security issues in the SCS. Those are entangled issues,
thus making the SCS the most complicated among all territorial and maritime disputes in the
world while also making traditional and non-traditional security issues intertwined.
3.1. Maritime security, the safety of navigation and marine crime
The first and most fundamental is maritime security and the use of sea lanes, which are
related to overlapping sovereignty claims between littoral states and the conduct of military
operations in the name of freedom of navigation by international actors, as well as marine
crime. Out of the disputing parties, China emerges as the most assertive and aggressive.
To reinforce territorial claims, many countries, especially China, have forcibly seized
entities in the SCS and built infrastructures (e.g., airports, wharves, harbors, and military
bases for stationed troops, and so forth.) on those entities. Although many countries have
engaged in such activities, the number of entities renovated and built by China and the
level of militarization of features occupied by China has caused special concerns. China’s
action raises concerns about the potential for conflict and the possibility to strengthen the
states involved as a deterrent power to limit regional conflict.
China builds artificial islands and infrastructure in the SCS for civilian purposes,
benefiting the international community. That is the argument the Chinese side often
makes to justify its behavior. China insists that the construction aimed at nonmilitary purposes, but it also admits that its objectives include improving its ability
to safeguard territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests as well as satisfy
the necessary military needs” (Chase & Purser, 2015). Additionally, the inauguration
of the five lighthouses in different features would “reflects China’s dedication to its
responsibility of boosting navigational safety in the SCS” and improve China’s
“capacity for maritime rescue and environmental protection” (An, 2016). In addition

56

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

to island reclamation, infrastructure construction, and other civil activities, China
continues to conduct drills and illegally maintains a military presence in the occupied
features. Over the years, China has repeatedly deployed weapons to the Paracel and
Spratly archipelago, combined with holding exercises separately and with other
countries, which intensifies the situation. China no longer conceals its ambition to
establish an air defense identification zone in the SCS. “ For the ADIZ in the SCS,
we have repeated our position on many occasions. What I need to underscore here
is that to set up an ADIZ is the right of a sovereign state and we don’t need other
countries to make suggestions” (Ministry of National Defense of the PRC, 2016).
China’s militarization and infrastructure-building activities in the SCS threaten
maritime peace, stability, security, and safety, go against the UNCLOS, challenge other
provisions of international law, ignore the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the
SCS (DOC) that China signed in 2002, as well as intentionally disregard the attention
and legitimate recommendations of the international community. The actions of China
have affected maritime security and safety in the SCS, thus negatively impacts other
countries’ efforts to resolve disputes.
Maritime security and safety remain an issue because traffic through the SCS is
essential for world maritime trade and communications, and the existing maritime
and territorial disputes will threaten the safety of navigation there. In recent years, the
term “safety and freedom of navigation” has become an important expression of the
competition between China and the United States in the SCS. China is deploying its
navy across Asia’s seas and sea lanes, making the unipolar US maritime security order
that has existed for 75 years into a more multipolar and volatile system. The Chinese
naval’s aggression in the East China Sea and SCS is not a single move but affects the
United States’ ability to control the sea across the Western Pacific Rim. Geographically,
the SCS is home to some of the world’s most important shipping routes. The ship
carrying import and export goods between markets in Asia and Europe, Africa, and
America must pass through the SCS. Regional circulation will be significantly related
to both the cost and time delay in delivery. As a result, most countries are directly
interested in ensuring freedom of navigation is respected in the SCS. Unfortunately,
however, the SCS is home to many long-standing territorial disputes. Brunei,
China, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam have overlapping
sovereignty claims over different maritime entities and water areas in the SCS. Most of
these territorial disputes focus on features within the Paracel and Spratly islands group,
and China is the country making the most absurd demands.
The United States does not support either side in territorial disputes over the features
in the SCS, and the various sovereignty claims are not discussed in detail here. However,
the United States actively opposes illegal claims to the waters around those entities
and illegal restrictions on sea traffic. China has made such unreasonable claims to limit
freedom of navigation. The United States conducts freedom of navigation operations in

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

57

the SCS to oppose these claims and actions. Strategically, the United States has used the
SCS issue as a manipulation mechanism to force either regional countries or external
powers to support the ultimate goal of building a military alliance against China in the
Indo-Pacific region. Tactically, the United States has increased unilateral or joint power
deployments under the Indo-Pacific Strategy. That approach intensifies the geopolitical
competition triggered by naval military games between China and the United States and
poses new challenges to regional maritime security. The primary consideration of the
US Indo-Pacific Strategy is to prevent the bilateral balance of power from developing
in favor of China. US tactics are designed to undermine China’s growing influence in
the vast Indo-Pacific region, including the SCS, and to maintain US superiority. Because
of the Indo-Pacific Strategy, the future will see increasingly fierce competition between
China and the system of US allies and partners.
Therefore, the security model in the SCS is increasingly developing into
competition between major countries. First, US-led freedom of navigation operations
(FONOPS) in disputed areas in the SCS will be more provocative and targeted and the
involvement of the United States Coast Guard (USCG). The joint FONOPS and the
joint law enforcement role played by the USCG as part of their Indo-Pacific Strategy
in the SCS will provide a new means for the United States to prevent the growth of
China’s maritime forces and the militarization of the SCS. It is foreseeable that in the
framework of its Indo-Pacific Strategy, the United States will not only continue to
escalate FONOPS in the SCS in terms of frequency, scale, and geography but also
bring along many challenges as well as become more diverse, which means putting
pressure on China in the security realm. On the one hand, allies of the United States
such as Japan, Australia, and the United Kingdom can conduct joint operations with
the United States based on existing unilateral military operations in the SCS. France
and the UK have announced that the two countries would promptly conduct patrols
for freedom of navigation in the SCS (Lillehaugen, 2018). Australia insisted that it had
the right to send naval operations to the SCS, as evidenced by sending three warships
to the SCS (Strait Times, 2018)). Another US ally, New Zealand, also openly and
openly criticized China in its 2018 Strategic Defence Policy Statement (New Zealand
Government, 2018).
On the other hand, the United States institutionalizes and normalizes the
enforcement actions of the coast guard and gradually conducts joint maritime law
enforcement with relevant countries such as the Philippines, Vietnam, and Malaysia.
Hence, direct competition for power between China and the United States in the SCS is
ongoing. Clearly, the United States has been proving to allies as well as other countries
that it is ready for a safe, secure and free SCS. The US effort has been recognized by
its allies, at least in terms of ​​freedom of navigation, to demonstrate that China’s desire
to hegemony the SCS is not easily achieved. Although China is taking advantage of the
field and space in the SCS, the US is also slowly regaining its position. Marine crime

58

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

is another long-standing issue affecting maritime security in the SCS. SCS is known as
a sea area with a very high traffic density because it concentrates on many important
international maritime traffic routes. That is one reason for the development of many
types of crimes operating in the SCS. Depending on the crime situation, countries focus
on different types of marine crimes, such as: i) piracy and armed robbery; ii) terrorism;
iii) smuggling (goods, human trafficking, rare animals and plants, weapons and banned
substances); iv) violations of the sovereignty of coastal states such as illegal fishing,
illegal exploitation of natural resources; and vi) acts in violation of international law
on matters such as the protection of the marine environment.
In July 2005, the Lloyd Markets Association’s Joint War Committee (JWC) listed
the Strait of Malacca and some areas in the south of the Philippines (along with
regions like Iraq, Lebanon and Somalia) as regions facing potential wars, attacks,
terrorist activities and related hazards (Wu & Zou, 2009). As a result, marine insurance
premiums have increased for ships passing through those areas despite firm opposition
from regional authorities and shipowners. In 2003, the ASEAN Regional Forum issued
a Statement on Cooperation Against Piracy and Other Threats to Maritime Security.
ASEAN is also aware of the piracy threat and cooperates to a certain extent. At the 12th
ASEAN Regional Forum Ministers’ meeting in July 2005, ministers applauded ARF’s
persistent efforts in promoting maritime safety and security and highlighted the four
areas of for future cooperation, namely multilateral cooperation, operational solutions
for maritime safety and security, transport and port security, and the application of
technology for maritime safety and security (ASEAN, 2005). There are also some truly
bilateral or trilateral cooperation efforts based on no firm agreement, such as the joint
patrols between Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia, which are really reasonable as
they share the waters of the Strait of Malacca and Singapore.
Additionally, the concerned countries should realize that without any great power
help, eradicating piracy would be pretty tricky. The ASEAN Regional Forum then
convened a meeting of maritime experts to coordinate coastal protection actions,
exchange information, and investigate re-piracy. In February 2006, the United
States held a meeting in Alameda, California, where representatives from Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, Australia, Germany, India, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway,
South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the Philippines were gathered. China was
invited but did not attend (Herbert-Burn et al, 2009).
Despite new moves in anti-piracy efforts and the recent decline in piracy in the SCS,
there are some nagging problems in combating piracy. Long-term concerns include
many unresolved overlapping disputes and jurisdictional disputes. For example, the
Spratly Islands are claimed by six parties and occupied by three of them. These territorial
claims are particularly important as anchors for asserting exclusive ecological zones
around disputed islands and natural oil and gas resources that are believed to be on the
seabed. With an insufficient number of agreed boundaries in the SCS, states act primarily

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

59

for their interests. As a result, “The lack of agreed jurisdiction complicates maritime
enforcement, leads to unchecked degradation of the marine environment and facilitates
illegal activities at sea, including possible maritime terrorism” (Bateman, 2005, pp.
260). Otherwise, when the objective of the meeting was to coordinate state contribution
efforts to support coastal states in the Strait of Malacca / Singapore, there has been
little progress in burden-sharing. On the one hand, the littoral states wanted to share the
burden, including providing environmental protection and security services. On the other
hand, the sea-used countries saw burden-sharing to engage more directly in maritime
security measures against piracy and terrorist threats. It can be said that the anti-piracy
cooperation in the SCS has only achieved limited results.
3.2. Marine resources exploitation and environmental degradation
All the issues of this second group are directly related to the human exploitation of
nature to find resources that serve different human and social purposes. In fact, oil and
gas exploitation, as well as fishing in the SCS, are simply an expression of a more
fundamental conflict over sovereignty in the region. Given the recent strength and
assertiveness in the SCS, China’s interests notably deserve special attention. In addition
to expanding China’s security perimeter, China’s regional interests in marine resources
can be grouped into two issues (2 ps), namely petroleum, and protein (seafood).
As the world’s largest energy importer, China wants the most assurance of energy
resources, securing supplies, and not having to worry much about ownership. Due to
the supply-demand nature of the global energy market, any additional supply that is
developed makes the market larger and larger. As a result, the product’s price will fall,
both directly benefiting China as the world’s largest energy consumer.
Since energy is really a China’s concern, China will find ways to exploit marine
energy resources. Although China continues to oppose exploration by other claimants
in the “nine-dash line,” it repeatedly uses its own oil and gas companies to complicate
the situation in existing disputed maritime areas. While the level of competition for oil
and gas resources is inflated, it is clear that state oil and gas companies in the region are
being used to assert maritime claims, with rigs and oil being used as a clear indication
that the state controls disputed areas. International oil and gas companies trying to
operate in disputed areas also run the risk of promoting national goals over economic
and business reasons. The most typical example of this is the stressful monthly incident
in 2014 with Vietnam when China National Petroleum Corporation (CNOOC) used
the Haiyang Shiyou 981 rig to perform exploration drilling at the disputed area near
Paracel archipelago. CNOOC with its fleet and exploration rigs is a kind of tool to
establish sovereignty. CNOOC itself is interested in encouraging Chinese leaders to
take a hard line in protecting the right to access oil and gas resources. CNOOC is also
known for promoting sovereignty claims over potential oil and gas reserves in the
SCS; thus, CNOOC’s credibility and political influence could be enhanced.

60

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

The sovereignty disputes and too high seafood demand from the claimants, especially
China, harm seafood resources in the SCS. The most important aspect of the Spratly
Islands dispute is not just oil or sovereignty; it is whether seafood from the SCS
continues to be supplied to the Asian people in general and the Chinese in particular
or not. For more than 20 years, every May, China unilaterally issued a ban on fishing
in the SCS, lasting for three months. In line with the ban, China sent many fishing
boats and China Marine Surveillance (haijian) ships to increase operations in the SCS
to control and confiscate fishing boats and equipment that China considers violations
of its unilateral fishing ban. There are at least three signs that seafood resources are
endangered. The first sign is production. Catches remain unsustainable 10-12 million
tons for decades, a figure that could double from illegal, unreported, and unregulated
(IUU) fishing (Cheung & Sumaila, 2015). Stable catch conceals a severe problem:
catches increasingly include smaller species with booming populations because wild
predators have been overfished. The second sign is that fishermen’s catch per unit
effort (CPUE) has dropped drastically over the past decades as fishers are forced to
spend more time and fuel to bring in the same amount of fish or seafood. Vandalism,
including the use of fishing boats damaging corals, Muro-ami nets, or even explosives
and cyanides that are often used to squeeze more from declining fisheries. The third
sign is that vital habitat is disappearing. A 2012 meta-analysis of maritime studies
show that in the past 10-15 years, the SCS’s coral coverage in disputed areas decreased
from over 60% to just 20%. Coral reefs along the Chinese coast are even worse and
have declined by more than 80 percent in the past few decades (Hughes et al, 2013).
Under the provisions of UNCLOS, the coastal state has:
“sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring and exploiting, conserving and
managing the natural resources, whether living or non-living, of the waters superjacent
to the seabed and of the seabed and its subsoil, and with regard to other activities
for the economic exploitation and exploration of the zone, such as the production of
energy from the water, currents and winds. (Article 56).
Environmental degradation in the SCS has caused deep concern for either coastal
countries or other countries using transport routes across the SCS. Scholars and
scientists pay great attention to the environmental degradation and pollution in the
SCS. There is a noticeable activity that damages the ecological environment of the
SCS, namely islands reclamation or the construction of artificial islands. Among the
claimants, China is the most active.
China has diversified strategies to assert its dominance over the disputed maritime
areas, including strengthening its military capabilities, researching to show a historical
and diplomatic basis for its claims to ensure that the Southeast Asian claimants do not
unite in the dispute with China. This is evident in the comments of Yi Xianliang, deputy
head of the Chinese Foreign Ministry’s Boundary and Ocean Affairs Departments, on
construction activities in the SCS when he said that “the Spratly Islands are China’s

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

61

intrinsic territory, and what China does or doesn’t do is up to the Chinese government.
Nobody can change the government’s position.” In other words, China has sovereignty
control over the disputed territory and intends to enforce it. One tactic that China has
used recently as if having undoubted sovereignty over disputed areas, is to explore
potential energy resources and to build infrastructure construction. By doing those,
China asserts its rights to do what it wants to do within its territory.
As for the reclamation and construction of artificial islands, it is undeniable that
China is responsible for the most active implementation of island-building activities in
recent years. Additionally, according to Zhang Hongzhou (2016), the giant clam mining
industry began to explode in 2013, when the Chinese government decided to turn a blind
eye to the illegal exploitation of a protected species to reinforce its claim in the SCS.
According to Zhang (2016), in 2015, the giant clam mining industry supported the lives
of nearly 100,000 people in Tanmen, Hainan. Environmental damage may have dire
consequences for the people of all countries around the SCS. Actually, the Chinese side
has always denied all allegations. On April 28, 2015, Foreign Ministry spokesperson,
Hong Lei, rejected the notion that the construction of the Chinese island is harmful to
the environment. Chinese construction projects have also undergone years of rigorous
scientific evaluation and testing and are subject to strict environmental protection
standards and requirements. Such projects will not damage the ecological environment
of the SCS (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC, 2015). On June 16, 2015, Chinese
Foreign Ministry spokesman Lu Kang told reporters that China’s construction activities
against the Spratly Islands did not and will not cause damage to the system and marine
ecological environment in the SCS (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC, 2015).
However, in its 2016 ruling, the Permanent Court of Arbitration “strongly
condemns China for the serious and permanent environmental damage it has inflicted to
coral reefs and their wildlife in the SCS” (Tickell, 2016), especially regarding China’s
recent large-scale island reclamation (O’Neil, 2018). The court ruled that by carrying
out such activities, China has violated its obligation to conserve and protect fragile
ecosystems and habitats of depleted, threatened, or endangered species and threats
that cannot be overcome to the marine environment. In its ruling, the court noted that
it had asked China to provide the environmental assessment studies, as required by
Article 206 of UNCLOS. China, which refused to participate in any court proceedings
in the lawsuit, did not comply. The arbitral tribunal also determined that the Chinese
government is responsible for the poaching and destruction of coral reefs in the SCS.
The court ruled that the Chinese authorities were aware that Chinese fishers had caught
and harvested giant endangered sea turtles, corals and clams in the SCS (by using
inducing methods that seriously damage the reef) and failed to fulfill an obligation to
prevent such activities. The court found that China, despite the rules of giant clams
protection and conservation of the reef environment in general, was fully aware of
the practice and has proactively accepted it as a means to exploit the living resource

62

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

cascade of the reefs within the months before those reefs faced the near-permanent
destruction brought on by island construction activities.

4. Policy implications for Vietnam
In the SCS, there are disputes in some areas of waters, leading to sovereignty in the undefined
overlapping areas between disputing parties. Directly related to Vietnam are the dispute in
Paracel Islands between Vietnam and China; and the Spratly Islands dispute between six
parties (Vietnam, China, the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei, and Taiwan). Because of the
history of conflicts between countries related to the SCS and the continuous strengthening
of military capabilities, the SCS has hidden hot spots that can threaten peace and stability.
Maintaining a stable, peaceful, and cooperative SCS is an aspiration and a shared
responsibility of either regional countries or the international community. To achieve this
goal, it is necessary to have a joint effort of the countries in the region and the international
community based on respecting international law, fully and responsibly implementing the
basic principles of international law, including UNCLOS 1982. Vietnam has been and will
be making a positive and responsible contribution to this joint effort towards this goal.
Several policy implications should go to Vietnam’s government as follows.
4.1 For maritime security, freedom of navigation, and marine crime
First and foremost, Vietnam should enhance cooperation with the United States in
general and in the SCS in particular. In addition to the issue of common interests in
the field of security for the SCS and Southeast Asia, the two countries have come to
understand each other better. Vietnam and the US no longer look at each other through
an ideological lens. Vietnam and the US both believe that the SCS is a strategic area in
terms of politics, international law, economics, marine environment, and security.
Although the US is not directly involved in sovereignty disputes, the country has many
interests similar to Vietnam in the SCS. The US-Vietnam cooperation in the SCS issue
is very active and there are many potentials for development. While the United States
essentially continued to rely on the principles outlined in May 1995 (before establishing
diplomatic relations with Vietnam), under which it continued to promote peacefully
resolving disputes, peace and stability, freedom of navigation, neutrality regarding
disputes, respect for principles of international law, the fact that the United States is
becoming more and more actively and voluntarily involved in the SCS issue. The
outstanding benefit that both Vietnam and the US are concerned about is the right of
unobstructed access in the SCS following international law. That right of unobstructed
access is closely related to the exploitation of marine resources as well as for the
navigation of commercial ships and military activities in the SCS. Besides continuously
making policy statements and proposing acts related to the region and the SCS, the United
States continues to strengthen its presence in the SCS with naval ships and aircraft of all

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

63

kinds, including warships. In terms of economic business, US companies such as Delta
Offshore Energy, Bechtel Corporation, General Electric, McDermott, Exxon Mobil, and
Murphy Oil continue to cooperate in oil and liquefied natural gas projects in Vietnam
and the SCS (BBC, 2020). And defense cooperation related to the SCS continues to be
of interest to the two sides, including transferring a number of big-size US patrol boats to
Vietnam (US Embassy & Consulate in Vietnam, 2019).
Another important interest that both Vietnam and the United States attach
importance to promoting is enhancing peace and stability in the SCS and Southeast
Asia. Good relations between Vietnam and the US will help protect maritime security in
the SCS. The fact that Vietnam and the US continue to pay attention to and strengthen
cooperation related to the SCS has brought about practical benefits to the region. That
cooperation contributes to increasing regional interest in the SCS issue, accelerating
the process of dialogue at regional and international forums, creating a more balanced
situation in resolving the disputes. In addition, although the United States itself has not
ratified the 1982 UNCLOS, it has persisted in promoting cooperation based on The
Convention’s principles of facilitating regional countries in finding a common voice to
realize patterns of behavior in the SCS. Otherwise, strengthening cooperation on SCS
issues actively contributes to helping protect the legitimate interests of both Vietnam,
the US, and some other Southeast Asian countries about dispute settlement, marine
resources exploitation, using sea routes in international integration, and enhancing
trade. In order to contribute to promoting peace, stability and cooperation in the SCS,
Vietnam and the US have plenty of room to promote cooperation. The two sides should
continue to uphold and promote the building of a rules-based regional order, for which
the free and open Indo-Pacific is one of the examples a regional order. Thus, the SCS
issue is also resolved according to the positive general principles of international law.
Vietnam and the US established their “comprehensive partnership” in July 2013.1 Of
course, in Vietnam’s diplomatic rhetoric, China is Vietnam’s most important partner,
while the US is one of the least important. However, the US is in reality, the second
most important partner of Vietnam. For many aspects, the United States is just as
important as China. For Vietnam, the current relationship with the United States is
fundamentally strategic in many vital areas, such as security and defense, although it
is just called a “comprehensive partnership” by name. Vietnam and the US can also
join regional and international countries to create an annual high-level security forum
1

Linguistically, Vietnam lags behind the Philippines, Thailand, Indonesia and Singapore, which are strategic

partners of the United States in the region, in their importance to the US. Meanwhile, Vietnam has raised the
level of diplomacy to “strategic relations” with 16 countries including Russia (2001), Japan (2006), India
(2007), China (2008), South Korea and Spain (2009), United Kingdom (2010), Germany (2011), France,
Indonesia, Italy, Singapore and Thailand (2013), Malaysia and the Philippines (2015) and Australia (2017).
The US, the world’s largest economy and military, is even behind Vietnam’s “comprehensive partnership”
with Myanmar which was set up in 2017.

64

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

to discuss and resolve emerging SCS issues. The two countries can also promote
cooperation related to the capacity building of each stakeholder for training, joint
exercises, information exchange, economic cooperation, scientific research, marine
environmental protection, terrorism, piracy prevention, and natural disaster relief in the
SCS. In that process, openness and transparency of cooperation and active sharing of
information and cooperation with regional countries are essential to alleviate concerns
and gain access to other resources and support of the international and regional
community. The tighter the US-Vietnam relationship, the higher it will enhance
regional countries’ confidence in the US.
For marine crime, the basis for promoting cooperation in the field of marine crime
prevention in both bilateral and multilateral frameworks is the common understanding
of the threats. Marine crime issues such as piracy, armed robbery at sea, smuggling,
terrorism, illegal fishing, and destruction of the marine environment in the SCS created
an urgent need for cooperation between countries.
Facing with these security challenges, Vietnam has actively participated in
multilateral and bilateral cooperation mechanisms such as the Regional Cooperation
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, Heads of
Asian Coast Guard Agencies Meeting, etc., proactively set up communication channels
or hotlines, participated in joint patrols, and cooperated to improve maritime capacity
with neighboring countries. All are heading towards the prevention of all kinds
of marine crimes. The coastal states have come to realize that cooperation is one of
the effective options for maintaining order and security in the SCS. In addition, the
adjustment of the maritime security focus in the policies of major countries such as
China, Japan, the US, India, and other countries also facilitates cooperation between
law enforcement forces in general. It looks for opportunities to promote cooperation
and capacity building for maritime law enforcement agencies in Vietnam in particular.
However, in the context of increasingly fierce disputes in the SCS, cooperation between
anti-crime forces is facing many challenges: (i) civil and law enforcement forces are used by
some countries as political tools to assert sovereignty and unilaterally enforce their claims;
(ii) the decline of confidence among countries in the region is pursued by some countries
and enforced excessive claims which are inconsistent with UNCLOS, which is considered
as the main cause of distrust, dissatisfaction, and conflicts between law enforcement forces
in the SCS, thus creating a huge challenge in efforts to promote cooperation against threats
from marine crime; (iii) it is also difficult to reach consensus due to the lack of clearly
delimited maritime boundaries, thereby defining the specific jurisdiction and jurisdiction of
the stakeholders. Thus, it can be seen that disputes and lack of trust are factors that limit the
motivation and desire for cooperation between countries.
4.2 For marine resources exploitation and environmental degradation
Among the disputing parties, Vietnam always wishes to resolve the problem as soon

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

65

as possible with the most actively proposed idea called the model of cooperation for
mutual development. General Secretary Do Muoi introduced this model during his
visit to Thailand in October 1993 (Hoang Viet, 2010).
This policy is being implemented by Vietnam in practice. The legal basis for
cooperation for development without the delineation of the main overlapping sea
area is the Clause 3 of Article 74 (applied to the EEZ) and the Clause 3 of Article 83
(applied to the continental shelf) of the UNCLOS. Accordingly, in the period of the
delimitation of the sea, states must endeavor to reach a practical interim settlement
that does not prejudice or hinder the reaching of the final delimitation agreement. In
other words, the provisional settlement is the ultimate solution that the Convention
requires states to strive to achieve. This is an effort obligation, so no provisional
arrangements are required. Unlike the Chinese model of “setting aside dispute and
pursuing joint development2,” the model proposed by Vietnam should be deployed
in the disputed area, which is overlapping by the sovereignty demands of the related
parties, with legal and historical grounds consistent with the provisions of international
law, especially UNCLOS and acknowledged by the parties to be disputed. According
2

In Chinese: 搁置争议，共同开发. According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC, the concept

has four elements:
The

sovereignty of the territories concerned belongs to China.

When

conditions are not ripe to bring about a thorough solution to territorial dispute, discussion on the issue

of sovereignty may be postponed so that the dispute is set aside. To set aside dispute does not mean giving
up sovereignty. It is just to leave the dispute aside for the time being.
The

territories under dispute may be developed in a joint way.

The

purpose of joint development is to enhance mutual understanding through cooperation and create

conditions for the eventual resolution of territorial ownership.
In

fact, despite the proposed joint exploitation cooperation, China still maintains its unreasonable territorial

claim. More importantly, most of the areas that China proposed to exploit collectively lie on the continental
shelf which is obviously under the sovereignty of another countries. Through common exploitation
intentions, China intentionally forces other countries involved in mining to understand that they are
exploiting in the disputed territory with China. In addition, the policy of bilateral negotiations with each
disputing country that China has introduced is not consistent with the reality of intermingling interests
and claims of many parties and the international community in the SCS. Therefore, China’ proposal is
not feasible in practice. The model of cooperation in sharing marine resources and setting aside disputes
for mutual exploitation, if carried out, will mean the recognition of Chinese claims over the entire SCS,
in accordance with China’s intentions to turn a non-disputed area into a dispute. Other claimants may
have to accept a resource sharing within their own territorial waters. This makes the model difficult to
implement. In fact, not a single country would accept to give up their sovereignty. Although China has
recently signed joint mining cooperation memorandums with the Philippines (2017) and Malaysia (2019),
the implementation of these agreements will be prolonged and there is always a potential risk of collapse
when economic benefits are not as expected.

66

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

to this point of view, in the SCS, there are basically disputed areas such as the Paracel
archipelago, Spratly archipelago, continental shelf areas in the South and Southwest of
Vietnam between Vietnam and Malaysia, Vietnam - Thailand - Malaysia, and historic
waters between Vietnam and Cambodia. The goal of Vietnam is to the interests of all
stakeholders and contribute to building the SCS of ​​peace, cooperation, and sustainable
development is through the process of cooperation and development in the SCS. That
policy of Vietnam is consistent with the principles of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations, and the stakeholders’ interests.
Meanwhile, the co-development model proposed by Vietnam meets the set of
criteria, especially cooperation must take place in areas with factual disputes under the
EEZ and the continental shelf. Therefore, the model is supported by many countries.
Currently, in addition to cooperation for development between Vietnam and Malaysia,
or Malaysia and Thailand, some countries are actively researching and applying this
model. In the context that the settlement of sovereignty disputes in the SCS faces
many difficulties and challenges, it can be expected that the related parties show
their goodwill, and promote negotiations for mutual cooperation in exploitation and
development, generally, in disputed waters. However, the replication of the cooperation
model under Vietnam’s initiative still faces many obstacles because the views of
countries on joint exploitation are still different, and strategic confidence between
countries is still low and deterrence by China. In addition, the application of this model
is only possible in cases the related parties show their willingness to negotiate a specific
disputed area, the subject to be jointly exploited, and the extraction mechanism.
Although the implementation of Vietnam’s model of cooperation for development is
not always easy (Tran Nam Tien, 2014), in recent years, the implementation of the
model has been carried out quite smoothly because it meets the criteria for identifying
the real disputed area and is supported by many countries.
Besides, Vietnam needs to continue promoting the implementation of the
model of cooperation for development in expanding cooperation for exploitation
and development first, and at the same time negotiating and settling disputes of
the overlapping areas with other countries based on suitability and respect for the
interests of all parties, and in compliance with the principles of UNCLOS and DOC.
If implementing that move well, Vietnam will receive the support of the international
and regional community, thereby contributing to building the SCS into a sea of​​
peace, cooperation and sustainable development. According to the regulations of
UNCLOS, Vietnam can consider a temporary practical solution of joint exploitation
in the overlapping area with Indonesia and the Philippines. However, it is necessary to
carefully consider and comprehensively forecast the parties’ response when conducting
joint exploitation of marine resources in sensitive areas. Besides, in international
cooperation on oil and gas exploitation, it is necessary to select potential partners,
focus on international cooperation mechanisms. The implementation of exploration

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

67

and exploitation projects should focus on sovereignty and long-term interests over
short-term and immediate economic interests.
Due to the geographical and historical conditions and the process of regional and
world integration, Vietnam’s security and defense issues are increasingly closely linked
with neighboring countries. The rapid developments of non-traditional security issues
in Southeast Asia have forced countries to erase the distinction between domestic and
regional issues. No country, including Vietnam, can continue to assert that non-traditional
security issues within its borders can be resolved unilaterally through the state’s response.
The range of fluctuations, the extent of the effects, and the impacts of these issues
crossed national boundaries; thus, responses at the national level are insufficient. In other
words, the transnational character of non-traditional security requests either responses at
the national level or closer regional cooperation. Vietnam has actively cooperated with
neighboring countries and regional institutions in responding to security challenges,
especially climate change (Communist Party of Vietnam 2011, pp. 237).
Vietnam has also made great efforts to promote cooperation with other countries in
the region in setting up legal frameworks, building a special cooperation mechanism
with a particular focus on strengthening cooperation with ASEAN countries. Vietnam
submitted appropriate plans and mechanisms such as participation in the ASEAN
Anti-Drug Cooperation Strategy, signing the ASEAN Declaration on Counterterrorism
Cooperation. Vietnam highly appreciates and actively participates in the ASEAN
Defence Ministers Meeting (ADMM) and other defence industry conferences and
supports initiatives to enhance ASEAN military cooperation to tackle security issues
for mutual interests. In that spirit, the Ministry of National Defence of Vietnam has
actively participated in multilateral cooperation mechanisms with ASEAN countries,
such as attending ASEAN defence conferences at all levels, exchanging experiences on
national defence, fighting against transnational crime, anti-terrorism, and humanitarian
activities in disaster prevention. (Ministry of National Defence 2009, pp. 29).
Not only does Vietnam cooperate with Southeast Asian countries but dialogue
partners. Vietnam and ASEAN have developed collaborative programs and plans in
the field of non-traditional security, including cooperation capabilities. In other words,
cooperation in non-traditional security areas is a new direction that ASEAN countries
and Vietnam have implemented effectively with dialogue partners, significant partners
such as China, Japan, South Korea, the United States, and the European Union. These
cooperative efforts can be named here, for example, ASEAN-US Joint Statement on
Counterterrorism Cooperation; ASEAN-EU Joint Statement on Counterterrorism
Cooperation; Bali Declaration on building the ASEAN Community; ASEAN Regional
Forum. Among those cooperation mechanisms, the ASEAN Regional Forum is the most
important formal security dialogue mechanism with the participation of many dialogue
partners. In addition to the ASEAN Regional Forum, the cooperation mechanism between
the 10 ASEAN member countries and the three Northeast Asian powers, including Japan,

68

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

Korea, and China, also known as ASEAN +3, is becoming an increasingly mainstream
channel for cooperation, particularly in the field of economics and security.
Marine investigation and research on marine resources and the environment should
be carried out regularly to verify Vietnam’s sovereignty over areas where Vietnam
has sovereignty and jurisdiction under UNCLOS. Vietnam needs to develop marine
economy sustainably, form marine eco-culture, proactively adapt to climate change,
sea-level rise, and prevent low tide, pollution, degradation of the marine environment,
erosion of the coast and sea erosion, restoration, and conservation of important marine
ecosystems (Nguyen Chu Hoi, 2018). Besides, Vietnam must develop strategies and
socio-economic development plans combining with a marine investigation, prevention
of natural disasters, and sea environmental pollution. Vietnam’s attention should be
paid to international cooperation on marine resources and environmental investigation
and research. Particularly, on the issue of fishing, it is necessary to negotiate with the
concerned countries about the traditional fishing area in the SCS based on international
law and the conclusions of the Permanent Court of Arbitration. This will be an essential
foundation for establishing regional cooperation mechanisms to control fishing in the
disputed field and prevent the degradation of marine resources.

5. Conclusion
In sum, the non-traditional security complex in the SCS covers two categories. First, the
issues must be maritime security, freedom of navigation, and marine crimes. As the lifeline
sea route connecting the Pacific and Indian oceans, the SCS plays an important role in the
global maritime map. Thus, any emerging nation’s control of the sea route will be a threat
to maritime security and not be consistent with the interests of freedom of navigation for
all the countries or the region as a whole because SCS is a sea area with a very high traffic
density because it concentrates on many important international maritime traffic routes.
That is one reason for the development of many types of crimes operating in the SCS, such
as piracy and armed robbery. Second, there is a group of issues that are directly related to
the human exploitation of nature in order to find resources that serve different human and
social purposes. It can be said that, in terms of the immediate intensity of impact on nature,
those activities are just inferior to the war. However, unlike armed conflicts or wars, natural
exploitation takes place regularly, continuously, and in perpetuity. Therefore, the scope of
action of natural extraction and the duration of exploitation are respectively stronger and
longer than those of wars. It is undeniable that the destructive intensity of nature and habitat
increases with human exploitation and economic development.
In fact, the situation in the SCS is always subject to tension or local conflict and
recent years have continuously witnessed an escalation in sovereignty claims as well
as tense actions in the disputed waters. Meanwhile, there is a lack of regional security
cooperation mechanisms that are strong enough to effectively handle those issues in
accordance with the fundamental principles of international law, especially aiming to

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

69

resolve disputes peacefully. The main factor making the situation more complicated
is China with its territorial and resource ambitions. Due to its interpretation of
international law and field actions, China tends to increase imposition of restrictions
on freedom of navigation and overflight in most areas of the SCS. In its strategy of
becoming a global power, the SCS is certainly not China’s ultimate goal. Vietnam is
not the only target that China wants to dominate or maintain influence. China’s goal
is global reach, in which Vietnam and the SCS are only important gateways for China
to take steps passing on the path they want to take. If China cannot pass through
Vietnam, it is difficult for China to control and monopolize the SCS. China will find
every way and at any cost dominate the SCS according to the intention of the ninedash line, to completely master the sea routes to the world. The SCS is the lifeblood of
oil transportation, the only way China can reach out to control the ocean. The SCS is
a strategic path, a core area of interest,
​​
ensuring national safety and security as well as
China’s economic growth and military position.
For Vietnam, the country should be aware of heightening its relationship with the US.
China’s aggression in the South China Sea is one of the main factors for Vietnam to seek
to tighten relations with the US, especially in defense security to balance China in the SCS.
Overall, while there are certain differences, especially in political freedoms and human
rights, the strategic interests of the United States and Vietnam are increasingly aligned. A
better Vietnam-US relationship is beneficiary to the SCS as well as Southeast Asia’ regional
cooperation. Besides, Vietnam always emphasizes that peace, stability, cooperation and
development in the South China Sea are the common aspirations and goals of the countries
surrounding the SCS. Exploiting natural resources for economic growth has led to great
achievements. However, because of not paying attention to the consequences, or by
pursuing immediate benefits, the mankind has made the earth as a whole and the SCS in
particular become gradually exhausted. The risk of crises, large-scale ecological disasters
are appearing in the immediate future. Thus, multilateral cooperation in every aspects of
non-traditional security issues in the SCS must be pushed forward.

Acknowledgements
*”This research is funded by Vietnam National Foundation for Science and Technology
Development (NAFOSTED) under grant number 506.01-2019.03”

References
Acharya, Amitav et al (2006), Studying Non-Traditional Security in Asia: Trends and Issues,
Singapore: Marshall Cavendish.
An, Baijie (2016), “Fifth lighthouse to shine on South China Sea”, China Daily, available at
<https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2016-07/11/content_26033622.htm>, (accessed 28
September 2020).

70

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

ASEAN (2005), Chairman’s Statement of the Twelfth Meeting of the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) Vientiane, available at <https://asean.org/chairman-s-statement-of-the-twelfthmeeting-of-the-asean-regional-forum-arf-vientiane/>, (accessed 15 November 2020)
Bateman, Sam (2005), “Maritime ‘Regime’ Building”, in Joshua Ho et al, The Best of Times,
The Worst of Times Maritime Security in the Asia-Pacific, Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
BBC (2020), Viet Nam va My ky 7 thoa thuan hop tac tri gia hang ti dola [Vietnam and the US
signed 7 cooperation agreements worth billions of dollars], available at <https://www.bbc.
com/vietnamese/business-54655446>, (accessed 18 April 2021).
Bo Quoc phong [Ministry of Defence] (2004), Quoc phong Viet Nam nhung nam dau the ky
XXI (Sach trang Quoc phong Viet Nam 2004), [Vietnam’s National Defence in the Early
Years of the 21st Century (Vietnam’s White Book of National Defence 2004)], Hanoi: Bo
Quoc phong.
Bo Quoc phong [Ministry of Defence] (2009), Quoc phong Viet Nam (Sach trang Quoc phong
Viet Nam 2009 [Vietnam’s National Defence (Vietnam’s White Book of National Defence
2009)], Hanoi: Bo Quoc phong.
Bo Quoc phong [Ministry of Defence] (2019), Quoc phong Viet Nam 2019 (Sach trang Quoc
phong Viet Nam 2019 [Vietnam’s National Defence 2019 (Vietnam’s White Book of National
Defence 2019)], Hanoi: Bo Quoc phong.
Boutilier, James (2005), “The Best of Times, the Worst of Times: The Global Maritime Outlook
2004”, in Joshua Ho et al, The Best of Times, The Worst of Times Maritime Security in the
Asia-Pacific, Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
Caballero-Anthony, Mely (2010), “Non-Traditional Security Challenges, Regional Governance,
and the ASEAN Political-Security Community (APSC)”, Asia Security Initiative Policy
Series, Working Paper No. 7, Singapore: Centre for Non-Traditional Security Studies,
Rajaratnam School of International Studies.
Chase, Michael S., Ben Purser (2015), “China’s Airfield Construction at the Fierce Cross Reef
in Context: Catch-up or Coercion?”, Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, available at <
https://amti.csis.org/chinas-airfield-construction-at-fiery-cross-reef-in-context-catch-up-orcoercion/>, (accessed 14 June 2020)
Cheung, William W. L., U. Rashid Sumaila (2015), Boom or Bust: The Future of Fish in the
South China Sea, Ocean Recovery Alliance, available at <https://www.oceanrecov.org/
news/ocean-recovery-alliance-news/boom-or-bust-the-future-of-fish-in-the-south-china-sea.
html> (accessed 28 March 2020).
Cuong, Le Van (2008), “Tac dong cua nhan to an ninh phi truyen thong doi voi van hoa va con
nguoi o mot so nuoc Dong A” [Impacts of Non-traditional Security on Culture and Human
of East Asian nations’, Tap chi Thong tin Khoa hoc xa hoi [Journal of Social Sciences
Information], No. 9.
Dang Cong san Viet Nam [Communist Party of Vietnam] (2011), Van kien Dai hoi dai bieu
toan quoc lan thu XI [Document of the 11th National Congress], Hanoi: Chinh tri Quoc gia
Publishing House.
Dang Cong san Viet Nam [Communist Party of Vietnam] (2016), Van kien dai hoi Dang toan
quoc lan thu XII, [Document of the 12th National Congress], Hanoi: Chinh tri Quoc gia
Publishing House.

Non-traditional Security Complex in the South China Sea:
Vietnam’s Perspectives and Policy Implications

71

Dang Cong san Viet Nam [Communist Party of Vietnam] (2021), Chien luoc phat trien
kinh te – xa hoi 10 nam 2021-2030, [Strategy for socio-economic development in the
decade 2021-2030], available at <https://tulieuvankien.dangcongsan.vn/ban-chap-hanhtrung-uong-dang/dai-hoi-dang/lan-thu-xiii/chien-luoc-phat-trien-kinh-te-xa-hoi-10nam-2021-2030-3671>, (accessed 20 March 2021).
Duong, Luan Thuy et al (2010), “Cac thach thuc an ninh phi truyen thong o khu vuc Dong Nam
A” [Non-traditional security challenges in Southeast Asia], in Minh, Pham Binh (2010),
Cuc dien the gioi den 2020 [World Affairs by 2020], Hanoi: National Political Publishing
House.
Ha, Tran Thi (2017), “Mot so thach thuc an ninh phi truyen thong o Dong Nam A hien nay”
[Some non-traditional security challenges in Southeast Asia today’], Tap chi Nghien cuu
Dong Nam A [Review of Southeast Asian Studies], Vol. 212, No. 11.
Herbert-Burn, Rupert et al (2009), Lloyd’s MIU Handbook of Maritime Security, London: CRC
Press.
Hoang, Dam Huy (2018), “Hop tac cua ASEAN ve chong o nhiem moi truong o bien Dong
tu nam 2003 den nay” [ASEAN cooperation on combating environmental pollution in the
SCS since 2003], Tap chi Nghien cuu Dong Nam A [Review of Southeast Asian Studies],
Vol. 222, No. 9.
Hoang Viet (2010), “Giai phap nao cho tranh chap bien Dong?” [What are the solutions for
SCS dispute?], Tap chi Thoi dai moi, No. 19, available at <http://www.tapchithoidai.org/
ThoiDai19/201019_HoangViet.htm> ((accessed 15 April 2020)
Hoi, Nguyen Chu (2018), “Phat trien kinh te bien xan de giau tu bien”, [Developing blue sea
economy to get rich from the sea], VOV News, available at <https://vov.vn/kinh-te/phattrien-kinh-te-bien-xanh-de-giau-tu-bien-822093.vov> (accessed 31 March 2020)
Holland, Steve., Nguyen, Mai (2017), “Trump offers to mediate on South China Sea”, Reuters,
available at <https://www.reuters.com/article/us-trump-asia-vietnam-idUSKBN1DC04H>
(accessed 10 October 2020).
Hughes, Terry P. et al (2013), “The Wicked Problem of China’s Disappearing Coral Reefs”,
Conversation Biology, Vol 27, No. 2, pp. 261-269.
Khiem, Pham Gia (2010), “Doi ngoai Viet Nam nam 2009: Vuot qua thach thuc, vung buoc vao
nam 2010” [Vietnam’s foreign affairs in 2009: Overcoming challenges and heading toward
2010], Tap chi Cong san [Communist Review], No. 807, pp. 7-13.
Klare, Michael T., Yogesh Chandrani (1998), World Security: Challenges for a New Century,
New York: St. Martine’s Press.
Lillehaugen, M. (2018), The ‘Free and Open’ Indo-Pacific: A Call for European Partnership,
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, available at <https://carnegieendowment.
org/2018/06/22/free-and-open-indo-pacific-call-for-european-partnership-pub-76673>
(access 20 March 2020).
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC (2015), Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hong Lei’s
Regular Press Conference on April 28, 2015, available at <https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_
eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/t1258874.shtml> (access 20 May 2020).
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC (2015), Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lu Kang’s
Remarks on Issues Relating to China’s Construction Activities on the Nansha Islands
and Reefs, 2015, available at <https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/

72

Nghiem Tuan Hung • Nguyen Xuan Cuong

s2510_665401/t1273370.shtml> (access 20 May 2020).
Ministry of National Defense of the PRC (2016), Defense Ministry’s regular press conference
on Mar.31, available at <http://eng.mod.gov.cn/TopNews/2016-03/31/content_4648198.
htm> (accessed 1 April 2020).
New Zealand Government (2018), Strategic Defence Policy Statement, available at <http://
www.nzdf.mil.nz/corporate-documents/strategic-defence-policy-statement-2018.htm>
(accessed 3 April 2020).
O’Neill, Daniel C (2018), Dividing ASEAN and Conquering the South China Sea: China’s
Financial Power Projection, Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Panda, Ankit (2017), “How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea? Not $5.3 Trillion a
Year”, The Diplomat, available at <How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea? Not
$5.3 Trillion a Year> (accessed 17 August 2020).
Strait Times (2018), Australia asserts right to SCS passage, available at <https://www.
straitstimes.com/asia/australianz/australia-asserts-right-to-south-china-sea-passage>
(accessed 3 April 2020).
Sukma, Rizal (2010), ASEAN and Non-traditional Security, paper presented at the Fourth
International Symposium ‘Security Cooperation and Regional Integration in Asia’, Waseda
University, Japan, 3 December 2010.
Terriff, Terry et al (2001), Security Studies Today, Singapore: Blackwell Publishers Ltd.
Tickell, Oliver (2016), “China condemned for massive coral reef destruction”, The Ecologist,
available at <https://theecologist.org/2016/jul/12/china-condemned-massive-coral-reefdestruction> (accessed 14 June 2020).
Tien, Tran Nam (2014), “Hop tac giai quyet xung dot bien Dong hien nay – Mot so goi y tu goc
nhin cua Viet Nam” [Cooperation for conflict settlement in the SCS – Suggestions from
Vietnam’ viewpoint], Tap chi Phat trien Khoa hoc va Cong nghe [Science & Technology
Development Journal], Vol. 17, No. X1, pp. 59-77.
US Embassy and Consulate Vietnam (2019), United States Transfer Six Patrol Boats to Vietnam
Coast Guard Region III, available at <https://vn.usembassy.gov/pr20190401-united-statestransfers-six-patrol-boats-to-vietnam-coast-guard-region-iii/>, (accessed 15 March 2021).
conventional oil and gas resources, available at <https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.
php?id=10651> (accessed 7 June 2020).
Vinh, Vo Xuan (2018), “Nan cuop bien o Dong Nam A tu khi chien tranh lanh ket thuc den nay”
[Piracy in Southeast Asia since the end of Cold War], Tap chi Nghien cuu Dong Nam A
[Review of Southeast Asian Studies], Vol. 219, No. 6.
Williams, Paul D and McDonald, Matt (2018), Security Studies: An Introduction (3st edn.),
London: Routledge.
Wu, Shicun and Zou, Keyuan (2016), Maritime Security in the South China Sea: Regional
Implications and International Cooperation, New York: Routledge.
Zhang, Hongzhou (2016), “South China Sea: The Story of the Tanmen Fishermen”, The
Diplomat, available at <https://thediplomat.com/2016/01/south-china-sea-the-story-of-thetanmen-fishermen/> (accessed 3 July 2020).

