Cogito
MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH JOURNAL
Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Bucharest, 2022
ISSN 2068-6706

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

1

Cogito Journal is published under the aegis of
“Dimitrie Cantemir” Christian University

Address: 176 Splaiul Unirii, Bucharest
Phone: 021.330.79.00, 021.330.79.11,
021.330.79.14
Fax: 021.330.87.74
E-mail: cogito.ucdc@yahoo.com

Cogito Journal is included in IDB ,
SCOPUS, EBSCO, PROQUEST,
CEEOL, INDEX COPERNICUS,
HEINONLINE, DOAJ, ULRICH’S
PERODICALS DIRECTORY, CNCS
recognized

2

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Cogito
MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH JOURNAL
Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

3

Every author is responsible for the originality of the article
and that the text was not published previously.
4

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

CONTENTS
PHILOSOPHY
EMPLOYING
JOHN
STUART
MILL’S
UTILITARIAN
PHILOSOPHY OF ECONOMICS AS A CATALYST TO AFRICA’S
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ........................................ 7
Emmanuel Kelechi Iwuagwu,
Bonaventure Ikechukwu Ozoigbo,
Gabriel Akwaji Agabi
ENVIRONMENT AND THE EMERGENCE OF DEHUMANIZED
FUTURE ........................................................................................... 28
Philip Osarobu Isanbor,
Philip Akporduado Edema
THE EXPERIENCE OF PHILOSOPHIZING IN EMERGENCY
CONDITIONS: SPECIFICS AND PERSPECTIVES .............................. 44
Inna Kovalenko,
Yuliia Meliakova,
Eduard Kalnytskyi,
Ksenia Nesterenko

POLITICAL SCIENCES, ECONOMICS AND LAW
“DEMOCRACY: A STATE OF DEMOS OR AN OLIGARCH’S
PARTY STATE? AN INTERPRETATION OF MODERNITY’S
NOTION OF DEMOCRACY IN THE MODERN GREEK STATE” .......... 63
Dionysis Tsirigotis
RUSSIA’S INVASION OF UKRAINE: THE IMPLICATIONS FOR
THE AMERICAN HEGEMONY .......................................................... 85
Murat Güneylioğlu
RUSSIAN FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC POLICIES TOWARDS THE
NEAR ABROAD ............................................................................... 103
Stephen Adi Odey,
Andi Octamaya Tenri Awaru,
Oduora Okpokam Asuo
ASEAN AND CONFLICT MANAGEMENT IN SOUTHEAST ASIA ......123
Lita Limpo,
Beauty Beauty

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

5

SOCIAL INSTABILITY AS A GLOBAL TREND OF THE MODERN
WORLD ........................................................................................... 141
Oleg Danilyan,
Oleksandr Dzeban,
Yurii Kalynovskyi
FACTORS DETERMINING THE WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR
THE CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY OF SONE BEEL,
ASSAM, INDIA .................................................................................162
Kanchan Baran Singha,
N.B. Singh,
K. Gyanendra Singh
THE PROSPECTS, CHALLENGES, AND LEGAL ISSUES OF
DIGITAL BANKING IN NIGERIA .................................................... 186
Paul Atagamen Aidonojie,
Oluwaseye Oluwayomi Ikubanni,
Nosakhare Okuonghae
THE MOMENT OF CONSUMMATION OF AN OFFENCE
RELATING TO THE MANIPULATION OF AN EVENT: UNDER
THE CRIMINAL CODE OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA ............. 210
Gheorghe Reniță,
Sergiu Brînza

FOREIGN LANGUAGES AND LITERATURES
MANIPULATIVE ARGUMENTATION IN ANTI-UKRAINIAN
DISCOURSE OF RUSSIAN POLITICIANS: INTEGRATION OF
DISCOURSE-ANALYTICAL AND CLASSICAL RHETORICAL
APPROACHES ................................................................................ 224
Nataliia Kravchenko
SEMANTIC
PHENOMENA
IN
ENGLISH
CLINICAL
TERMINOLOGY OF VETERINARY MEDICINE ............................... 247
Olena Syrotina,
Yurii Rozhkov
TYPOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF ILLOCUTIONARY SPEECH
ACTS: A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ............................................ 266
Oleksandra Tuhai

6

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

EMPLOYING JOHN STUART MILL’S UTILITARIAN
PHILOSOPHY OF ECONOMICS AS A CATALYST TO
AFRICA’S SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Emmanuel Kelechi Iwuagwu,
fremmakele@yahoo.com
Bonaventure Ikechukwu Ozoigbo,
bonaventure.ozoigbo@futo.edu.ng
Gabriel Akwaji Agabi
agabigab19@gmail.com

Abstract: This work examines the significance of Mill’s Utilitarian
philosophy of economics in addressing the challenges confronting the social and
economic development of Africa. Africa, the second largest continent both by
land mass and population, is yet to replicate its size with socio-economic
greatness. The continent is still riddled with myriads of socio-political and
economic problems begging for solutions. These problems, as the work
identifies, range from poor productive capacity, unmotivated labour force, poor
capital base, bad foreign market policies, corruption, defective economic
policies, bad leadership and lack of political will. This work employing the
philosophical tools of textual critical analysis, exposition and evaluation argues
that some aspects of J.S. Mill’s utilitarian philosophy of economics can be used
as a catalyst to trigger the long overdue social and economic development of
Africa. The aspects which the work employed include Mill’s views on production,
labour, capital, exchange and international trade.
Keywords: J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Philosophy of Economics, Africa,
Social and Economic Development, Production, Capital, International Trade.



Senior Lecturer, Department of Philosophy, University of Calabar,
Calabar, Nigeria.

Senior Lecturer, Directorate of General Studies, Federal University of
Technology Owerri, Owerri, Nigeria.

Assistant Lecturer, Department of Philosophy, University of Calabar,
Calabar, Nigeria.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

7

Introduction
It is generally agreed that the African continent, which is only second
to Asia both in land mass and population, has not lived up to its potentials
in spite of its abundant human and material resources. Africa which is
considered the cradle of civilization is today lagging far behind when
compared with other continents in terms human capital development and
economic progress. The continent is yet to take off socially, politically, and
economically and is still largely dependent on other developed continents
for its survival.
Socially, the continent is riddled with myriads of social ills ranging
from poverty, illiteracy, out of school children, armed robbery, kidnapping,
cultism, drug abuse, human trafficking, prostitution, ritual murder, gender
based violence such as rape, female genital mutilation, domestic violence,
etc., as well as youth restiveness caused by massive unemployment which
in turn ferments all forms of social ills and criminality1.
Economically, though Africa boasts of abundant human and material
resources, it is yet to develop these capacities to its advantage. This failure
to take off economically is consequent upon many factors among which
are: corruption, wrong economic policies, lack of political will to execute
the proper economic policies, inability to harness the abundant human
and natural resources, lack of investable capital, huge infrastructural
deficit, defective foreign trade policies, improper motivation of its huge
labour force which has led to massive brain drain and its weak taxation
policies.
Some contemporary scholars, such as Ikegbu2, Iwuagwu3, Ozoigbo4
and Enyimba5, have tried to proffer solutions to address these problems to
save Africa from being the weeping continent. These scholarly
recommendations have in no small measure enhanced some noticeable
progress though the goal is yet to be achieved. It is on this note that this
work brings on board John Stuart Mill’s utilitarian philosophy of
1 E.K. Iwuagwu, ‘John Stuart Mill’s Utilitarianism: A Panacea to Nigeria’s Socio-Political
Quagmire,’ Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal. vol. 13, no. 4, 2021, p. 67.
2 E.A. Ikegbu, ‘African Socialism: Metaphors for Political Freedom and Economic
Prosperity in the 21st Century,’ Journal of Integrative Humanism, vol.3, no. 1, 2013, pp.
37-50.
3 E.K. Iwuagwu, ‘Employing the Principles of Subsidiarity and Participation as
Veritable Catalyst for Africa’s Socio-Political and Economic Development,’ International
Journal of Research in Arts and Social Science, vol. 9, no. 1, 2016, pp. 138-151.
4
B.I. Ozoigbo, ‘African Theories of Development and the Reality of
Underdevelopment,’ International Journal of Development and Economic
Sustainability, vol. 4, no. 4, 2016, pp. 12-19.
5 M. Enyimba, ‘Sustainable-Inclusive Development Through Conversational
Thinking: The Case for Africa-China Relations,’ Filosofia Theoretica: Journal of African
Philosophy, Culture and Religions, vol. 8, no. 1, 2019, pp. 1-20.

8

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

economics to serve as another catalyst to spur Africa’s social and economic
development. Mill’s utilitarianism is a vibrant socio-ethical philosophy
which assesses the success of any government based on its capacity to
produce the greatest amount of happiness for the greatest number of its
citizens6. It is a people-centered philosophy that highlights the primary
purpose of government which consists in securing the wellbeing of its
citizens. In accord with Bentham’s definition of utility Mill defines
utilitarianism as:
the creed which accepts the foundation of
morals, Utility, or the Greatest Happiness Principle,
holds that actions are right in proportion as they
tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to
produce the reverse of happiness. By happiness is
intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by
unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure7.
With the socio-ethical foundation of Africa reformed with the
utilitarian mindset, the relevant aspects of J.S. Mill’s philosophy of
economics will then be introduced to spur economic growth.
Some contemporary scholars consider some classical economic
theories as obsolete and only marginally relevant (if at all) in addressing
our present day economic realities. The economic theories of great and
influential economists such as Adam Smith, Robert Malthus, David
Ricardo, J.S. Mill and others are unfairly put in this class. It is argued by
this school of thought that the present economic realities enhanced by
industrial revolution and mostly by globalization has rendered these
classical economic theories ineffectual and redundant. This work disagrees
with this line of thinking and rather holds that though some aspects of the
classical economic theories may have been overcome by historical course
of events and contemporary socio-economic realities, the classical
economic theories continue to provide the foundation upon which present
day political economy stands. Contemporary political economy still relies
heavily on some classical economic theories. According to James Bonar,
‘more has been left of John Stuart Mill the economist than John Stuart
Mill the philosopher’8.

6 S. Nathanson, ‘Editor’s Introduction’ to John Stuart Mill’s Principles of Political
Economy With Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy, Cambridge, Hackett
Publishing Company, 2004.
7 J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, New York, Floating Press, 2009, p. 14.
8 J. Bonar, ‘The Economics of John Stuart Mill.’ Journal of Political Economy, vol.
19, no. 9, 1911, p. 718.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

9

J.S. Mill’s masterpiece, Principles of Political Economy (1848), not
only became the 19th century English economics handbook but was also
widely consulted across Europe for many years because it answered most
questions in economics. Mill’s economic views emphasizing the historical,
social, and cultural factors that determine the level of productivity in a
society have been ignored by many contemporary economists with dire
consequences. According to Nathanson,
While Mill emphasizes the many political, social
and cultural underpinnings of successful economies,
later economic policy makers seem to have taken
literally the equation of a market economy with a
policy of “laissez-faire.” This has led to the notion
that all one has to do in order to produce a successful
economy is to leave things alone. Mill would not have
made that mistake, and his views on this and many
other matters are still relevant to economics and
economic policy-making9.
His views on economic matters are very rich resource materials for
many economic, social and political problems which have remained
pressing issues even in our own contemporary time. The twin perennial
problems of creating productive economies and that of designing viable
institutions to ensure a just distribution of the fruits of economic
productivity addressed by Mill are still confronting our contemporary
economic policy makers. The proper role of government in production and
trade are still contentious issues in our time, so also are the socioeconomic problems of poverty, poverty alleviation, just wages, access to
capital, international trade and efficient taxation system 10. These teething
problems are still very much unresolved in Africa and are stalling its social
and economic development.
Considering the fact that in his utilitarian project Mill approached
socio-economic problems believing that social progress could only be
made if people embrace the relevant facts and embrace correct and useful
principles for evaluating institutions and policies, one cannot dismiss
Mill’s insight with a wave of hand. Mill, according to Nathanson,
combines an attempt to explain how economic
systems work with a search for the right principles to
use in evaluating economic and social policies. There
is much to be learned from his discussion of
particular problems, principles, and policies and
9

S. Nathanson, op. cit., p. x.
S. Nathanson, op. cit.

10

10

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

from the methods that he uses for trying to
understand social issues in a serious way11.
This work believes that since there is a lot to learn from Mill’s
utilitarian philosophy of economics with regard to the many socioeconomic challenges still confronting Africa, and with the widespread
clamor for applying philosophical ideas to practical realities, the time is
ripe for Mill’s philosophical ideas to receive the attention it deserves
especially in applying it to solving the problem of social and economic
development of Africa.
This work being a research in philosophy is a qualitative research
rather than a quantitative enterprise. It is rationalistic, speculative and
normative in approach rather than empirical and descriptive. In its
method of approach, the work also employs the philosophical tools of
exposition, critical analysis, textual and contextual analysis and evaluation.
In conclusion the work agreed that though the present socio-economic
realities confronting Africa may be very daunting, employing J.S. Mill’s
utilitarian philosophy of economics to address them will serve as a catalyst
to spur social and economic development which Africa urgently needs to
assure its match to greatness.
Africa’s Social and Economic Backwardness: A Cursory
Look at its Contributory Factors and Suggested Remedies.
The issue of Africa’s socio-economic underdevelopment has been a
subject of discussion in many academic and nonacademic forums. Many
contemporary scholars have identified some factors militating against
Africa’s social and economic development and also proffered some
solutions. Gemede decried Africa’s backwardness with regard to human
development and other measures of economic development caused by
poor policy environment which cannot sustain economic growth. Such
alien policies cannot translate into welfare improvements or sustainable
development. He recommends a new socio-economic development
approach/model that is informed by an African economic renaissance
paradigm12. Iwuagwu E. K. identified over-centralization as a major cog in
the wheel of Africa’s social and economic development. He recommends
subsidiarity and participation at all levels of governance as a major catalyst
to Africa’s development13. For Ozoigbo, the problem is dependence index.
He warned that no country or continent ever developed by majorly
S. Nathanson, 0p. cit., p. xi.
V. Gumede, ‘Towards a Better Socio-Economic Development Approach for African
Renewal,’ Africa Insight, vol. 46, no. 1, 2016, pp. 89-105.
13 E.K. Iwuagwu, 0p. cit., 2016, pp. 138-151.
11

12

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

11

depending on others. He insists that the key to development is real
‘independence’14. Amtaika’s Socio-Economic Development in Africa:
Challenges and Dimensions (a collection of essays that discussed the
historical, political, social and economic ramifications of development
policies in Africa) blamed unfriendly policies for Africa’s woes and
recommends policies that consider the African peculiarities 15. Igwe, P. et al
explored five main factors affecting investment and productivity in Africa
as: education of the labour force, access to infrastructure, access to
finance, size of firms and business climate variables such as insecurity,
bribery and corruption, ease of doing business and poor power
availability16. Verter investigates the dynamics of trade in food products
and food security in Nigeria, the giant of Africa, he reveals adverse trade
imbalance between her imports and exports. He identifies the causes of the
country’s food insecurity and inadequate production capacity as:
infrastructural deficit, population growth, poverty, corruption, insecurity
and inadequate government support to farmers17. Ferreira and Steenkamp
blamed Africa’s socio-economic woes on poor regional trade integration
among African countries caused by high trade cost, poor infrastructure
and insufficient market information. They insist that enhanced trade has
the potential to drive Africa’s development through greater productivity,
industrialization, innovation and job creation18. Enyimba identifies the
challenges militating against Africa’s development in the dearth of
constructive and balanced relationships. He recommends using the
conversational technique in forging a development that is constructive19.
Ikegbu, E. et al blamed Africa’s stagnation on poor leadership,
inappropriate policies and pursuit of personal drives. They argued that
leadership ineptitude, political and financial rascality, corruption and
high-level ethnic and religious profligacy are obstacles to Africa’s social
and economic development20.
B.I. Ozoigbo, 0p. cit.
A. Amtaika, Socio-Economic Development in Africa: Challenges and Dimensions,
Austin Texas, Pan African University Press, 2017.
16 P. Igwe, P. Amaugo, A. Ogundana, O. Egere, and J. Anigbo, ‘Factors Affecting the
Investment Climate, SMEs Productivity and Entrepreneurship in Nigeria,’ European
Journal of Sustainable Development, vol. 7 no. 1, 2018, pp. 182-200.
17 N. Verter, ‘Food Security and Trade in Food Products in Nigeria,’ European
Journal of Sustainable Development, vol. 8, no. 3, 2019, pp. 527-542.
18 L. Ferreira and E. Steenkamp, ‘Promoting Sustainable and Inclusive Trade by
Exploring Untapped Intra-regional Trade Opportunities in Africa,’ Africa Insight, vol. 49,
no, 4, 2020, pp. 72-87.
19 M. Enyimba, 0p. cit.
20 E.A. Ikegbu, G.C.S. Iwuchukwu, S.A. Ekanem, and C.K. Ariche, ‘Poverty
Leadership, Coronavirus and Sustainable Development in Nigeria,’ European Journal of
Sustainable Development, vol. 9, no. 4, 2020, pp. 351-363.
14
15

12

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

From the above background it can be said that the factors militating
against Africa’s Social and economic development include poor production
output consequent upon unmotivated labour force, infrastructural deficit,
poor and unfriendly socio-economic policies, corruption, insecurity, overcentralization and lack of political will to implement viable policies. Other
factors include inadequate investable capital to drive growth. This is seen
in lack of modern machinery in agriculture and other industrial
equipments, inadequate finance to establish large scale business outfits
and stringent conditions in accessing credit facilities. Finally, there is
imbalance in trade resulting in huge trade deficit because of excessive
importation without commensurate export capacity.
Some of these issues are what this work wants to address employing
J.S. Mill’s utilitarian philosophy of economics. With his principle of utility
providing the social background, Mill’s views on production, labour,
capital and international trade will be applied in finding a solution to
Africa’s social and economic underdevelopment.
Background of Mill’s Utilitarian Philosophy of Economics
and its Significance to Social, Political and Economic Reforms
The nineteenth century British social philosophy witnessed a
continuity of empiricism in two new significant phases namely:
philosophical radicalism championed by Jeremy Bentham and
Benthamism as modified and developed by J.S. Mill. These two new
phases fall under utilitarianism. Hence utilitarianism is considered the
first phase of nineteenth century empiricism 21. Utilitarianism as
championed by Bentham and James Mill though individualistic in outlook
is aimed at the welfare of the society.
Adam Smith’s classical and encyclopedic masterpiece Wealth of
Nations (1776) bequeathed to the nineteenth century British utilitarians a
new discipline of political economy. In this work Smith viewed ‘the
obvious and simple system of natural liberty’ as the best guide to social
policy. For him, that system is the base for achieving the wealth of the
nations. He also identified the expansion of that wealth with the general
prosperity of the population at large22. The utilitarians bought this idea of
Smith and brought into it a more sharply defined principle of justice: the
greatest happiness of the greatest number. The utilitarians were impressed
by Smith’s system of natural liberty which met their standard.
Consequently a system of laisser-faire capitalism brought about by the
F. Copleston, A History of Philosophy. Volume VIII: Modern Philosophy, New
York, Doubleday, 1994.
22 A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Edited
by R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1976. pp. 687-688, 696.
21

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

13

progress of liberty and built on free markets, private property and the
wage relationship serves the utilitarian purpose of giving happiness to the
majority.
Though this classical liberal position pervaded much of the early
nineteenth century utilitarianism, J.S. Mill developed a set of increasingly
radical themes based on an egalitarian psychology. These themes include:
land reforms, the extension of the franchise, restrictions on inheritance,
access to education, granting of civil rights to minorities, blacks and
women and most importantly the possibility of reorganizing production in
cooperative enterprises23. All these reforms are aimed at sharing the
benefits of increasing productivity more widely. Mill was convinced that
laisser-faire capitalism is only transitory and that the economy that will
replace it will both expand its material base as well as make possible
meaningful personal growth for the largest share of the population24.
Mill grew up in an environment in which social reform and the
utilitarian ethic of Jeremy Bentham were pervasive influences. His father
James Mill was a diehard promoter of Benthamism, an idea which he and
Bentham tried to apply in every facet of life, be it in legal, social, political
or economic issues25. The basic idea of Benthamism as a utilitarian
philosophy is that the goal of all social, political or individual actions or
decisions should be the promotion of the greatest amount of happiness or
wellbeing. Hence all government or individual actions, laws and policies
are adjudged right or wrong based on its tendency to promote the greatest
happiness26. This basic idea was what spurred Bentham, James Mill and
other utilitarians to seek radical reforms in the laws and practices of their
time in order to enhance social and economic wellbeing of their citizens.
John Stuart Mill may have revised some of the views of Bentham and
his father on how social and political reforms could best be achieved, all
the same he remained faithful to the basic project of utilitarianism and
distinguished himself as an astute promoter of social, political and
economic reforms geared towards the betterment of people’s lives and
their utmost happiness. Hence Mill’s utmost goal in all his writings was the
utilitarian goal of bringing about what Bentham called ‘the greatest
happiness of the greatest number.’

23 J. Persky, The Political Economy of Progress: John Stuart Mill and Modern
Radicalism, New York, Oxford University Press, 2016, p. 4.
24 J. Persky, 0p. cit.
25 J.S. Mill, Autobiography. Edited with an Introduction by John M. Robson, New
York, Penguin Books, 1989.
26 J. Bentham, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation,
Kitchene, Batoche Books, 2000.

14

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Mill’s Philosophy of Economics
In his philosophy of economics J. S. Mill is in the same class with
Adam Smith, David Ricardo and other classical economists. Mill’s
Philosophy of Economics was very influential in shaping the economic
policies in England of his time. His enormous contributions to the quantity
theory are still very relevant. For Mill economics is an inexact and separate
science which employs the deductive method in its analysis27. Mill’s
Principles of Political Economy combined the disciplines of philosophy
and economics and advocated that population limits and slow economic
growth would be beneficial to the environment and increase public
goods28. His work when viewed within the context of his agitation for
social and economic progress is considered one of the most important
contributions made by classical economists. Mill, according to Rudi
Verburg,
characterized his economics with his theory of
(individual) development, which explained how
people could be induced to change patterns of
behavior that prevented progress, enabling a
‘tendency towards a better and happier state’.
Mapping out how to overcome man’s material and
moral improvement, Mill brought economics into
action as an instrument for progress29.
Mill strongly advocated for the use of philosophical thought and
economic theory to influence political decision making. He expanded the
ideas of Adam Smith and Ricardo, developing the ideas of economies of scale,
opportunity cost and comparative advantage in trade. Mill divided the main
body of this his magnum opus into five ‘books’ which treated the following
topics: production, distribution, exchange, influence of the progress of society
on production and distribution and the influence of government.
Among the many areas Mill philosophy of economics dwelt on which
will be beneficial to our subject of discussion include: production, capital
and international trade.
John Stuart Mill on Production
Mill regards production as very central and crucial to economics. For
him production has two arms: labour and appropriate natural objects. Mill
27 D.M. Hausman, ‘John Stuart Mill’s Philosophy of Economics,’ Philosophy of
Science, vol. 48, no. 3, 1981, pp. 363-385.
28 J. Kagan, John Stuart Mill, Investopedia, 2019.
29 R. Verburg, ‘John Stuart Mill’s Political Economy: Educational Means to Moral
Progress,’ Review of Social Economy, vol.64, no. 2, 2006, p. 225.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

15

argued that every economic theory or assertion is aimed at increasing
productivity so as to better the lives of the people. For him the provisions
of nature are enormous but man must labour to utilize these vast resources
provided by nature to his benefit. For Mill, ‘Labour is either bodily or
mental; or, to express the distinction more comprehensively, either
muscular or nervous’30 He used an array of imagery to demonstrate how
human labour and ingenuity enhances production of valuable goods: from
the sewing of cloth to the turning of wheels and the creation of steam31.
Mill argued that without adequate labour, productivity would be
difficult to ascertain. It is Mills’ argument that there can be no
development without sufficient labour. For every product utilized by man
there are chains of production where different types of labour are
employed. Hence, though the labour of the plowman who prepared the
ground for planting of the seed may be considered minimal in the
production of the bread, it is very significant in the value chain of
production.
For Mill there are productive and unproductive labours. While
productive labours enhance productivity for the good of man,
unproductive labours hinders productivity and are mostly detrimental to
humanity because it does not promote the common good32. Mill regards
anyone who contributes nothing directly or indirectly to production as an
unproductive consumer.
Mill also acknowledged the necessity of the second requisite of
production, appropriate natural agents without which labour will be
nonexistent or inconsequential. Hence, man is surrounded by abundant
natural resources consisting of land, trees, shelters, water, animals, fishes,
and numerous forms of natural resources as well as natural strength and
skills to exploit the generous gifts of nature33.
John Stuart Mill on Capital
In his discussion on economic and social development J.S. Mill argued
that apart from the primary and universal requisites of production, labour
and natural agents, there is another crucial element which is capital. Of
this Mill says,
there is another requisite without which no
productive operations, beyond the rude and scanty
beginnings of primitive industry, are possible:
30 J.S Mill, Principles of Political Economy with Some of Their Applications to Social
Philosophy, Ed. S. Nathanson, Cambridge, Hackett Publishing Company, 2004, p, 19.
31 Op. cit., p. 22.
32 Op. cit., pp. 30-32.
33 Op. cit., p. 19.

16

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

namely, a stock, previously accumulated, of the
products of former labour. This accumulated stock of
the produce of labour is termed Capital....What
capital does for production is to afford the shelter,
protection, tools, and materials which the work
requires, and to feed and otherwise maintain the
labourers during the process34.
Mills argued that the distinction between Capital and Not-capital does
not lie in the kind of commodities involved, but in the mind of the
capitalist, that is to say, in the capitalists’ will to employ them for one
purpose rather than another and all property, however, ill adapted in itself
for the use of labourers is a part of capital35.
Capital like labor is very indispensable in every production process.
Though labour is fundamental to production but without capital labour
cannot be employed. Capital makes possible the provision of shelter,
protection, tools, and materials which the work requires as well as to feed
and maintain the labourers during the production process. Hence one can
infer from the above that building up capital, avoidance of wastages of
capital and proper reinvestment of capital is key to every economic growth.
According to Fawcett, since the labourer must be fed by previously
accumulated food, some of the results of past labours are required to be set
aside to sustain the labourers while producing. Capital is not confined to
the food which feeds the labourers but includes machinery, buildings and
in fact every product due to man’s labour which can be applied to assist his
industry36.
Henry George corroborates this view of capital by regarding it as that
part of man’s stock which he expects to yield him revenue 37. Thus capital
consists of that part of man’s or an entrepreneur’s possession; whatever it
might be which he desire to employ in carrying on fresh production.
Mill further distinguished between Circulating and Fixed Capitals.
While circulating capitals are those capitals that are used once and cannot
be repeated such as materials used during production, wages and capitals
consumed by the producer, fixed capitals ‘consists of instruments of
production of a more or less permanent character….To this class belong
buildings, machinery, and all or most things known by the name of
implements or tools’38.
J. S. Mill, 2004, op. cit., p. 32.
Op. cit., p. 33.
36 P. Fawcett, Manual of Political Economy, London, Marshall, 1993, p. 11.
37 H. George, Progress and Poverty, New York, Knox Publishers, 2009, p. 41.
38 J. S. Mill, op. cit., 2004, p. 34.
34
35

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

17

With his utilitarian background Mill recommends that the welfare of
the workers must never be sacrificed in the name of expanding production.
Hence fixed and circulating capitals must be proportionally increased to
avoid industrial unrest and promote economic growth.
John Stuart Mill on International Trade
J.S. Mill disagreed with that aspect of David Ricardo’s theory of
comparative advantage, which states that the gains of trade are evenly
distributed. For Mill international trade benefits the country whose
demand for goods is most elastic. He criticized the kind of international
trade which serves as an instrument of exploitation of the weaker
economies by the stronger ones.
In this regard he propounded his theory of reciprocal demand or the
law of international values to argue what actually determines the
equilibrium terms of trade. For him a stable ratio of exchange will be
determined at a level where the value of imports and exports of each
country is in equilibrium39. Mill’s theory provided the actual determination
of equilibrium terms of trade which are determined by the equation of
reciprocal demand. By reciprocal demand Mill means the relative strength
and elasticity of demand of the two trading countries for each other’s
products in terms of their own product. Mill believes that the actual ratio
at which goods are traded will depend on the strength and elasticity of
each country’s demand for the other country’s product, or upon reciprocal
demand. The ratio will be stable when the value of each country’s export is
just enough to pay for its import40. He holds that a country that dwells
wholly on importation of goods and services will definitely enters into
financial crisis and end up in debt.
According to Mill there are some things that are physically impossible
to produce in certain geographical locations because of some particular
natural circumstances of climate. There are also many things which though
they could be produced at home without difficulty and in any quantity are
yet imported from a distance. This may be explained by the huge cost of
producing them at home which makes it cheaper to import them than to
produce them. Hence Mill encourages nations to concentrate on the
production of things where they have comparative advantage both for their
internal use and for exports while they should import items that can be
produced at home at a higher cost.
While Mill encouraged international trade, he argued that it could be
used as a means of exploitation where the more advantaged countries
P. Choudhary, Mill’s Theory of Reciprocal Demand: Formula, Graphs and
Criticism, 2021, www.microeconomicsnotes.com.
40 J.S. Mill, 2004, op. cit.
39

18

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

suppress and marginalize the less advantaged ones. He warned against its
being hijacked by the capitalist in their agenda to continually render the
smaller and developing countries financially dependent. The disadvantages
of international trade notwithstanding Mill argued for other benefits of it
which among other things includes: a country obtaining things which it
either could not have produced at all, or which it must have produced at a
greater expense; consumers buying items at a cheaper price because of
reduced cost of production; spurring untapped productive capacities of
countries whose goods are in high demand in the international market
which may have remained dormant if not for trade, etc.41
Mill and the other classical liberals bought into laisser-faire
capitalism, a mode of production which permits private firms to hire
workers in a labour market and seek profit both domestically and
internationally in largely unregulated markets. It is believed that Mill’s
conviction that the laissez- faire capitalism of his day, while playing an
immensely useful role in spurring accumulation, would ultimately be
replaced by an economy built on a more cooperative base 42. For Mill,
laissez- faire capitalism was only an efficient and necessary stage. He
anticipated that the economy was moving toward a state capable of
supporting a far more egalitarian society which will achieve the utilitarian
goal of the greatest happiness of the greatest number. This stage, Mill
argued, can only be achieved by the collective effort of all to push for
fundamental institutional reforms.
Employing Mill’s Utilitarian Philosophy of Economics as a
Catalyst to Africa’s Social and Economic Development
As has been identified above, among the myriads of the socioeconomic problems militating against Africa’s social and economic
development include: poor production output consequent upon
unmotivated labour force, infrastructural deficit, poor and unfriendly
socio-economic policies, corruption, insecurity, over-centralization and
lack of political will to implement viable policies. Other factors include
inadequate investable capital to drive growth as well as stringent
conditions in accessing credit facilities. Finally, there is imbalance in trade
resulting in huge trade deficit because of excessive importation without
commensurate export capacity This work believes that with J.S. Mill’s
utilitarian mindset driving the socio-ethical, political and economic life of
Africa, it will be spurred towards sustainable social and economic
development.

41
42

J. S. Mill, 2004, op. cit., pp. 173-175.
J. Persky, op. cit.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

19

With regard to Mill’s view production, it is true that Africa is blessed
with abundant natural resources and a huge population, its productive
capacity is below average in world ranking because of inadequate human
capital development, poor infrastructure, unmotivated workforce and
insufficient capital base. For J.S. Mill, the gifts of nature must be tapped
through labour to provide for human needs43. To enhance productivity,
African economies must invest on human capital development to produce
skilled productive labour force instead of unemployable and nonproductive graduates. The workers must be well motivated to increase
productivity and to put a halt to the massive brain drain that is been
witnessed currently through emigration to Western countries in search of
greener pasture. To enhance productivity there must be infrastructural
upgrade through provision of constant power supply, good roads, modern
industrial equipments and agricultural machinery, improved service
delivery and good transportation facilities. Labour which is key to
production can also be improved by providing adequate security to the
workforce which is lacking in so many African countries because the
activities of bandits, terrorists, kidnappers and armed robbers. Security is
key to any meaningful economic development. As Iwuagwu observed,
insecurity ‘is a great deterrent to any serious investor because no investor
will stake his hard earned money where his business will go up in flames at
the least provocation’44. If African countries will pay particular attention to
its labour force through the measures highlighted above, there will be a
massive growth in productivity which will in turn spur economic growth.
With regard to capital, J.S. Mill did acknowledge that labour will
achieve very little without investable capital. Most African economies lack
strong capital base that can enable them drive economic growth.
According to Mill capital consists of accumulated stock of the products of
previous labour which will be invested to promote future production45.
Most African economies can be regarded as consumerist economies with
recurrent expenditures far surpassing capital expenditures. Hence with
most of the fruits of its low production consumed, its stock of investable
capital cannot provide what is needed to drive economic growth. African
economies must heed Mill’s advice and avoid unproductive labour which
hinders economic growth. This can be done by avoiding wastages through
corruption and unnecessary pleasure expenses which drain investable
capital rather than increase it. African countries must exercise fiscal
discipline and learn to reinvest the products of previous labour and the
J.S. Mill, 2004, op. cit., p. 19.
E.K. Iwuagwu, ‘Nigeria’s Ethno-Religious Crises and its Socio-Political and
Economic Underdevelopment’, Cogito, vol. 14, no. 1, 2022, p. 130.
45 J.S. Mill, 2004, op. cit., p. 32.
43

44

20

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

enormous natural resources in human capital development, development
of critical infrastructure, provision of adequate security, provision of ‘fixed
capitals’, and proper remuneration of its abundant human resources. None
of the above can be achieved in an atmosphere of financial rascality. With
solid capital base, African economies can provide the enabling
environment as well as credit facilities to Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSMEs), human capital development and proper
remuneration of its workforce.
Another driver of economic growth discussed by J.S. Mill is strong
presence and ability to compete in the international market through
international trade. African countries do not compete strongly in foreign
trade because of its very low productive capacity in industrial goods. Most
African countries are suppliers of raw materials in the international
market. These natural products include: crude oil, unrefined gold,
diamond, copper, zinc, and unprocessed agricultural products such as
cocoa, palm oil, coffee, cassava, pharmaceutical raw materials, etc. The
unfortunate thing is that in most instances the prices of these products are
not determined by the sellers but by the buyers. The developed economies
will afterwards refine or process these products and then sale them back to
the Africans at their own exorbitant prices. This brings about an
unacceptable imbalance in trade relations which leaves the African
economies exploited.
J.S. Mill, though a strong advocate of international trade which he
says benefits the country whose demands for goods is more elastic,
frowned at the use of international trade as an instrument of exploitation
of the weaker economies. This is why he propounded his theory of
reciprocal demand or law of international values to establish what should
actually determine the equilibrium terms of trade. Mill holds that a stable
ratio of exchange will be determined when the value of imports and
exports of each country is in equilibrium.
In line with Mill’s theory of reciprocal demand, African countries and
their trade partners should maintain a good ratio of import and export in
their trade relation. The movement of goods should be a two-way process
between the trading partners. The situation whereby mighty ships and
cargo planes regularly deliver millions of tons of goods to African countries
while returning to Europe, America and Asia empty or stuffed with sand in
order not to be swept off by ocean waves is unacceptable. The situation
where processed and completed goods are imported to Africa while only
raw materials and unfinished products are exported does not portray any
equilibrium in trade. A sad example of this imbalance in trade is seen in
Nigeria’s foreign trade between January 2017 and March 2021 where it
imported manufactured goods worth 40.94 trillion Naira while exporting

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

21

goods worth a meager 4 trillion Naira46. Surely it is because of this kind of
unjust and exploitative imbalance in trade that Mill rejected Ricardo’s view
that the gains of trade are evenly distributed. African countries should
strongly advocate for a fair value of their goods at the international market
and not allow the importers to determine the prices.
In line with the law of comparative advantage which Mill accepted,
African countries, with their abundant material and human resources,
should insist on the refining and processing of their raw materials in Africa
where it will be cheaper to do so. As Mill stated that there will be economic
prosperity and less labour if goods are produced where there is the greatest
absolute facility for its production47, African countries with their huge
population and natural resources only need infrastructure and machinery
to produce most of the goods they are currently importing. To avoid the
enormous task of transporting cargoes of raw materials to Europe,
America and Asia to be refined and processed, and thereafter transporting
them back to Africa, what Africa needs is to site these processing or
refining industries where these raw materials are located. If this is done,
with the teaming population at hand providing cheap labour, Africa will
surely pick up. Doing so will improve Africa’s production capacity in
industrial goods and minimize its avoidable excessive imports.
African economies should also explore untapped intra-regional trade
opportunities that exist among themselves, as suggested by Ferreira and
Steenkamp, which can drive economic growth through greater
productivity, industrialization, innovation and job creation rather than
depending on the Western world to do business with 48. This can be
facilitated by infrastructural upgrade, improving the ease of doing business
and providing adequate market information. African regional trade bodies
such as: African Economic Community (AEC), Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA), Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), East African Community (EAC), and Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) should be encouraged to promote free
movement of goods and services among member states without difficulty.
Also African Continental Free Trade Area (AFCFTA) created in 2018 by the
African Continental Free Trade Agreement among 54 members of the
African Union should be fully implemented. This agreement will create a
single continent-wide market for goods and services and promote free
movement of capital and labour. It will eliminate tariffs on intra-African
Punch Newspaper, Manufactured Imports Rise to N40.94tn, Nigeria Exports
N4tn Goods, 13th July, 2021.
47 J.S. Mill, 2004, op. cit., p. 173.
48 L. Ferreira and E. Steenkamp, op. cit.
46

22

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

trade as well as eliminate non-tariff obstacles to trade. According to Lin,
the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) estimates
that this agreement if fully implemented will boost intra-Africa trade by
52.3% once import duties and non-tariff barriers are eliminated49.
The AFCFTA agreement is in line with J.S. Mill’s soft and conditional
approval of laisser-faire trade relations among nations as well as his
believe in free trade or open market economy. Mill rejected overregulation of the economy and believes in deregulation of some aspects of
the economy to promote public and private sector partnership in growing
an economy. African countries should also key into the current trend in
contemporary economic drive which favors a deregulated market in order
to promote private sector investment in an economy. African governments
should encourage private sector participation by deregulation and
privatization in order to boost a private sector driven economy as is
witnessed in the developed economies where government involvement is
very minimal.
Inasmuch as free market and deregulation are encouraged, member
African countries should be discouraged from making their countries
distribution channels or routes for imported goods from the West. The
situation where African countries will import goods from Europe, America
and Asia and then enjoy free movement and tariff-free sales of such goods
to fellow African countries should be totally rejected or else Africa will
become a dumping ground for foreign goods. Africans should also
appreciate home-made goods and avoid crave for foreign goods and
services50. In approving deregulation of the economy the interest of the
common man must also be put into consideration bearing in mind Mill’s
utilitarian project of providing the greatest happiness for the greatest
number. Deregulation and privatization should not lead to further
exploitation and impoverishment of the ordinary citizen and the unjust
maximization of profit by the capitalist which is against Mill’s intention.
To enhance sustainable economic growth through international trade,
which is highly recommended by J.S. Mill, African countries must invest
massively in infrastructural development especially in the areas of
transportation and communication as well improved security by sea, land
and air. There should be in place a good road network, efficient railway
system, safe maritime system, efficient port system that enables speedy
clearance of goods, efficient immigration services, efficient digital banking
49 M. Lin, ‘The benefits of the AFCFTA for the African Economy’, 2021,
http://borgenproject.org>the-afcfta
50 E.K. Iwuagwu, ‘Socio-Cultural Globalization and the Death of African SocioCultural Values and Identity,’ European journal of Scientific Research, vol. 126, no. 3,
2014, pp. 321-330.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

23

system, functional communication infrastructures and functional
passenger and cargo airports. All these will facilitate the free and less
cumbersome movement of goods and services across Africa and also
promote trade and investment.
In addition to the provision of the much needed critical infrastructure
in Africa to enhance international trade, there should be adequate training
of personnel, removal of unnecessary duties and tariffs, improving the ease
of doing business and minimizing corruption. With adequate provision of
infrastructure, human capital development and elimination of other
barriers identified above, Africa will overcome its import-dependent status
and achieve a commendable ratio in its import and export balance. This
will in turn enhance productivity, grow the capital base of its economies,
halt brain drain of workers and create economic prosperity for all, thereby
fulfilling the utilitarian project of providing the greatest happiness for the
greater number of citizens.
Conclusion
The driving force behind J.S. Mill’s lifelong project of social, political
and economic reforms is the principle of utility as is expounded in his own
version of utilitarianism. According to him, ‘the creed which accepts the
foundation of morals, Utility, or the Greatest Happiness Principle, holds
that actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness,
wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness’ 51. J.S. Mill
together with Jeremy Bentham and his father James Mill bought the idea
of Adam Smith who identified the expansion of the wealth of the nations
with the general prosperity of the population at large and infused into it a
more sharply defined principle of justice: the greatest happiness of the
greatest number. Hence at the heart of the utilitarian philosophy is that
the goal of every social, economic, political or individual action or
decisions should be the promotion of the greatest amount of happiness or
wellbeing. Consequently all individual or government actions, laws and
policies are adjudged right or wrong based on its tendency to promote the
greatest happiness52.
Considering the undeniable significant of J.S. Mill’s philosophy of
economics which is the greatest expression of his utilitarian project and
considering the poor state of Africa’s social and economic development,
this work has argued that employing some relevant aspects of Mill’s
philosophy of economics will go a long way in improving Africa’s social
and economic development. The work agreeing with Mill’s views on
production, labour, capital and international trade holds that increased
51
52

24

J.S. Mill, op. cit., 2009, p. 14.
E.K. Iwuagwu, op. cit., 2021, p. 78.

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

productive capacity, motivated labor force, solid capital base and vibrant
international trade arrangement will greatly enhance sustainable social
and economic development of Africa. This, the work argues, can come
about through human capital development, provision of the critical
infrastructure, improved security, removal of unnecessary barriers
militating against a vibrant intra-regional trade, easy access to credit
facilities, improved ease of doing business, minimization of corruption and
implementation of viable economic policies.
In conclusion the work maintains that if Mill’s utilitarian philosophy
of economics is employed in addressing the deficiencies identified as
militating against Africa’s socio-economic growth, sustainable social and
economic development of Africa will be a reality and Mill’s utilitarian goal
of bringing about the greatest happiness of the greatest number will be
achieved.
References
Amtaika, A., (2017), Socio-Economic Development in Africa:
Challenges and Dimensions, Austin Texas, Pan African University Press.
Bentham, Jeremy, (2000), An Introduction to the Principles of
Morals and Legislation, Kitchene, Batoche Books.
Bonar, J., (1911), ‘The Economics of John Stuart Mill.’ Journal of
Political Economy, vol, 19 no.9, pp.717-727.
http://www.jstor.com/stable/1820347 JSTOR
Capaladi, N., (2004), John Start Mill: A Biography, London,
Cambridge University Press.
Choudhary, P., (2021), Mill’s Theory of Reciprocal Demand: Formula,
Graphs and Criticism, www.microeconomicsnotes.com (retrieved
03/06/2021).
Copleston, F., (1994), A History of Philosophy. Volume VIII: Modern
Philosophy, New York, Doubleday.
Enyimba, M., (2019), ‘Sustainable-Inclusive Development Through
Conversational Thinking: The Case for Africa-China Releations,’ Filosofia
Theoretica: Journal of African Philosophy, Culture and Religions, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 1-20.
Enyimba, Maduka and Ikegbu, Ephraim. A., (2021), ‘Towards a
Genuine National Development: A Case for Kant’s Epistemic Cooperativism in Nigeria,’ Cogito, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 72-84.
Fawcett, P., (1993), Manual of Political Economy, London, Marshall.
Ferreira, L. and Steenkamp, E., (2020), ‘Promoting Sustainable and
Inclusive Trade by Exploring Untapped Intra-regional Trade
Opportunities in Africa,’ Africa Insight, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 72-87.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

25

Gumede, V., (2016), ‘Towards a Better Socio-Economic Development
Approach for African Renewal,’ Africa Insight, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 89-105.
Hausman, D.M., (1981), ‘John Stuart Mill’s Philosophy of Economics,’
Philosophy of Science, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 363-385.
George, H., (2009), Progress and Poverty, New York, Knox
Publishers.
Igwe, P., Amaugo, A., Ogundana, O., Egere, O. and Anigbo, J., (2018),
‘Factors Affecting the Investment Climate, SMEs Productivity and
Entrepreneurship in Nigeria,’ European Journal of Sustainable
Development, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 182-200.
Ikegbu, Ephraim. A., (2013), ‘African Socialism: Metaphors for
Political Freedom and Economic Prosperity in the 21st Century,’ Journal of
Integrative Humanism, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 37-50.
Ikegbu, E.A., Iwuchukwu, G.C.S., Ekanem, S.A. and Ariche, C.K.,
(2020), ‘Poverty Leadership, Coronavirus and Sustainable
Development in Nigeria,’ European Journal of Sustainable Development,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 351-363.
Iwuagwu, Emmanuel K., (2014), ‘Socio-Cultural Globalization and the
Death of African Socio-Cultural Values and Identity,’ European journal of
Scientific Research, vol. 126, no.3, pp. 321-330.
Iwuagwu, Emmanuel K., (2016), ‘Employing the Principles of
Subsidiarity and Participation as Veritable Catalyst for Africa’s SocioPolitical and Economic Development,’ International Journal of Research
in Arts and Social Science, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 138-151.
Iwuagwu, Emmanuel K., (2021), ‘John Stuart Mill’s Utilitarianism: A
Panacea to Nigeria’s Socio-Political Quagmire,’ Cogito – Multidisciplinary
Research Journal, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 66-85.
Iwuagwu, Emmanuel K., (2022), ‘Nigeria’s Ethno-Religious Crises and
its Socio-Political and Economic Underdevelopment’, Cogito –
Multidisciplinary Research Journal, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 115-134.
Kagan, Julia, (2019), John Stuart Mill, Investopedia
Lin, M., (2021), ‘The benefits of the AFCFTA for the African Economy,’
http://borgenproject.org>the-afcfta
Mill, J.S., (1989), Autobiography. Edited with an Introduction by
John M. Robson, New York, Penguin Books.
Mill, J.S., (2004), Principles of Political Economy With Some of Their
Applications to Social Philosophy (Abridged), Ed. Nathanson, S.,
Cambridge, Hackett Publishing Company.
Mill, J. S., (2009), Utilitarianism, New York, Floating Press.
Nathanson, S., (2004), ‘Editor’s Introduction’ to John Stuart Mill’s
Principles of Political Economy With Some of Their Applications to Social
Philosophy, Cambridge, Hackett Publishing Company.
26

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Ozoigbo, Bonaventure I., (2016), ‘African Theories of Development
and the Reality of Underdevelopment,’ International Journal of
Development and Economic Sustainability, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 12-19.
Persky, J., (2016), The Political Economy of Progress: John Stuart
Mill and Modern Radicalism, New York, Oxford University Press.
Punch Newspaper, (2021), ‘Manufactured Imports Rise to N40.94tn,
Nigeria Exports N4tn Goods’, 13th July, 2021.
(www.punchng.com/manufactured-imports-rise-to-n40-94tn..)
Richardo, D., (1997), Principle of Political Economy and Taxation,
London, Macmillan.
Smith, Adam, (1976), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations, Edited by R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner, Oxford,
Clarendon Press.
Verburg, R., (2006), ‘John Stuart Mill’s Political Economy:
Educational Means to Moral Progress,’ Review of Social Economy, vol.64,
no.2, pp.225- 246.
Verter, N., (2019), ‘Food Security and Trade in Food Products in
Nigeria,’ European Journal of Sustainable Development, vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
527-542.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

27

ENVIRONMENT AND THE EMERGENCE OF
DEHUMANIZED FUTURE
Philip Osarobu Isanbor,
osarobuisanbor@gmail.com
Philip Akporduado Edema
philipedema76@gmail.com
Abstract: The imposing faces of contemporary human values in relations
to the sustained ontological and cosmological contents of global ecostewardship, project clear and indispensable needs for ethical regulations of
human actions in our scientifically and technologically driven world. That we
need the courses of eco-stewardship is clear to all due to the increasing rate of
environmental pollution and degradation to the detriment of the future of the
human persons. As first imperative, the human person needs to reflect on the
effects of an increasing military and nuclear engagements and explorations and
the emerging robotic and trans-humanistic anthropology through the
employment of trans-biology, trans-humanistic technology and all forms of
artificial intelligence. It projects the philosophy of living that contemporary
human persons must thus reject the idea of “negation of the world” and become
“world affirmers of values”, understanding that ethics requires the solution of
our problems in “here and now” by adopting the courses of global ecostewardship as foundational consciousness and value for achieving integral
humanism. Employing phenomenological method of analysis, the essay
concludes that the tasks for the care of the environment by every individual,
civil society or government should be intensified in monitoring human actions
for the sake of saving the human person from self-annihilation, self-alienation,
and possible self-extinction.
Keywords: Human Persons, Human Actions, Eco-Stewardship,
Environment, Integral Humanism, Lived Experiences

Introduction
The existential and pragmatic conceptualization of human lived
experiences from the Buddhist philosophical assertion: “If you want to


PhD., Lecturer, Department of Philosophy, Seminary of All Saints,
Uhiele-Ekpoma, Edo State, Nigeria.

PhD., Lecturer, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies,
Augustine University, Ilara-Epe, Lagos State, Nigeria.

28

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

know the past (cause), look at your present life (effect). If you want to know
the future (effect), look at your present (cause)” shows the some level of
indispensable relations and commonness of the human persons with their
responsive actions in achieving integral humanism, especially in most of
our contemporary societies that have been beclouded with conflicting
moral and developmental interests and ideologies.1 The human actions
fashion histories from the epistemological, socio-morphological, political
and religious organizations and valuations of lived experiences, and then
direct the societal values of socialization and the general consciousness for
development. It is through human actions that the values of the
environment which houses the human persons are determined.
The sociological and theological/religious concerns for global
institutionalization of eco-stewardship are indispensably linked with the
cosmological creative and innovative valuations of the human persons in
the midst of global ecological crises and exploitation. As we will agree with
Jude Onebunne and Success Ikechukwu, we existentially recognised that;
”the world is on the brink of an unprecedented growth-related ecological
crisis that threatens the sustainability of the human person and the society.
An ecological crisis occurs when changes to the environment of a species or
population destabilizes its continued survival and existence. The human
person engages in different activities to the detriment of his or her
environment which in return endangers his or her life”2. These concerns of
development demand the potent exercises of the power of human selfparticipation and self-dynamism to be expressed in true and authentic
freedom, in realising global order and justice; otherwise, there will be
global alienation, subjugation and suppression of the human person due to
environmental-health endemics, pandemics and disasters.
Hence, the range of development associated with environmental
pollution and degradation is leading to climate change, global warming,
species extinction, and radical life threatening on the earth. 3 Therefore,
there are needs to revaluate environmental values in relationship with the
human values and freedom in order to overcome these environmental
fallouts.4 This concerns the operation of global eco-solidarity as a collective
Cf, P.O. Isanbor, Ensuring Integral Ecological Sustainability for Integral Human
Development in Francis’ Laudato Si. Nigerian Journal of Religion and Society, 10, 2020,
p. 117.
2 J.I. Onebunne and S. Ikechukwu, “African Ecological Crisis and Education.” In I. A.
Kanu (ed). African Eco-Philosophy: Cosmology, Consciousness and the Environment.
Maryland: APAS, 2021, p. 233.
3 See, J.I. Onebunne and S. Ikechukwu, “African Ecological Crisis and Education”,
pp. 233-234.
4 See, G.T. Miller and S. Spoolman, Environmental Science: Problems, Concepts and
Solutions. 12th Edition. Belmont: Cengage Learning, 2008, p. 15.
1

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

29

action for common survival, and as what Pope John Paul II referred to as
the exercises of the morality of human beingness of the wholeness of
creation as the “personalism of truth” through active consciousness for
transcendental values; for Pope Benedict XVI as the proper
contextualization of the Mission of Theology in “charity in truth” for
integral humanism; and currently, for Pope Francis as the “integral ecology
of consciences” through global consciousness of the environment as a
common home and heritage.5
In addition, with some sense of contemporary fading values for
common living and sustenance, “the defence of life is a problem of pressing
relevance, if one considers the constant aggression on life that we witness
today. Life about to be born (abortion), life that is already consolidated
(violence, terrorism, war), life that is on the decline (euthanasia), one
immediately appreciates that we are dealing with a subject of utmost
importance.”6 In actual sense, no society develops beyond what it can offer
to itself, for development is the recognition of one’s capability and capacity
to change his or her world through the creation and utilization of knowledge
and the projection of global closeness with some loss of values of the human
person as a subject of lived experiences. For “globalization is not only part of
nature; it is the mode of being for human beings. It expresses our internal
state. In an ontological sense, it is the category of our expressive
existentiality. It is the name we give to the invisible force that is propelling
reality forward with incredible velocity.”7 Outside this consideration of
development, the human persons are bound to live in a conflicting and
chaotic society, worst still, an exploited and deteriorated environment with a
high risk for the loss of the sense of integral humanism.
As contemporarily observed, with global trending nature of
consumerist and hedonistic development, “we are becoming ever more
consumes of the dangers and antagonisms that arise when technological
and economic processes are left to their own nature, laws and our political
and social control systems break down: dying cities, ruined environments,
population explosions, chaotic information channels, an increasingly
aggressive and vicious intensification of the North-South conflict, leading
possibly to a new outcome of the East-West power struggle, and so on.”8
We are being driven to the absorption of some particularistic moralities
Cf, P.O. Isanbor, 2020, p. 118.
M. Monge, Ethical Practices in Health and Disease. Manila: Sinag-Tala, 1994, p.
45, as quoted in P. Iroegbu, “What is Life: Body, Mind and Soul?” In P. Iroegbu and A.
Echekwube (eds.). Kpim of Morality. Ibadan: Heinemann, 2005, p. 437.
7 J.N. Agbo, “Is globalisation a process or a product?” In A. B.C. Chiegboka, et al.
(eds.). The Humanities and Globalization in the Third Millennium. Nigeria: Rex Charles
& Patrick, 2010, p. 36.
8 J.B. Metz, Faith in history and society. New York: The Seabury, 1980, p. 100.
5

6

30

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

under the guise of common human socialization and civilization of values
and interests, away from the universalistic conception of the human person
as a subject of morality. All struggles of particularistic relevance are
leading to the rat-race possession of the less available healthy and safe
environment by the powerful and more influential who call it their own
home, to the detriment of poorest of the society who originally possess it.
Contemporary Framework of Integral Humanism in the
Fate of Environmental Fallouts
Contemporarily recognised, the care of any reality is mainly dependent
on the socio-cultural sentiments and language used in qualifying or
classifying its values in the midst of other realities and its currencies of
integral humanism.9 For instance, the use of language in expressing
human values may be limited or utopic, opaque or obscure, but the
intentional meaning of the language by the expressor remains reasonable
and purposeful, and then, the knowledge of the human person. This is
because, it is the human persons that need to qualify or classify
themselves, especially as beings of development and as a subject of lived
experiences. With modern drive for development, the use of language
differentiates the “what-ness of meaning” from the “worth-ness of
meaning” through human new scientific and technological capacities and
resources.
What then is integral humanism? It is existentially about the
development of the human person in the wholeness of his or her created
values (that is the wholeness of his or her ontological and cosmological
values in all human and societal developmental affairs and policies), in
referencing to his or her transcendental ending.10 The philosophy of
integral humanism in relation of the environment becomes an existential
progressive rendition of hope and care for better human and non-human
future (recurring the principle of intergenerational equity) and for the
safety of the whole world through proper and responsible environmental
friendliness. It is envisaged, only, on the indispensable existence of the
human family, through the embrace of faith and reason. It is meant for the
environmental to be safeguarded by the application of the inseparability of
the fundamental relevance of faith and reason. Therefore, it projects the
social embraces of the ethics of integral human development which
9 Cf, Peter Egbe, “Harnessing our Resources for the Formation of Seminarians to the
Priesthood in the Post –Modern Age.” In G. Ogbenika and F. Ikhianosime (eds).
Formation of the Human Person in the 21st Century. Ekpoma: SAS/Floreat System, Benin
City, 2021, p. 149.
10 See, Pope Benedict XVI, Caritas in Veritate, Vatican City: Libreria Editrice
Vaticana, 2009, no. 21.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

31

demands that the human family must be conscious to safeguard and
protect her very self in relation to the environment.
From all indications, away from the global consciousness of integral
humanism, “there is also the danger of the loss of one’s individual identity,
the danger of getting submerged in the anonymity of the crowd being
pulled along by the force of globalization.” This social and organisational
pull of interests make the human person to be lost in the valleys of
relativistic and hedonistic values, where the human persons are objects of
anything the society throws at them. Hence, the result of such
development is in-authenticity, where the human persons as subjects of
lived experiences and as developers of history who have allowed what they
produces to overpowered them, having lost their self-identity by
submerging themselves into the anonymous crowd of globalization, begins
to live an inauthentic life. The human persons is no longer themselves but
a product of their own mechanised future, been driven away from ethics of
conscience. The human persons are no longer the one living globally;
rather, it is globalization living in them. They have become a globalization
robot, and being carried along or throw around by imperialistic global
values.11 It is a culture of relativistic, consumerist and popularist
globalism, a mechanised and computerised mentality of civilization and
socialization, leading to robotic anthropology where the human essence
will be greatly undermined, and the human creative and innovative
ingenuity and intelligibility will be ethically un-regularised.
It is only in true freedom and reason through solidarity of interests
and values can the intrinsic values of the environment as our common
home and heritage be sustained, as it is based on the innate and
immutable quality of the human person to sustain the courses of his or her
existence in relation of common human living, that is, being-with-others.12
With the indispensable nature of being-with-others in achieving integral
and authentic development, “we urgent need a humanism capable of
bringing together the different the different fields of knowledge, including
economics, in the service of a more integral and integrating vision.”13
Nevertheless, globalization as a way of common societal development
especially through the instrumentality of information and communication
remains a product of human knowledge.14 It is developmental
11 J. Omoregbe, Social-Political Philosophy and International Relation. Lagos:
JERP, 2007, p. 156.
12 Cf, Justin C. Anyarogbu, Ibid.
13 Pope Francis, Laudato Si, Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 2015, no. 141.
14 Cf, F.O. Olatunji and P.O. Ujomu, Understanding Import of Knowledge in Rene
Descartes’ Philosophy to Development Narratives for Africa. Albertine Journal of
Philosophy, 5, 2021, pp. 1-2., H. Ugwu, “Trans-biology and Biospheric Modification.” In I.

32

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

consciousness resulting from human creative and innovative power, and it
has become what we cannot avoid to influence us of what we do to
ourselves and for ourselves through industrialization, commerce,
medicine, tourism, security, socialization, education, transportation,
information and communication especially. What are becoming of us are
products of our knowledge and what our future will be are still products of
our knowledge.15 The contemporary persons have the knowledge of some
pragmatic ideologies hinged on scientific and technological prowess and
efficiency to rule the world, but such knowledge can also destroy the same
world when they are not ethically guided to promote the courses of integral
humanism. With pragmatic ideologies to rule the world, “it is essential
then, to forge a cultural paradigm through ‘a global pact on education for
and with future generations, one that commits families, communities,
schools, universities, institutions, religions, governments, and the entire
human families to the training of mature men and women.’”16 Such sense
of commitment demands that true freedom is being exercised by matured
persons who know the values of common good and survival, for this is
social and transcendental compact for the sustainability of the
environment as a common home, and “that can promote education in
integral ecology, according to a cultural model of peace, development and
sustainability centred on fraternity and the covenant between human
being and the environment”.17
As existentially recognised, no one sustains his or her life without
reference to the values of the environment, and the humanness of the
individual as an agent of development is known by the values he or she
truly invests on the environment. For Pope Francis, “human beings too are
creatures of this world, enjoying a right to life and happiness, and
endowed with unique dignity. So we cannot fail to consider the effects on
people’s lives of environmental deterioration, current models of
development and the throwaway culture”18 These are contemporarily
occasioned by the world of imposing demands for urbanization and
industrialization that is under our watch of indifference and relativistic
mentality, propelling the flames of individualism and populism, and
recognising whatever interest such promote, one will necessarily imagine
the present developmental dynamics that cannot serve by the wages of
populism. But, we religiously look forward for the indispensable influences
A. Kanu (ed). African Eco-Philosophy: Cosmology, Consciousness and the Environment.
USA, Maryland: APAS, 2021, p. 353.
15 Cf, P.O. Isanbor, 2021 a, p. 58.
16 Pope Francis, Message for the World Day of Peace, Vatican City: Libreria Editrice
Vaticana, 2022, no. 3.
17 Pope Francis, Message for the World Day of Peace, no. 3.
18 Pope Francis, Laudato Si, no. 43.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

33

of true growth and development engineered by the social and pragmatic
values of integral humanism.19
In communal valuation of actions for the realization of integral
humanism, it is not only one voice of choices and decisions that can be
heard. It is about conversion of people- on a conversation of voices of trust
and justice which are dependent on the values of common good and
solidarity. It is a language that classifies or convenes the true meaning of
human living over the spans of lived experiences, that is, the rationality of
development based on the values of thinking of, knowing about and being
conscious of the existence of oneself in relations to the other persons in the
same environment that sustain them all. The contents of the language we
use in expressing our values, existence and essence should determine the
level of our development, for no one develops above or beyond his or her
very self, and the such consciousness of ourselves shows the level of
religiosity and relationship with our ourselves, our environment and our
God.20 For the knowledge of oneself leads to the knowledge of the other
selves, and this indicates the level of one’s thinking and creative ability,
since, it shows the propensity of one’s consciousness- self-dynamism, selfparticipation and self-responsibility, leading to one’s values for his or her
authenticity and subjectivity.
Integral Humanism and the Environment in Global
Conflicting Values
Commonly considered, the environment refers to the conditions and
circumstances surrounding and affecting a particular group of living
creatures. From this conceptualization of the environment as conditions of
living, we understand that the anthropology of development is always
hinged on the values of human actions, and these are basically exercised
on the same environment as a cosmological commodity. For instance, we
understand that the drives to satisfy needs and make life more comfortable
have been propelling widespread industrial development majorly in the
urban areas of human habitations. These concerns are occasioning the
emergent industries and urban cities been characterised with large human
population and concentration of infrastructure in the urban centres, and
all of these are constantly and heavily translating into too many
environmental problems and challenges. These concerns for modern
development have been informing our thinking, and projecting the

Peter Egbe, p. 159.
See, Stan-Williams Ede, Thomistic Animus, Cartesian Cogito, and Neuroscience:
Triplets of an Authentic Human Identity. West African Journal of Philosophical Studies,
8, 2005, pp. 15-32, cf, p. 30.
19

20

34

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

directedness of science and technology in the pursuit of materialisticdriven and lopsided development.21
Such consciousness of the environment projects the understanding of
lived experiences that no human creative and innovation in advancing the
society is outside the consideration of the human valued choices and
actions.22 Conscious to the fact, each human person is to be certain of his
or her actions and pride of place as the subject of development, and
making the pragmatic statement of importance not to reduce his or her
essence in the midst of technological advancements and breakthroughs in
Artificial Intelligence researches, for they are themselves of intrinsic values
the products of human’ ingenuity and immanent intelligence.23 What the
individuals produced determined the content of the minds, and it suggests
the directedness of our thinking. The same consciousness of the humanity
informs the values of the environment. That which is very desirous for the
attainment of integral humanism is the adequate and authentic ethical
reflection on human scientific and technological engagements which
should go in search of cogent, well-reasoned theories about the values of
human person particularly in view of the radical steps forward made by
bio-science and military engineering especially. Thereby, it is highly
implausible that there would be an artificiality created life that would
stimulate exactly the characteristics, mental qualities and uniqueness of
the human person. In all, the human person must be self-assertive that ‘he
is’ and that he or she is a person with a unique identity and not a
mechanism.24 As such, the social and ethical responsibilities in sustaining
human culture, politics, economics and other aspects of development are
informed by the currencies of environmental anthropology, a call for
common environmental and global survival.
For we live in a world of conflicting values and interests, sometimes,
away from the dictates of natural law and away from common human
morality that define clearly our humanness.25 These are commonly
associated with actions that are supposed to promote and respect our
beingness as persons with common authenticity and subjectivity, but we
misplaced our common priority for common existence and happiness on
the sanctuary of greed and selfishness. By the exercises of faith and reason,
we long for the solution to the problems we caused by our very selves by
See, M.A. Izibili, “Environmental Ethics: An Urgent Imperative.” In P. Iroegbu and
A. Echekwube (eds.). Kpim of Morality. Ibadan: Heinemann Books, 2005, p. 388.
22 F. Nwaigbo, “Trinity and Ecology for a Sustainable Christian Community.” In F.
Nwaigbo, et al (eds). Theology for Sustainable Ecology in Africa. Port Harcourt: CIWA
Publ., 2011.
23 Cf, Stan-Williams Ede, p. 31.
24 Cf, Stan-Williams Ede, p. 31.
25 See, A.I. Kanu, 2021, p. xi.
21

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

35

mismanaging our freedom on the pavilion of misguided creativities and
innovations. We long for the solution to the problems that seem to be
endless due to the imposing global agitation for the right to the freedom to
do anything our relativistic and hedonistic culture of development is
presenting to us. We are at the mercies of our own doings as beings who
love to be free with moral or ethical restraints and commitment that should
exact some level of moral or ethical responsibilities on us for the purpose of
sustaining the environment, and then sustaining our future generations.
Environment and the Longing for Common Survival
The thrust of lived experiences is hinged on the values of the peace or
war or other forms of conflicts. Both happen on the environment.
Individuals, peoples, communities, nations and states all over the world
talk of the Culture of Peace, rather than the Culture of War.26 For
instances, Socrates, Aristotle, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and some other contemporary thinkers, like Douglas Roche,
John Kusumalayam, John Paul II, Benedict XVI and Pope Francis, call for
the Culture of Peace through the valuation of human life and relationship,
especially for the respect for ecological justice, stewardship and solidarity.
All these are in affirmation of the values of the subjectivity of the human
person and an essential orientation towards communion with God and
with another person.27 They also reveal and advance the truth about the
human person, freedom and the indispensability of the communion of
persons. They generally call for the articulation of reasons for the
emergence of society and the quest for the Culture of Peace for the
sustainability of human existence.
From lived experiences, the human community readily knows what
these new aspects of scientific and technological engagements are to the
environment, in order to save itself from self-alienation, self-abnegation,
and ultimately, from self-extinction.28 The socio-philosophical
conceptualization of the quests for global eco-solidarity demands the every
individual sustains reasonably the love of oneself in relations to respect of
public politics and social justice, to recognised that, “the political and
economic projections for the possibilities of the Culture of Peace have been
challenged by some imperialistic, hedonistic and consumerist
See Maduabuchi Dukor, “National and World Peace: An Ethical Imperative for our
Times.” In P. Iroegbu and A. Echekwube (eds.). Kpim of Morality. Ibadan: Heinemann
Books, 2005, p. 156.
27 See, Paul Oredipe, “Integral Humanism: An Ethical Challenge in Faith and
Reason”, p. 63.
28 A.I. Kanu, “Introduction: African Eco-Philosophy and the Environment.” In I. A.
Kanu (ed). African Eco-Philosophy: Cosmology, Consciousness and the Environment.
Maryland: APAS, 2021, p. x.
26

36

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

developmental cultures or policies. They are mainly hinged on the values of
global conflicts and violence which have been generating the nefariousness
of environmental pollution and degradation, and sustaining the fears of
global warming and the rapidity of climate change....”29 But, such
conceptualization of human actions directs our consciousness at what
values we have on ourselves as persons in relation to the wholeness of
creation, and with the projections that, through our developmental values
and ideologies based on the existential operation of love, trust, equity,
justice and sincerity of purposes and common good, there have been some
socio-political and religious longings for the Culture of Peace as against the
Culture of War. These become very dominant in the minds of many people
as they civilize along the values of science and technology which impose
more fears of ecological crises rather than the courses of global ecosolidarity. This is a global concern breeding the culture of global
disorderliness and disintegration as a result of some mismanagement of
freedom and creativities.30
Through the cosmological valuations of lived experiences, we were
once a child in some period of our history before we became adults of
circumstances. The products of adulthood are as a result of what we were
as a child. So, such social consciousness for integral humanism demand
that we must be truthful to what we give to our children in every
generation we find ourselves. This is because, such sincerity of purpose in
regard to the nature of the development we seek or desire must be the kind
of disposition we have towards the recognition of the indispensable
interconnectedness of generations. No generation is an isolated one,
because there are always links that are necessarily indispensable. A child of
yesterday is the adult of tomorrow, who is the adolescent of today. With
the indispensable nexus of the past, the present and the future of human
existence and living, we also seem the enduring needs of the philosophy of
the environment where human actions are examined in order to avoid
human self-annihilation, self-alienation and even the emergence of
possible self-extinction. This is where indispensability of the irreplaceable
tools of philosophy comes in as it will help in no small measure in
sharpening the belief system of the human person and his or her lifestyles.
With metaphysical conceptualization of human self-authenticity and
self-participation based on the indispensability of lived experiences, we
understand that life is about the trend of virtue and virtue ethics, and
when virtue is lost, benevolence appears. When benevolence is lost, right

29
30

P.O. Isanbor, 2021a, p. 44.
P.O. Isanbor, 2021a, p. 44.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

37

conduct appears.31 When right conduct is lost, experience appears,
establishes itself indispensably in regulating the affairs of the same life, for
then, experience is an inevitable shadow that exists between right and
wrong actions. With actions, there are necessarily price the human
persons must pay in order to redeem themselves from the shackles of
destruction they have put themselves due to less disposition of the
workability of being truthful to the natural law and principles the govern
the human existence toward the developmental employment of their selfactualisation and self-liberation.
The futuristic achievement of integral humanism is more negatively
challenges in the faces of imposing effects of the employment of the tools
of science and technology on the environment, mostly built on the
falsehood of the indispensability of the Culture of War in human existence
due to human freedom.32 Lack of peace in the communities and nations is
attributed to the lack of truth in human affairs. Where there is no truth,
the Culture of War and other forms of dehumanization abound, resulting
to environmental, social and political violence and break down of law and
order.33 With an imposing Culture of War, we readily recognise the sociodevelopmental facts that we have been at war with the contents of our
consciences in relation to the influence of what we produce scientifically
and technologically, and the interests we have develop with them to the
detriment of some of their values.34 The human person has seen to have
been enslaved by some unguided promises of the global politics in the
employment of the tools of science and technology over what the
consciences can posit in directing our actions towards overcoming the
weights of social, economical, political and ecological injustices. Our
actions speak volume, especially in our quest for hedonistic and relativistic
values and consumerist orientations, where the contents of the good are
neglected or less preferred over the bad, because, a very sizeable numbers
of modern and contemporary persons have been embracing the emotivistic
doctrine in valuing what is good or bad, what is right or wrong.
Nevertheless, the sense of common survival and development
demands a common knowledge about our existence and the reasons to
sustaining it.35 We know always that “knowledge contributes to
C.S. Ifeakor and E.R. Chinedu, “Between Environmental Conservation and
Development: An African Perspective.” In I.A. Kanu (ed). African Eco-Philosophy:
Cosmology, Consciousness and the Environment. USA, Maryland: APAS, 2021, p. 101.
32 Cf, Pope Francis, Laudato Si, no. 144.
33 See M. Dukor, “National and World Peace: An Ethical Imperative for our Times”,
p. 159.
34 See, C.N. Ogbujah, The Culture of Death and the Crisis of Modernity. Igwebuike:
An African Journal of Arts and Humanities, Vol. 6, No. 7, 2020, p. 124.
35 P.O. Isanbor, 2021b, p. 322.
31

38

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

development in several different ways: as a productive resource; as an
essential input for education, scientific research and industrial technology;
as an catalyst for social change and economic development in Marxian
language; and as a basis for civilization and cultural values that promote
social integrity and harmony, which is the essential foundation for integral
humanism.”36 With this sense of globalization, one of the truisms of
human experiences in relation to their existential relevance of integral
humanism has remained the imposing and indispensable sociality of
human self-recognition and self-importance, away from the moral effects
of secularism/relativism, consumerism and imperialism in promoting
throwaway culture and mentality. With these factors of subjugated
development, “the modern is a subject of the Western Cultural Revolution,
which has not only practically edged God out of the stage of reality, but has
also, in His place, declared science, technology, freedom and pleasure as
new gods.”37 These are not naturally suited within the values of true
community of persons and for the promotion of organised living, not
simply for the actualization of integral humanism. Rather, the realization
of integral humanism is mainly through ethical management of our
freedom in the exercises of our creativity and innovations. The social
conceptualization and sustainability of the human family best situates the
valuations of global social order for common survival and development.38
The consideration of the true contents of human conscience
necessarily brings us to the culture where science and technology
undermines the values of integral humanism, by the enthronement of
slavery of conscience.39 This is by modern quest for easy, erotic and
erroneous sources and avenues of human pleasures rather than happiness
derived to the detriment of human work and its values. The economic
concerns for the development values in some artificial intelligence that
have remained an effort to erect a machine model of the human persons
will have their childhood, learn language as children do, gain their
knowledge of things around them by perceiving the world through their
sensory organs and ultimately to contemplate the whole domain of human
thought in order to develop the environment and make it remains a world
of positive experiences possibly.40 The products of intelligence an
innovation cannot or never to take over the real and true human values.
The human persons are product of their rationality and intelligibility. They
F.O. Olatunji and P.O. Ujomu, p. 2.
Nnamani, “Faith, Formation, and Vocation: Any Link?” In G. Ogbenika and F.
Ikhianosime (eds). Formation of the Human Person in the 21st Century, p. 122.
38 See, P.O. Isanbor, 2020, p. 117.
39 Cf, C.N. Ogbujah, The Culture of Death and the Crisis of Modernity, p. 126.
40 J. Weizenbaum, Computer Power and Human Reason. SF: W.H. Fredman, 1976,
pp. 202-203.
36

37A.G.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

39

remain who they are for themselves and their community, as they
determine what happen in their future from the nature of the actions in the
present and that of the inherited past.
Conclusion
We necessarily and indispensably need to lay a metaphysical
foundation for ethical decision-making concerning the human person in
the relation to the environmental sustainability.41 This will be
exponentially possible with collective adoption of the operation of ecostewardship, and globally ensures the institutionalization of the Culture of
Peace. Such global concern for sustainable Culture of Peace conjures the
social and political commitment of “one’s obligation to future generations
with respect to the environment,”42 indispensably and humanistically
considering the effects of one’s present actions on the same environment.
Hence, there should be “the urgent need for the elaboration of a
philosophical view of the human person which forms the foundation of our
contemporary life and thought. The viewpoints of science and faith in the
exercise of freedom need not be in conflict in a coherent vision of the
human person.”43 This should be based on the human quest for selfintegration, self-authenticity, self-participation and self-dynamism that
guarantee the interconnectedness of past, present and future values of
development. This concern recognises that no generation is independently
and wholly free from the actions of other generations. That, human
generations are one as far as they are interdependently connected and
bounded together by existing, enduring and unavoidable environment that
houses them.
For the sake of common human survival, the exercise of true freedom
is to be natural and humane, recognising that the natural law that defines
human existence beyond the imposing influences of science and
technology, even as they are to be employed to modify and explore the
nature, not to exploit it. When we engage ourselves in actions and
responsibilities, the values of the human person should remain the
measure of our philosophical and developmental ideologies, creativities
and innovations. Hence, for more secured and sustained future, in right
freedom, we necessarily and indispensably need to seek eco-friendly
technologies and industrialization. Outside these convictions; there are
41 See, Paul Oredipe, “Integral Humanism: An Ethical Challenge in Faith and
Reason”, p. 62.
42 A.B. Ojo, Ethical Response to Ecological Challenges: A Call of Responsible
Stewardship. Nigerian Journal of Religion and Society, Vol. 10, 2020, p. 99.
43 Paul Oredipe, “Integral Humanism: An Ethical Challenge in Faith and Reason”, p.
62.

40

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

abound the aberrations of the values of the human person, and his or her
environment will continually suffers the heats of exploitation and
deterioration. But, when freedom is duly exercised by the recognition of
the divine nature of the environment and the phenomenological ethics of
otherness, all elements and recourses of the environment are sustained in
order to keep our communal living, from generations to generations.
Therefore, with the enduring nature of creation, the presence of the
environment continually guarantees life. Only with human life can the
environment be classified with meaning, characterised with created values,
and sustained with the consciousness of sustaining human future. This is
an ecological reality that determines what the present holds for the future
indispensably. As a generic heritage for any existing generation shows the
indispensable connectedness of our past, present and future, and it
beholds on us to sustain what belong not to anyone but for everyone, since
everyone will also die to leave the same environment in existence and or
the existing, as the environment is existence itself, so the existence is God
Himself who never dies or ends. With the sense of stewardship of the
human person that is associated with our created nature, we are
encouraged not to abuse the environment in order not to abuse God
supposedly. This means that; when God is seen through the environment
as His presence in the active development of the humanity and society,
there are possibilities to totally eliminate all forms and avenues of its
pollution and degradation.
References
Agbo, J.N., (2010), “Is Globalisation a Process or a Product?” In A. B.
C. Chiegboka, T.C. Utoh-Ezeajugh, and G.I. Udechukwu (Eds.). The
humanities and Globalization in the Third Millennium (pp. 26-39).
Nigeria: Rex Charles and Patrick.
Benedict XVI, Pope, (2008), Message for the World Day of Peace. The
Human Family, a Community of Peace. Vatican City: Libreria Editrice
Vaticana.
Ede, S-W.O., (2005), Thomistic Animus, Cartesian Cogito, and
Neuroscience: Triplets of an Authentic Human Identity. West African
Journal of Philosophical Studies, Vol. 8, pp. 15-32.
Egbe, P., (2021), “Harnessing our Resources for the Formation of
Seminarians to the Priesthood in the Post –Modern Age.” In G. Ogbenika
and F. Ikhianosime (eds). Formation of the Human Person in the 21st
Century. (pp. 148-164). Ekpoma: SAS, with Floreat System, Benin City.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

41

Francis, Pope, (2022), Message for the World Day of Peace. Dialogue
between Generations, Education and Work: Tools for Building Lasting
Peace. Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana.
Francis, Pope, (2020), Fratelli Tutti. Social Encyclical on the
Fraternity and Social Friendship. Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana.
Francis, Pope, (2015), Laudato Si. Social Encyclical on the
Environment as our Common Home. Vatican City: Libreria Editrice
Vaticana.
Isanbor, P.O., (2021a), “Environmental Sustainability and the Quest
for Global Social Order in Francis’ Laudato Si.” In I. A. Kanu (ed). African
Eco-Philosophy: Cosmology, Consciousness and the Environment, (pp.
42-66). USA, Maryland: Association of the Promotion of African Studies.
Isanbor, P.O. (2021b). “Environment in the Cultures of War and
Peace.” In I.A. Kanu (ed). African Eco-Philosophy: Cosmology,
Consciousness and the Environment, (pp. 209-332). USA, Maryland:
Association of the Promotion of African Studies.
Isanbor, P.O., (2020), Ensuring Integral Ecological Sustainability for
Integral Human Development in Francis’ Laudato Si. Nigerian Journal of
Religion and Society, Vol. 10, pp. 113-123.
Isanbor, P.O., (2018), Morality against Environmental Degradation: A
Review for Sustainable Development. Scientia: Plasu Journal of General
Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 119-126.
Izibili, M.A., (2005), “Environmental Ethics: An Urgent Imperative.”
In P. Iroegbu and A. Echekwube (eds.). Kpim of Morality, Ethics: General,
Special and Professional, (pp. 383-390). Ibadan: Heinemann Books.
Kanu, A.I., (2021), “Introduction: African Eco-Philosophy and the
Environment.” In I.A. Kanu (ed). African Eco-Philosophy: Cosmology,
Consciousness and the Environment, (pp. i-xiv). USA, Maryland:
Association of the Promotion of African Studies.
Dukor, M., (2005), “National and World Peace: An Ethical Imperative
for our Times.” In P. Iroegbu and A. Echekwube (eds.). Kpim of Morality,
Ethics: General, Special and Professional, (pp. 156-161). Ibadan:
Heinemann Books.
McDonagh, S., (1987), To Care for the Earth: A Care to a New
Theology. New Mexico: Bear & Company.
Metz, J.B., (1980), Faith in History and Society. New York: The
Seabury Press.
Miller, G.T. and Spoolman, S., (2008), Environmental Science:
Problems, Concepts and Solutions. 12th Edition. Belmont: Cengage
Learning.
Nnamani, A.G., (2021), “Faith, Formation, and Vocation: Any Link?”
In G. Ogbenika and F. Ikhianosime (eds). Formation of the Human Person
42

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

in the 21st Century. (pp. 121-135). Ekpoma: SAS, with Floreat System,
Benin City.
Nnamani, A.G., (2005), “Ethics of the Environment.” In P. Iroegbu
and A. Echekwube (eds.). Kpim of Morality, Ethics: General, Special and
Professional, (pp. 391-400). Ibadan: Heinemann Books.
Nwaigbo, F., (2011), Trinity and Ecology for a Sustainable Christian
Community. In F. Nwaigbo, et al (eds). Theology for Sustainable Ecology
in Africa. Port Harcourt: CIWA Publication.
Onebunne, J.I. and Ikechukwu, S., (2021), “African Ecological Crisis
and Education.” In I.A. Kanu (ed). African Eco-Philosophy: Cosmology,
Consciousness and the Environment, (pp. 233-349). USA, Maryland:
Association of the Promotion of African Studies.
Ogbujah, C.N., (2020), The culture of Death and the Crisis of
Modernity. Igwebuike: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities, Vol.
6, No. 7, pp. 123-137.
Ojo, A.B., (2020), Ethical Response to Ecological Challenges: A Call of
Responsible Stewardship. Nigerian Journal of Religion and Society, Vol.
10, pp. 98-112.
Olatunji, F.O and Ujomu, P.O., (2021), Understanding Import of
Knowledge in Rene Descartes’ Philosophy to Development Narratives for
Africa. Albertine Journal of Philosophy, 5, pp. 1-10.
Oredipe, P., (2005), “Integral Humanism: An Ethical Challenge in
Faith and Reason.” In P. Iroegbu and A. Echekwube (eds.). Kpim of
Morality, Ethics: General, Special and Professional, (pp. 56-70). Ibadan:
Heinemann Books.
Schaefer, J., (2009), Theological Foundations for Environmental
Ethics: Reconstructing Patristic and Medieval Concepts, Washington:
Georgetown University Press.
Vallainatos, A., (1997), Creation, Koinonia, Sustainability and Climate
Change. The Ecumenical Review, Vol. 4, No. 9, pp. 194-202.
Ugwu, H., (2021), “Environmental Sustainability and the Quest for
Global Social Order in Francis’ Laudato Si.” In I.A. Kanu (ed). African EcoPhilosophy: Cosmology, Consciousness and the Environment, (pp. 353372). USA, Maryland: Association of the Promotion of African Studies.
Weizenbaum, J., (1976), Computer Power and Human Reason. San
Francisco: W.H. Fredman.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

43

THE EXPERIENCE OF PHILOSOPHIZING IN
EMERGENCY CONDITIONS: SPECIFICS AND
PERSPECTIVES
Inna Kovalenko,*
kinna087@gmail.com
Yuliia Meliakova,**
melyak770828@gmail.com
Eduard Kalnytskyi,***
kalnitsky@ukr.net
Ksenia Nesterenko****
ksn.nesterenko@gmail.com
"If the health crisis calls into question several
of the foundations of our societies,
then philosophy helps us to move forward
by stimulating critical reflection
on problems that are
already present but which
the pandemic is pushing to the limit"
Audrey Azule, Director-General of UNESCO,
message on the occasion of World Philosophy Day

Abstract: The protracted COVID-19 epidemic is unique not only because it
has changed the familiar life on a global scale. The distant way of social life, the
emergence of new social standards, the intensification of existential risks have
become a challenge and for philosophy itself, its ability to expand the horizons of
reflection of new reality. The article discusses the specifics of individual and
social life in the context of the theory of viral modernity and the problems of
PhD. in Philosophy, Associate Professor of Philosophy Department,
Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
** PhD. in Philosophy, Associate Professor of Philosophy Department,
Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
*** PhD. in Philosophy, Associate Professor of Philosophy Department,
Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
**** PhD. in Philology, Associate Professor of Foreign languages
Department, Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
*

44

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

global digital control. In addition, the methodological possibilities of
phenomenology allow us to comprehend the modern pandemic as an
extraordinary event that, in contrast to the temporality of ordinary experience,
radically changes the perception of time in the conditions of COVID everyday
life.
Keywords: modern philosophy, post-COVID world, digital control,
temporality.

Introduction
Georg Hegel’s Preface to Elements of the Philosophy of Right contains
a canonical passage on the purpose of philosophy, which arises only after
the completion of the formation of reality: “When philosophy paints its
grey on grey, then has a shape of life grown old. By philosophy's grey on
grey it cannot be rejuvenated but only understood”1. This passage ends
with the famous mention of the owl Minerva, which spreads its wings only
with the coming of the dusk. Indeed, philosophizing anticipates the
maturation of history and spirit. In addition, in an effort to impartially
“read” the reality, philosophy appears as a slow, systematic and balanced
reasoning, removed from the dominance of empirical facts.
Martin Heidegger also noted that philosophy cannot provide an
immediate effect that can change the current state of affairs. There is also
an Eastern tradition that gives philosophy the mission of awakening
human consciousness: the Indian concepts of darśana and bodhi mean
not so much love to wisdom and knowledge but the vision of truth and
awakening to it by creating emptiness in oneself and distancing oneself
from everyday worries. With this understanding, one should expect from
the philosopher not an unappealable position on current events, but rather
a deep reflection on what characterizes a certain state of human spirit.
However, in contrast to the traditional understanding of the
philosopher as a person who raises issues, the modern philosopher is
primarily a professor, academician, expert, who is expected to make final
judgments on topical issues. Today such issues are the protection of the
principles of justice, in-depth study of crisis situations, the creation of new
conceptual tools for comprehension of present and future, taking into
account global capitalism, biopolitics, digitalization and other phenomena
that, in Hegel’s sense, determine the “configuration of nations”.
The main challenge for modern philosophy was the COVID-19
pandemic, which suddenly plunged humanity into fear, death, isolation
W.F.G. Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1991. Available at:
https://hscif.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Hegel-Phil-of-Right.pdf.
1

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

45

and loneliness, forcing modern thinkers to actively respond to this event
and critically rethink the role of philosophy in the context of radical sociocultural transformations.
What should philosophy be during a pandemic? What tasks can it
solve? What kind of consequences of a pandemic could be for civilization
and philosophy as such? Modern philosophy comprehends the pandemic
at the same time as it takes place, thus emphasizing its relevance, as well
as the status of the thinking mind and consciousness of its time, which is
understood in concepts.
Theoretical basis
The experience of understanding the COVID-19 pandemic was
embodied in a significant body of philosophical essays of analytical,
reflective and critical nature. Rejecting the clichés of conservatism and
intellectual isolation, professional thinkers study COVID reality, looking
for orderly methodologies and categorical schemes that allow us to move
from reality to concepts, from facts to their principles.
In attempts to philosophically understand the global pandemic
situation, representatives of various research areas, regardless of their own
horizons of understanding, refer primarily to the works of Michel
Foucault, in which disciplinary mechanisms of power, biopolitics and
peculiarities of private life regulation in the conditions of globalization are
conceptualized2.
Giorgio Agamben, thinking about the political and ethical
consequences of the pandemic, marks the current situation as “bare life”,
where survival becomes the main value and the community becomes a
weak-willed biomass3. A significant problem, according to the philosopher,
is the gradual transition of life to the online mode, which threatens the
formation of a state of machines, not people. The author also expresses
serious concern over the possible transformation of the “state of
exception” into a permanent attribute of relations between the state and
citizens, namely, total control and surveillance as a paradigm of
biopolitical power under theological cover.
Jean-Luc Nancy, criticizing the position of G. Agamben, emphasizes
that the experience that humanity is currently going through is not a
2 M. Foucault, Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings, 19721977. New York: Pantheon, 1980; M. Foucault, Omnes et Singulatim: Vers Une Critique
de la Raison Politique. Dits et Écrit. Paris: Gallimard, 1994, Vol. IV, рр. 134-161; М.
Foucault, Society Must Be Defended: Lectures at the Collège de France 1975–1976, trans.
David Macey. New York: Picador, 2003.
3 G. Agamben, A Che Punto Siamo? L’epidemia Come Politica. Roma: Quodlibet,
2020.

46

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

political and legal, but primarily an epidemic state of emergency 4. The
enormous danger of the COVID-19 virus justifies appropriate actions by
the governments. Besides, according to the philosopher, the virus spreads
the discourses of the ostentetious defience because “showing that you are
not fooled, is more important than avoiding contagion– which amounts to
being doubly fooled …”5. As a product of globalization, the pandemic
accelerates the destruction of culture in favour of a system of
indistinguishable and militant technical, economic, authoritarian and
other forces. In such conditions, Pascal's formula of man who infinitely
surpasses man gives way to the loading of man in “humanity, overwhelmed
by the events and situations it has produced”. J.-L. Nancy compares the
virus to a magnifying glass, which “enlarges the characteristics of our
contradictions and of our limitations”, and, in particular, questions the
adequacy of the term biopolitics, because “life and politics challenge us
together”6.
For Roberto Esposito, the widespread deployment of biopolitics is an
obvious fact: the connection between politics and biological control has
been around for a long time, and all “current political conflicts are related
to politics and biological life”7. The researcher describes the trend of
medicalization of politics and politicalization of medicine, which distorts
the classic “portrait” of politics, in particular, towards segmenting the
population by somatic, age, gender and even ethnicity features. In
addition, R. Esposito differentiates Fukoldian discourse and specific
situations in certain countries. In his opinion, tough anti-virus measures
do not indicate a totalitarian seizure of power, but rather the weakness of
existing state powers and the risk of losing the balance of power.
Slavoj Žižek tries to avoid thinking about COVID-19 in terms of
monitoring and control and focuses on the effectiveness of measures and
consequences of the pandemic in the context of global economic
development. The philosopher believes that radical social change is the
only way to prevent future economic megacrisis. “The impossible
happened, the author notes, "our world has stopped” 8. Accordingly, “our
reaction to it should also be to do the impossible - what appears impossible
J.-L. Nancy, Eccezione Virale. Antinomie, 2020. Available at:
https://antinomie.it/index.php/2020/02/27/eccezione-virale/.
5 J.-L. Nancy, A Much Too Human Virus, 2020. Available at: https://www.journalpsychoanalysis.eu/a-much-human-virus/.
6 J.-L. Nancy, op. cit.
7 R. Esposito, Curati a oltranza. Antinomie, 2020. Available at:
https://antinomie.it/index.php/2020/02/28/curati-a-oltranza/.
8 S. Žižek, Is Barbarism with a Human Face Our Fate? In the Moment, 2020.
Available at: https://critinq.wordpress.com/2020/03/18/is-barbarism-with-a-humanface-our-fate/.
4

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

47

within the coordinates of the existing world order”9. Sl. Žižek believes that
one of the significant threats of an anthropological nature is barbarism
with a human face – “ruthless survivalist measures enforced with regret
and even symphathy but legitimized by expert opinions”, which will
inevitably reduce “the premice of our social ethics: the care of the old and
weak”10.
Disagreeing with the opinion of G. Agamben about the centrifugal
consequences of belief in “naked life”, Sl. Žižek11 sees in this guideline a
unifying perspective: “to maintain a corporeal distance is to show respect
to the other…”12, which contributes to the positive results of forced
alienation and emphasizes personal responsibility. However, the emphasis
on individual responsibility, according to the philosopher, should not turn
into a solid ideology and replace the issue of systemic socio-economic
transformations: the triple nature of the crisis - medical, economic and
psychological - encourages the search for new ways of producing and
allocating resources. Sl. Žižek hopes for almost communist perspectives:
“maybe another and much more beneficient ideological “virus” will spread
and hopefully infect us: the virus of thinking of an alternative society, a
society beyond the nation state, a society that actualizes itself in the forms
of global solidarity and cooperation”13.
Bernard-Henri Levy considers the reaction to coronavirus in two
aspects: positive, because “our respect for life has increased and that we
want to save lives first of all”, and negative, which embodies collective
hysteria and serious danger of potential tracking of citizens through
electronic applications14. Also B.-H. Levy is concerned about the
disappearance of major events on television and “mental screens”15; he
considers the very eschatological rhetoric of rethinking the world during a
pandemic to be excessive and dangerous.
Analyzing the socio-economic aspects of the fight against the
pandemic, Noam Chomsky focuses on the critique of the manifestations of
savage capitalism, which hinders the establishment of an effective health
S. Žižek, op. cit.
S. Žižek, op. cit.
11 S. Žižek, op. cit.; S. Žižek, Coronavirus is ‘Kill Bill’-esque blow to capitalism and
could lead to reinvention of communism, 2020. Available at: https://www.rt.com/oped/481831-coronavirus-kill-bill-capitalism-communism/; S. Žižek, Pandemic! COVID-19
Shakes the World. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2020.
12 S. Žižek, Is Barbarism with a Human Face…
13 S. Žižek, Coronavirus is ‘Kill Bill’-esque blow….
14 B. Henri-Lévy, Оn the good and bad news about coronavirus, 2020. Available at:
https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/Bernard-Henri-Lévy-on-the-good-and-bad-newsabout-coronavirus.
15 B. Henri-Lévy, op. cit.
9

10

48

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

care system. The philosopher also expresses serious concern about the
prospect of “an international of the most reactionary governments in the
world, which will later become the basis for the US power”16.
Sergio Benvenuto places the anthropological consequences of the
pandemic in an existential context. Referring to one of the journalists, he
emphasizes: “We are not in danger, we are the danger” 17. Accordingly,
everyone becomes equally dangerous, which entails seclusion at all levels –
“every citizen closes himself for another”18. Arguing with G. Agamben
about the “rigidity of our neighbor”, S. Benvenuto speaks of a positive
inversion of certain clichés: “Today I demonstrate my love for my
neighbor, keeping him or her at a distance”19 or “the further others hold on
the distance from me, the closer I feel to them”20. Conscious avoidance of
communication becomes, according to the philosopher, a biopolitical and,
consequently, ethical choice, just as fear, in contrast to frivolous attitude,
becomes an act of courage. In the long run, life should become “hearted”
or “homeized” - the author proposes to invent appropriate neologisms and
predicts that “generalized seclusion will become our usual way of life”21.
Among the numerous publications on the COVID-19 pandemic written
by prominent researchers the article by Alain Badiou22, where the
philosopher opposes those who consider the pandemic something radically
new or unprecedented is noted with the the spirit of pragmatic restraint.
Such a researcher's position is probably due to the author's standards in
understanding the concept of the event.
Instead, Toby Ord's philosophical research is marked by an expressive
style of disaster and contains certain methodological explorations. The
author, in particular, examines the concepts of “existential risk” and
“existential catastrophe”. The first one is defined as “... a risk that
threatens ... the long-term potential of humanity”23. The second is defined
as “the destruction of the long-term potential of humanity”24. According to
T. Ord, an existential catastrophe threatens either the complete
16 Interview: Noam Chomsky on How Bosses Are Making Coronavirus ‘Worse, for
Their Benefit’, 2002. Available at: https://labornotes.org/2020/04/interview-noamchomsky-how-bosses-are-making-coronavirus-worse-their-benefit.
17 S. Benvenuto, Welcome to Seclusion. Antinomie, 2020. Available at:
https://www.journal-psychoanalysis.eu/coronavirus-and-philosophers/#_edn3.
18 S. Benvenuto, op. cit.
19 S. Benvenuto, op. cit.
20 S. Benvenuto, op. cit.
21 S. Benvenuto, op. cit.
22 A. Badiou, On the Epidemic Situation, 2020. Available at:
https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/4608-on-the-epidemic-situation.
23 T. Ord, The Precipice. Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity. London:
Bloomsbury, 2020, р. 37.
24 T. Ord, op. cit., р. 37.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

49

disappearance of humanity, or existence in much less favourable
conditions. Such conditions, in turn, are either the result of the final
collapse or the affirmation of an irreparable dystopia. The difference
between them is determined only by the time frame in the interval
between the suddenness and the process of gradual degradation.
In general, modern thinkers proposed many ideas expressed not only
in highly specialized language, but also intended for non-academic
audiences. On the other hand, as some experts point out, academic
philosophizing, with its metaphysical insights, ethical and aesthetic
achievements, and even metapolitical discursive explorations, has no
decisive effect even in less tumultuous times: “Many philosophical
discussions look like sports on a square inch playing field, with very few
players and even fewer spectators”25. The radical difference between
philosophical knowledge and scientific knowledge is explained by the
following argumentation: philosophical knowledge is too specialized to be
always relevant, while scientific knowledge is relevant (though not always
successful) precisely because it is very specialized26.
It should also be mentioned that there are significant differences
among philosophers, even on fundamental issues. In particular, one in five
philosophers challenges the existence of an external world that is
independent of the human mind27 which indicates, in particular, the
significant contradictions between personal views and group norms of
academic publications. In addition, the traditional “Achilles' heel” of most
philosophical statements is the inability to empirically confirm or refute
linguistically expressed arguments.
However, we should hardly agree with the opinion that in times of
crisis, public philosophy is useless. On the contrary, the philosophers'
indication to the uncertainty during a pandemic may reveal the
constructive potential of epistemological restraint, so that, according to the
Swedish philosopher Erik Angner, a viral pandemic is not accompanied by
a “pandemic of overconfidence”28.
In general, differences in the perception of COVID-19 reach an a priori
worldview understanding of essential issues, in particular, human
existence and its place in the world: progressives saw the pandemic as a
catastrophic event that requires harsh measures; conservatives
L. Lauwaert, A. Block, Beware of the Philosophical Expert. Philosophy Today,
2020, 64 (4), р. 872.
26 L. Lauwaert, op. cit., р. 872.
27 D. Bourget, D.J. Chalmers, What Do Philosophers Believe? Philosophical Studies,
2014, 170(3), рр.465-500.
28 E. Angner, Epistemic Humility: Knowing Your Limits in a Pandemic. Behavioral
Scientist, 2020, Available at: https://behavioralscientist.org/epistemic-humilitycoronavirus-knowing-your-limits-in-a-pandemic/.
25

50

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

emphasized the exaggeration of risk, which is unlikely to justify the
devastating consequences for human existence. For progressives, there is a
strong causal link between harsh anti-epidemic measures (quarantine,
wearing masks, mass vaccinations) and slowing the spread of the virus;
conservatives attribute this dynamic to natural fluctuations in the virus's
“behavior”. Progressives say the virus has changed the world forever, and
conservatives hope to return to the status quo after the pandemic. In such
an almost polar situation, “it is philosophers who could help bring these
worlds by unearthing the underlying conditions, unarticulated 'pictures
and metaphors', a priori conceptions of the thing and of the place of
human in the world”29.
The philosophy of the pandemic era has a range of specific ontological,
epistemological, ethical-anthropological and other issues that need
comprehention today. The purpose of the article is to study the specifics of
the philosophical understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic as an event
that causes radical transformations at the social and personal-existential
levels, as well as determines the context of global digital culture.
Results and Discussion
We would like to begin our presentation of the main material with the
philosophical problem that G. Agamben, in connection with the emergency
caused by the COVID-19 virus, expressed as follows: “A che punto
siamo?”30. In Italian, this phrase literally means “Where are we now?” or
“What's happening to us now?” The author believes that humanity is now
in a state of exception and that later this stage in history (Italian, in
particular) will be “one of the most shameful…, and rulers and leaders will
look irresponsible and unscrupulous”31.
Such emotional statements convincingly show that the author
understands the pandemic primarily as a biopolitical event. However, it is
no less obvious that the stage which is still underway is waiting for a
fundamental understanding: humanity is directly in an event which it
attaches a great importance and which, in turn, has a decisive impact on
humanity. Thus, the pandemic itself has become a reality, the
understanding of which requires a different way than the usual diagnosis
and prediction.
The pandemic, covering the whole world (that is, all (pan) people
(demos)), questioned globalization, forced the local to fight for its ability to
act on a global scale. The virus has spread everywhere not only through
dynamic global communication, it has transformed globalization itself into
Y. Adler, A Political a priori? Philosophy Today, 2020, 64 (4), р. 819.
G. Agamben, op. cit., р. 31.
31 G. Agamben, op. cit., р. 14.
29

30

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

51

a “pandemic virus” operating at the biological, socio-economic, political,
cultural and other levels.
In this regard, it is worth mentioning the concept of viral modernity,
which is based on a stable parallel between viral forms in biology and
information - two powerful forces driving cultural evolution.
Bioinformationalist logic assumes that the basic characteristics of digital
information (exponential magnification, high-precision replication,
infinite recombination, and artificial intelligence expression) are
comparable to key evolutionary innovations in storing and replicating
biosphere information (RNA, DNA, multicellularity, and language as
cognitive systems)32. Accordingly, the potential symbiosis between
biological and digital information can reach a critical point where these
codes could compete via natural selection. Alternatively, this fusion could
create a higher-level superoorganism employing a low-conflict division of
labour in performimg informational tasks33.
The methodological potential of the concept of viral modernity
contributes to the philosophical understanding of the COVID-19
pandemic, bringing together complex topics such as biopolitics,
posthumanity, quarantine, post-truth, conspiracy thinking. It should also
be taken into account that modern reality “does not have absolute
knowledge, but in principle is built as a communicative or narrative, as an
exchange of descriptions and evidence of reality itself…”34. The facts show
that the topic of COVID-19 was often placed in the post-truth landscape
and used by politicians to strengthen power (in particular, Donald Trump's
statement about COVID-19 as fake news), which, in turn, showed
disrespect for science and expert assessments. Such manipulations can
cause the epidemic of disinformation – “integral accident”35, which is
inherent in technology and is essentially a farmakon in the Derridian
sense - drugs that can harm the patient. Globalization itself, therefore,
becomes a “virus of inequality, injustice, racism, extermination, hunger,
destruction. What is manifested in a pandemic is the virulence of all
virulence, the virotic itself as a mode of how virulence contaminates” 36.

М.А. Peters, Т. Besley, Pandemic Education and Viral Politics. London:
Routledge, 2020.
33 M.R. Gillings, M. Hilbert, D.J. Kemp, Information in the biosphere: Biological
and digital worlds. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 2016, 31(3), р. 180.
34 I. Kovalenko, Y. Meliakova, E. Kalnytskyi, K. Nesterenko, Оn conspiracy thinking
in the phenomenology оf modern culture, Cogito, 2021, 13(3), р. 75.
35 P. Virilio, The original accident. Cambridge: Polity, 2007.

It is also worth mentioning that in Latin the word virus means poison.
36 M. Sá Cavalcante Schuback, To Think in the Eye of the Storm. Philosophy Today,
2020, 64 (4), р. 908.
32

52

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

The virus of globalization is transmitted in a virtual way and
encourages thinking about the virulence of globalization by analogy with
the biological, eliminating the differences between digital and molecular.
One finger touch is enough to be contaminated with the virus - such words
are true for digital and political infection 37. Thus, politics, actively using
the capabilities of social networks and the extraordinary power of digital
technologies in all dimensions of human existence, infects with viruses of
numbers, activities and strategies. Increased political influence in social
networks, regardless of ideological content, exacerbates feelings up to their
devastation, leads to dis-socialization: the individual finds him/herself
isolated in his/her cell-screen, separated from the common space. Thus,
under the guise of virtual socialization and justified isolation,
dissocializing of society is going on.
From an epidemiological point of view, the effect of the virus is
described as a barrier that prevents the body from being inside itself.
Similarly, isolation, eliminating physical contact, prevents the body from
being itself, closes it, cuts it off not only from other bodies but also from
itself, deprives between-being: “what is effaced is not only contact, but also
the co-incidence of the accidental: the rain that dampens, the sun that
burns, the body that bumps, threatens, surprises, it is not only the cut of
the elasticity of living: inside, outside; us, them, but it is a cut from the
pulse of between-being. More than the other, what disappears is the
between”38.
In addition, the cult of speed combined with the rapid development of
communication technologies has led to the phenomenon of world
compression39. The increase in the speed of information transfer has
significantly affected even the use of language, which is less and less
fulfilling its fundamental role - the expression of opinions in dialogue. In
this regard, isolation can play a beneficial role, as many people are forced
to change their lifestyle.
Difficult epidemiological situation around the world not only affects
the physical or mental state of man, transforming the healthy into the sick
one, but also causes global changes that are steadily transforming into new
social standards. Thus, in the practice of social life, wearing masks,
maintaining social distance, disinfecting hands, increasing the share of
work and online learning are firmly fixed. In the conditions of constant
existential expectation of the next waves of the pandemic, new patterns of
social action are formed: the medical mask has become the norm of social

M. Sá Cavalcante Schuback, op. cit., р. 909.
M. Sá Cavalcante Schuback, op. cit., р. 909.
39 P. Virilio, Vitesse et Politique. Essai de dromologie, Paris: Galilée, 1977.
37

38

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

53

behavior, while its absence is equated to deviations; social distance and
mobility restrictions are firmly entrenched in everyday life.
The effectiveness of such measures is ensured, in particular, by
constant digital control, the idea of which has received a powerful new
impetus during the pandemic. Indeed, forced self-isolation has accelerated
the process of digitalization of society, placing humanity in new ontological
conditions, determined primarily by the level of development of digital
technologies and the degree of human mastery.
On the one hand, the coronavirus pandemic has become a good
opportunity to diversify knowledge and master new professions on the
Internet. Forced isolation has been a catalyst for the digital economy, the
flexible combination of digital labour, digital education and digital leisure.
Partial restoration of nature because of declining man-made activity can be
considered another positive consequence of the global epidemic.
On the other hand, one of the main risks of total informatization is
related to the idea of digital control. It consists primarily in tracking
potential carriers of the coronavirus, introducing QR passes, monitoring
activity in the educational and information space, increasing the number
of face recognition cameras and 5G communication stations.
Indeed, it is widely believed that an effective way to the epidemic
containment is to track contacts with mobile phone data and surveillance
cameras, although this is often seen as the authoritarian. Such an
accusation, in our opinion, is wrong at least because the tools of digital
surveillance are widely used by modern political regimes - from liberaldemocratic to authoritarian. In the post-panoptic digital reality, any
political power becomes dispersed and is realized through the micropractices of surveillance. In this regard, profiling technology is actively
used, which, transforming human bodies into streams of information,
“provides opportunities for categorization, social sorting, remote control of
mobility, etc.”40.
Based on the above, we can assume that the digital turn as a
theoretical problem, together with the ecological turn, decisively
determines the future form of philosophy, in particular, the ontology of
interconnection between human biological life with new digital
technologies and further transformation of humanity as part of larger bioand technological systems.
In addition, in the current pandemic, the contradictions between the
personal (private) and the public are sharply exacerbated, which leads to
I. Kovalenko, Y. Meliakova, E. Kalnytskyi, Postpanopticum: metamorphoses of
culture control in a digital society. The Bulletin of Yaroslav Mudryi National Law
University. Series: Philosophy, philosophy of law, political science, sociology, 2021, 3
(50), р. 47.
40

54

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

solving the problem not by protecting the private or public at any cost, but
through a complex search for compromise between them. In particular,
isolation has called into question individualism, which is a fundamental
characteristic of Western society, where the values of autonomy and selfinterest prevail - in contrast to traditional societies, where the individual is
inseparable from the group to which he or she belongs.
Isolation reaffirmed Heidegger's emphasis on connection between
Dasein and being-others, which helped to restore solidarity and mutual
assistance. Today, most people are deeply aware that isolation, as well as
wearing masks and the practice of remote gestures are aimed at both the
protection of others and personal protection. It has also contributed to the
re-evaluation of those professions that are usually considered secondary
and primarily service-related, from hospital staff to housekeepers and
garbage collectors, without which no human society could exist.
There is an inverse relationship between the event and its participants
(“We”): “We” is formalized in the events that happen to “We”, just as the
event has a decisive influence on “We”. The COVID-19 pandemic
dramatized the gap between two forms of multiplicity, populism
(nationalism) and solidarity. Accordingly, one of the challenges of the
pandemic as for philosophy is to take into account the nature of the
differences between these two forms.
In this regard, the complex relationship between the nondiscriminatory nature of the virus and the loci of initial discrimination
based on the actions of different levels of government should be taken into
account. In such conditions, “We” moves between the individualized “I”
and its generalization as “We”. If in the structure of populism “I” is a part
of “We” to the extent that they are both homogeneous objects (when the
remnants of initial inequality and discrimination are removed for the sake
of homogeneous “We”, and in COVID reality pandemic is denied as a
biopolitical event), then solidarity as a structure of thought and a form of
activity presupposes in “We” the necessity of honour and dignity as
obligatory predicates of human nature. Solidarity manifests itself as a
common feeling, a co-feeling, compassion whose significance, as Hannah
Arendt clearly showed41, is that, despite the imbalance of power, it is a
rational political judgment. The situation with COVID-19 shows that the
philosophical understanding of life cannot be separated from the forms of
solidarity caused by constant attempts to actualize human dignity.
New temporality in the conditions of pandemic. In postclassical philosophical discourse, temporality is understood as a sequence
of changes, as the duration of existence in the human world, which is
41

H. Arendt, On Revolution. New York: Viking, 1963.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

55

inevitably associated with personal assessments, values, preferences,
contradictory and therefore unstable structures of the social subject.
The present is perceived not only as a fleeting boundary between what
has happened and what has not yet happened, but also as an essential
dimension that contains all the past and predicts all the future. Edmund
Husserl called this dimension “living real”, in contrast to the “dead”
present, reduced to the atom-moment, abstractly drawn on the timeline42.
In addition, a full sense of the present implies the openness of the
situation in which the subject found himself, and, as Martin Heidegger
once pointed out, a strong desire to take control of it43. A similar view is
expressed in Buddhist philosophy: the reflection of instability (anytia)
through meditative efforts helps to experience the experience of complete
identity over time. With this understanding, the temporality of ordinary
experience becomes more predictable, programmatic and self-affirming,
however, it should be borne in mind that, according to the specifics of
human existence, such experience is based on world stability and remains
open to events.
The temporality of ordinary experience differs significantly from the
event, usually associated with the phenomenon of surprise. As Françoise
Dastur points out, an event is in fact “always a suddenness, something that
fascinates us in an unpredictable way, without warning and that leads us to
an unpredictable future. The event that arises in the formation is
somewhat irreparably excessive in comparison with the usual notion of
time as a flow. This manifests itself as something that shifts time and gives
it a new form, something that brings the flow of time out of balance and
changes its direction”44.
In such words, it is emphasized that the event unbalances and radically
changes the usual style of existence. Moreover, it “does not happen in the
world… it is, on the contrary, like a new world that opens up because of what
is happening. The event is a critical moment of temporality - a critical
moment, which, however, implies the continuity of time”45.
Thus, an event is not just an accidental situation that can happen in
anyone's life. Implicit knowledge of the possibility of an event is an integral
E. Husserl, On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.
43 M. Heidegger, The Temporality of Disclosedness in General. Being and Time.
Trans. by J. Stambaugh. New York: State University of New York Press, 1996.

In the context of our research, the appearance of the new coronavirus in 2019 is
not considered as a virological event that occurred outside the limits of human
consciousness, but primarily as a humanitarian disaster caused by the spread of this virus
44 F. Dastur, Phenomenology of the Event: Waiting and Surprise. Hypatia, 2000,
15(4), р. 182.
45 F. Dastur, op. cit., р. 182.
42

56

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

part of temporality and a necessary component of life experience. An event
cannot be perceived immediately; it is understood only as post facto and,
finally, personally - as what has happened to the subject, but not what he
has done. According to Fr. Dastur's exact phrase, in such a situation we
experience our inability to experience.
Thus, because the event is unplanned and destroys the ordinary world,
its understanding is possible only after it takes place, and only then can we
understand how a new world emerges. If ordinary experience presupposes
an initial belief in the stability of the world and has the same “style”, then
the violation of such coherence leads to the inability to remain open to the
event, and later to integrate it. Fr. Dastur describes such a disposition as
“psychosis”46.
In the current pandemic context, this and the above characteristics of
the event are, in our opinion, the most accurate: the pandemic has taken
over the human world, confused, changed the understanding of the future
and brought the flow of time out of control. Thus, whole worlds changed
instantly: office workers were forced to work at home and, being in small
rooms for a long time, at the same time they had to provide and control the
distance learning of their children; another category of workers (librarians,
service staff) fell under mass dismissals, while their concerns grew as the
pace of slowing life.
The transformation of many of the routines of daily life (gym
attendance, regular shopping, daily appearance at work, etc.) was also
accompanied by the emergence of sudden “necessary” activities (food
vendors, couriers, hospital cleaners and caregivers) against the
background of intentional indifference to health risks, staff turnover and
unpredictable changes. In particular, there were striking details about the
relentless and desperate work of doctors and nurses, who have also been
faced with fundamental ethical issues, especially in intensive care units.
In general, isolation has “forced” people to experience a new period of
time as a temporality that is no longer rapid and fragmentary. At first, time
was perceived as too slow, but later there was a feeling of accelerating
time, even in conditions of monotony, which was not interrupted by the
usual pleasant vacation or traditional recreational activities. Therefore, it
is not surprising from a phenomenological point of view that the beginning
of the epidemic was the event. Suddenly the world turned upside down,
and a radically new and uncertain future shattered the usual sense of time.
Under such conditions, the constant phenomenological possibility of a
sudden event is combined with a sense of crisis. Time of emergency,
lockdown, self-isolation - this is also the time of the event. We put
ourselves to trying to make time work according to the usual pattern: we
46

F. Dastur, op. cit., рр. 185-186.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

57

self-critically recall the pandemic warnings of public health experts and
imagine a world where we can plan effectively; we review charts showing
the dynamics of morbidity, mortality and recovery, trying to build a
timeline from the past to the future; we look for news about the
effectiveness of vaccines and possible dates for their appearance.
Such actions demonstrate rational attempts to analyze the successes
and failures of management, as well as attempts to gain epistemic
flexibility in future events. However, given the almost complete futility of
ordinary citizens to decisively influence the situation, such intentions
should be understood rather as existential attempts to overcome
(eradicate) a particularly long event, thus recreating the usual temporality
to make human experience our own again.
Analyzing the political processes at the end of the XVIII century,
Michel Foucault noted that the newly born biopower faced an endemic
problem and had to take into account that “the form, nature, extention,
duration and intensity of the illnesses are prevalent in a population… They
were permanent factors which sapped the population's strength, shortened
the working week, wasted energy and cost money both because they led to
a fall in production and because treating them was expensive. Death was
no longer something that suddenly swooped down on life - as in epidemic.
Death was now something permanent, something that slips into life,
constantly gnaws at it, diminishes it and weakens it”47.
In turn, Lauren Berlant used the phrase “slow death”48 to describe the
quiet background of late capitalism in the form of continuous depletion of
the population. Slow death is a form of life that takes form of endemic. In
our opinion, such a shift is not solely a function of the actual impact of
deaths and diseases. This is primarily due to the instability of the event as
a gap in life experience, as COVID-19, in particular, reflects the inability of
political and economic systems to perform their tasks and, ultimately,
leads to a transition from pandemic to endemic.
Such a dominant temporality becomes, in the words of Jasbir K. Puar,
a temporality of weakness, not health or disability, chronic, not acute –
“not non-normative, not exclusive, not that one that can occur or can be
avoided, but a banal feature everyday existence, which already determines
the unreliability of such existence”49.

47 M. Foucault, Society Must Be Defended: Lectures at the Collège de France 1975–
1976, trans. David Macey. New York: Picador,2003, рр. 243-244.
48 L. Berlant, Slow Death (Sovereignty, Obesity, Lateral Agency). Critical Inquiry,
2007, 33(4), рр. 754-780.
49 J.K. Puar, The Right to Maim: Debility, Capacity, Disability. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2017, р. 16.

58

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Some mass deaths, especially as a result of terrorist attacks or other
special crises, are considered catastrophic, always sudden, even if foreseen,
and injure not only their victims but the general public, while catalyzing
radical changes in security and control. Almost a million deaths from
COVID-19 quickly became a feature of the social landscape, slow deaths
entered normal life, becoming a sign primarily of personal tragedy with
frequent silence by politicians.
In our opinion, comparing epidemic and endemic with event and
duration helps to explain the state of consciousness of patients with socalled “long-term COVID” - such an understudied syndrome is found in
survivors of COVID and in which the acute phase of viral infection changes
to periodic recurrence self-awareness50. As the incidence of disease and
medical knowledge increases, the ontology of experience with the disease
will increase. However, the refusal to recognize a nonlinear, cyclical, stable
time of post-viral life is also an existential reaction to the “psychosis” of a
long event and the need for more “normal” temporality.
Conclusions. Philosophizing today is, above all, a resolute statement,
devoid of a state of detachment and balance. Attentive to the achievements
of natural, medical and social sciences, the philosophy of the COVID era is
aimed at specific ontological, epistemological, ethical and political studies
and, in fact, has no right to miss the present time in anticipation of
comfortable “twilight”. Right now, in the face of a global emergency,
philosophy is able to show its maximum strength - through rigorous and
systematic thinking to discover the arche of the new world reality and
identify its determinants.
The philosophy of the pandemic is a reflection of the specific social
reality generated by the distance way of social life and digital technologies,
new stereotypes about the relationship between individual and collective,
new readings of the issues on personal and collective responsibility.
It is likely that in human society, COVID-19 itself may be one of the
meso-institutions, manifesting itself as a serious seasonal disease, and thus
provoking phenomena that could have happened in any case, albeit less
quickly and decisively. The fact that COVID-19 did not cause a political
revolution does not make it just another mediocre event that does not
change anything. Instead, like all important events, the pandemic is likely to
shuffle the mechanisms of various key human institutions, and all attention
will be focused on the most important of those it destroys or causes.
Pandemic isolation was an event that caused a specific time gap in the
formation of life experience. In addition, it is gradually showing its
productive potential, encouraging people to rethink and change their way of
F. Callard, Very, Very Mild: COVID-19 Symptoms and Illness Classification.
Somatosphere, 2020. Available at: http://somatosphere.net/2020/mild-covid.html/.
50

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

59

life alone. In fact, a new horizon opens up in the development of mankind the so-called trans-modernity, marked not so much by the transhumanist
vector (towards overcoming human artificial intelligence), but by open and
solitary neohumanism, combining values of science and technology with
conscious care for themselves and others in the shared space.
Conclusion
Philosophizing today is, above all, a resolute statement, devoid of a state
of detachment and balance. Attentive to the achievements of natural,
medical and social sciences, the philosophy of the COVID era is aimed at
specific ontological, epistemological, ethical and political studies and, in
fact, has no right to miss the present time in anticipation of comfortable
“twilight”. Right now, in the face of a global emergency, philosophy is able to
show its maximum strength - through rigorous and systematic thinking to
discover the arche of the new world reality and identify its determinants.
The philosophy of the pandemic is a reflection of the specific social
reality generated by the distance way of social life and digital technologies,
new stereotypes about the relationship between individual and collective,
new readings of the issues on personal and collective responsibility.
It is likely that in human society, COVID-19 itself may be one of the
meso-institutions, manifesting itself as a serious seasonal disease, and thus
provoking phenomena that could have happened in any case, albeit less
quickly and decisively. The fact that COVID-19 did not cause a political
revolution does not make it just another mediocre event that does not
change anything. Instead, like all important events, the pandemic is likely to
shuffle the mechanisms of various key human institutions, and all attention
will be focused on the most important of those it destroys or causes.
Pandemic isolation was an event that caused a specific time gap in the
formation of life experience. In addition, it is gradually showing its
productive potential, encouraging people to rethink and change their way of
life alone. In fact, a new horizon opens up in the development of mankind the so-called trans-modernity, marked not so much by the transhumanist
vector (towards overcoming human artificial intelligence), but by open and
solitary neohumanism, combining values of science and technology with
conscious care for themselves and others in the shared space.
References
Adler, Y., (2020), A Political a priori? Philosophy Today, 64 (4), рр.
815-819.
Agamben, G., (2020), A Che Punto Siamo? L’epidemia Come Politica.
Roma: Quodlibet.
60

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Angner, E., (2020), Epistemic Humility: Knowing Your Limits in a
Pandemic. Behavioral Scientist. Available at:
https://behavioralscientist.org/epistemic-humility-coronavirusknowing-your-limits-in-a-pandemic/.
Arendt, H., (1963), On Revolution. New York: Viking.
Badiou, A., (2020), On the Epidemic Situation. Available at:
https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/4608-on-the-epidemic-situation.
Benvenuto, S., (2020), Welcome to Seclusion. Antinomie. Available at:
https://www.journal-psychoanalysis.eu/coronavirus-andphilosophers/#_edn3.
Berlant, L., (2007), Slow Death (Sovereignty, Obesity, Lateral
Agency). Critical Inquiry, 33(4), рр. 754-780.
Bourget, D., Chalmers, D.J., (2014), What Do Philosophers Believe?
Philosophical Studies, 170(3), рр. 465-500.
Callard, F., (2020), Very, Very Mild: COVID-19 Symptoms and Illness
Classification. Somatosphere. Available at:
http://somatosphere.net/2020/mild-covid.html/.
Dastur, F., (2000), Phenomenology of the Event: Waiting and
Surprise. Hypatia, 15(4), рр. 178-189.
Esposito, R., (2020), Curati a oltranza. Antinomie. Available at:
https://antinomie.it/index.php/2020/02/28/curati-a-oltranza/.
Foucault, M., (1994), Omnes et Singulatim: Vers Une Critique de la
Raison Politique. in: Dits et Écrit. Paris: Gallimard, Vol. IV, рр. 134-161.
Foucault, M., (1980), Power/knowledge selected interviews and other
writings, 1972-1977. New York: Pantheon.
Foucault, M., (2003). Society Must Be Defended: Lectures at the
Collège de France 1975–1976, trans. David Macey. New York: Picador.
Gillings, M.R., Hilbert, M., Kemp, D.J., (2016), Information in the
biosphere: Biological and digital worlds. Trends in Ecology & Evolution,
31(3), рр. 180-189.
Hegel, W.F.G., (1991), Elements of the Philosophy of Right.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Available at:
https://hscif.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Hegel-Phil-ofRight.pdf.
Heidegger, M., (1996), The Temporality of Disclosedness in General.
in: Being and Time. Trans. by J. Stambaugh. New York: State University of
New York Press.
Henri-Lévy, B., (2020), Оn the good and bad news about
coronavirus. Available at: https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/BernardHenri-Lévy-on-the-good-and-bad-news-about-coronavirus.
Husserl, E., (1991), On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of
Internal Time. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

61

Interview: Noam Chomsky on How Bosses Are Making Coronavirus
‘Worse, for Their Benefit’, (2002), Available at:
https://labornotes.org/2020/04/interview-noam-chomsky-howbosses-are-making-coronavirus-worse-their-benefit.
Kovalenko I., Meliakova Y., Kalnytskyi E., Nesterenko K., (2021), Оn
conspiracy thinking in the phenomenology оf modern culture. Cogito,
13(3), рр. 67-83.
Kovalenko, I., Meliakova, Y., Kalnytskyi, E., (2021), Postpanopticum:
metamorphoses of culture control in a digital society. The Bulletin of
Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University. Series: Philosophy, philosophy
of law, political science, sociology, 3 (50), рр. 41-58.
Lauwaert, L., Block, A., (2020), Beware of the Philosophical Expert.
Philosophy Today, 64 (4), рр. 871-876.
Nancy, J.-L., (2020), A Much Too Human Virus. Available at:
https://www.journal-psychoanalysis.eu/a-much-human-virus/.
Nancy, J.-L., (2020), Eccezione Virale. Antinomie. Available at:
https://antinomie.it/index.php/2020/02/27/eccezione-virale/.
Ord, T., (2020), The Precipice. Existential Risk and the Future of
Humanity. London: Bloomsbury.
Peters, М.А., Besley, Т., (2020), Pandemic Education and Viral
Politics. London: Routledge.
Puar, J.K., (2017), The Right to Maim: Debility, Capacity, Disability.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Schuback, M. Sá Cavalcante, (2020), To Think in the Eye of the Storm.
Philosophy Today, 64 (4), рр. 907-911.
Virilio, P., (2007), The original accident. Cambridge: Polity.
Virilio, P., (1977), Vitesse et Politique. Essai de dromologie, Paris:
Galilée.
Žižek, S., (2020), Pandemic! COVID-19 Shakes the World. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Žižek, S., (2020), Coronavirus is ‘Kill Bill’-esque blow to capitalism
and could lead to reinvention of communism. Available at:
http://left.by/archives/18846.
Žižek, S., (2020), Is Barbarism with a Human Face Our Fate? In the
Moment. Available at: https://critinq.wordpress.com/2020/03/18/isbarbarism-with-a-human-face-our-fate/.

62

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

“DEMOCRACY: A STATE OF DEMOS OR AN
OLIGARCH’S PARTY STATE? AN INTERPRETATION
OF MODERNITY’S NOTION OF DEMOCRACY IN THE
MODERN GREEK STATE”
Dionysis Tsirigotis
dtsirigo7@gmail.com
Abstract: The key objective of this study is to clarify the actual use of
democracy in current era. Taking as a case study the Modern Greek state we are
trying to explain and understand the key figures of its political system in terms of
democracy notion. Starting from George Contogeorgis’s assumption that the
modern political system is neither democratic nor representative, we try to
examine the internal sociopolitical structure of Modern’s Greek State. The main
working assumption is whether democracy is the foundation of politics, i.e. the
state of demos, or is the core instrument of political parties so as to occupy the
executive branch and establish an oligarch political regime. We will show, how
the development and understanding of democracy in Western Europe and Greece
in particular, is totally different from its classical conception. The analytical
starting point is the assumption that the political system of western democracy
presented as an indirect representation creates a gap between society and policy,
which disables the latter from its physical role as a mandator of the government.
By extending the above- mentioned syllogism into the Modern Greek State, in
accordance with George Contogeorgis’s assumption that the modern political
system is neither democratic nor representative, can be described the roots of
current sociopolitical and economic impasse in Greece.
Keywords: Greece, Democracy, Politics, Western Europe, Society

Introduction
The modern literature on democracy tends to equate it with the
existence and operation of a parliamentary system as a measure of
democratic status. These studies have shown that political parties are the
main instruments of politics in the current political system due to the
principle of representation. As David Robertson notes, “to talk, today, about
democracy, is to talk about a system of competitive political parties”.1



Assistant Professor at the Department of International Relations and
European Studies, at University of Piraeus.
1 Kaare Strom, “Parties at the core of government”, in Russell J. Dalton and Martin
P. Wattenberg (eds), Parties Without Partisans. Political Change in Advanced Industrial

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

63

So the key objective of this study is to clarify the actual use of
democracy in the current era. Taking the Modern Greek state as a case
study, we are trying to explain and understand the key figures of its
political system in terms of what they mean to democracy. Starting with
George Contogeorgis’ assumption that the modern political system is
neither democratic nor representative,2 we try to examine the internal
sociopolitical structure of the modern Greek State. The main question is
whether democracy is the foundation of politics, i.e. the state of demos, or
merely a core instrument of political parties so as to occupy the executive
branch and establish an oligarchic political regime. On the one side, the
stripping of democracy of its foundational component is morphing it into a
democracy without demos. On the other side, “the transformation of party
leaders into holders of public office promotes the de-democratization of
political decision-making, that is, it increasingly delegitimizes
lawmaking”.3
In this context, the core questions to be considered are the following:
How is democracy defined in the modern era?
What is the relationship between political system (democracy) and
civil society/citizens?
How can we explain/interpret the dispute of the political function with
its society?
Defining and explaining democracy in the modern era.
The concept of democracy was born and nourished in ancient Athens
in the 4th century BC based on the principle of people governing
themselves,4 as has been thoroughly described and analyzed by classical
philosophical scholars.5 Democracy in its original meaning gave Rule to
Demos, i.e. “the body of citizens collectively”, and was comprised of three
main pillars: the Assembly of the Demos, the Council of 500 as a legislative
Democracies, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000, p. 180. David Robertson, A Theory
of Party Competition, London: John Wiley, 1976.
2 George Contogeorgis, Η Δημοκρατία ως Ελευθερία (Democracy as Freedom),
Athens: Patakis, 2007. Idem, Οι Ολιγάρχες, (The Oligarchs), Athens: Patakis, 2013.
3 Tillmann C. Lauk, op. cit., p. 30.
4 See Cristopher W. Blackwell “Athenian Democracy: an overview”, in Blackwell C.,
(ed.) Dēmos: Classical Athenian Democracy, The Stoa: a consortium for electronic
publication in the humanities, 2003, p. 2.
5 See indicatively Aristotle’s, Politics, Blackwell, “Athenian Democracy”. George
Contogeorgis, Το Ελληνικό Κοσμοσύστημα (The Hellenic Cosmosystem), vol.1 Athens:
Sideris, 2006, pp. 225-247. Geofrey De Ste Croix, Athenian democratic origins and other
essays, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. Ober Josiah, “The Nature
of Athenian Democracy” (review article: Hansen, Athenian Assembly), Classical Philology
84 no. 4 (October 1989).

64

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

branch and the People’s Court, the judiciary branch. 6 “The Greek word
dêmokratia conjoins kratos, a term for power, and dêmos, a term for “the
people.” Thus, Greek democracy is typically and rightly seen as differing
from the “modern form” of democracy in its emphasis on the relevance of
the direct participation of ordinary people in collective self-governance”.7
More precisely, the narrative defines democracy as freedom, the full
version of which refers to the constraints that nature imposes on man as
well as to the sociopolitical compulsions that concern the latter. 8 Freedom
has a unique value for Greeks’ sociopolitical organization and is defined as
the repetitive equivalent of autonomy. It also has three dimensions individual, social and political.9 Firstly, the personal freedom covers man's
private/public life within society. It is not placed at odds with society, but
as a constitutive parameter of it. Secondly, the social freedom focuses on
the area of social life where individuals make contracts with social (sub-)
systems (institutions or other individuals), which bind their will or alter
their social position. For example, the contract that was concluded
between a man and his employer so as to exchange his labor for a payment
is a deprivation of his (social) freedom. Lastly, political freedom refers to
the position of the individual in the political state system. The key issue
here is the establishment of a relationship between society and politics in
which the person is autonomous and free to define himself. Stated
differently, political freedom dictates that the people/citizens not be
subject to anyone else’s authority. It concerns the position of the overall
society of citizens within the political system. The political system,
however, is combined with another aspect of freedom that has to do with
the polysemy (cultural, geographical, etc.) of society and, by extension,
with the natural tendency of groups to self-manage their social, political
and economic issues.
In response to the questions at the heart of this article and in
conjunction with the aforementioned analysis of the core features of
democracy, we argue that modernity’s concept of democracy10 focuses on
the personal level of freedom, i.e. the institutional status of people in terms
of autonomy. There is neither social nor political freedom, only certain
Cristopher W. Blackwell, op. cit., p. 3.
Josiah Ober, “What the Greeks can tell us about democracy', Annual Review of
Political Science 11 (June 2008), p. 69.
8 Contogeorgis Contogeorgis, Η Δημοκρατία ως Ελευθερία, op. cit.
9 Ibid, pp. 26-29.
10 Robert A. Dahl Robert, Democracy, Liberty, and Equality, Oslo: Norwegian
University Press, 1986. David Held, Models of Democracy Cambridge: Polity Press, 2006.
Paul Hirst, “Representative Democracy and its limits”, The Political Quarterly 59 no. 2
(1988), pp. 199-213. Paul E. Gottfried, After liberalism: Mass democracy in the
managerial state, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999, pp. 30-36.
6
7

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

65

social rights to prevent the infringement of individual freedom and to
preserve citizens’ dependence contract with government. Accordingly, the
fundamental problem of modernity is the adaption of the democratic ideal
in a pre-political system such as post-feudal Europe. Thus, democracy is
equated with individual rights and freedom,11 something which is totally
different to the basic logic of democracy as highlighted by Aristotle work.
Subsequently, the political system of modernity, by the introduction of the
parliamentary system in Western Europe and especially in the United
Kingdom, became representative.12 The principle of representation defines
the measure of internal legitimacy, meaning that this is achieved through
the “transformation of the political will from the individual level to the
collective level. It holds that a group of people- today an electoral districtcan elect a representative. They will represent the will of their constituency
in the assembly of the other representatives – today in parliaments”.13 On
deeper investigation, the equation of democracy with parliamentarianism
in the beginning of the 20th century and the undisputable role of parties as
“the most important vehicles of mass democracy”14 in the implementation
process of the policy reflects their leading position in the political system.
This development may be interpreted under the light of the special
position that the Western political system grants to political parties at all
the levels of politics/state operation, for example in parliament, in
government, in the local administration etc.15
Following the abovementioned syllogism, we can conclude that the
transition from society to government of each political party leads to a
11 Isaiah Berlin, ‘‘Two Concepts of Liberty”, in idem, Liberty, ed. Henri Hardy,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969 [2002]). Tillmann C. Lauk, op. cit., p. 1. Michael
Ignatieff, The Rights Revolution, Toronto: House of Anansi Press, 2007. David Meskill,
Concepts and consequences of Liberty: From Smith and Mill to Libertian Paternalism,
Critical Review 25 no. 1 (September 2013), pp. 89-91. John Stuart Mill, ‘‘On Liberty.’’ In
idem, On Liberty and Other Essays, New York: Oxford University Press, 1859 [1991].
12 Arendt Lijphart, Patterns of democracy. Government forms and performance in
thirty-six countries, New Haven/London: Yale University Press, 1999 ch.2. Gustav S.
Mahler, “The ‘Westminster Model’ Away from West minster: Is It Always the Most
Appropriate Model?” in Baaklini Abdo I. and Desfosses Helen (ed.), Designs for
Democratic Stability: Studies in Viable Constitutionalism, Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe,
1997, pp. 35-51.
13 Tillmann C. Lauk, op. cit., p. 2.
14 Kaare Strom, “Parties at the core of government”, op. cit., p.181.
15 Gary Cox and Mathew McCubbins, Legislative Leviathan: Party Government in
the House, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1993. Russell J
Dalton and Martin P. Wattenberg, “Unthinkable democracy. Political change in advanced
industrial democracies”, in Russell J. Dalton and Martin P. Wattenberg (eds), Parties
Without Partisans. Political Change in Advanced Industrial Democracies, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000, pp.5-10. Kaare Strom, op. cit., pp. 182-183.

66

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

merger among them.16 The ruling party undermines the public body, since
the main source of revenue is the public treasury, assisted by the legislative
and a regulatory act of government. The result of this conjunction is not
only the removal/separation of the ruling party from its society, but
foremost the transformation of the party from a representative to an
authoritarian institution. The domination of the party is reflected by its
need to conquer the executive branch for the implementation of its policy,
i.e. already defined internal checks with the already stated practices.
Hence, the acquirement of governmental status by the ruling political
party ends with the absorption of the political system and state politics by
the ruling party.
A critical issue that inevitably arises from the above analysis is
whether the civil society is on the inside or outside of political function and
whether it exercises its primary role as a ruler and ruled of politics. This is
the issue to which we now turn.
The function of politics in the modern nation state. An
explanation and interpretation of party-society relationship
If we accepted that “parties have become agencies that govern ...
rather than represent; they bring order rather than give voice”,17 then the
major issue we have to explore is how to illustrate the actual role of civil
society in the political system.
As we observed, the modern notion of democracy, by acknowledging
political parties as the “most important organizations in modern
politics”,18 deprives civil society of its principal role as an exclusive agent of
formulation/implementation of politics and dissociates it from the
political system. In other words, it leads to the rehabilitation of society,
and “it is part of the process by which parties and their leaders separate
themselves from the”19 latter. This dichotomization between society and
politics indicates that the former upholds in all fields of intra-state
structure the role of the private. As a result, politics coincides with the
existence and operation of political parties by distorting the
meaning/function of classical democracy.
This is an important point since it illustrates the core difference
between the classical and the modern concept of democracy, which is
crystallized in the question of whether and to what extent civil society is
located within or outside the state system. For modernity, the assignment
of democratic and representative authority in the executive branch is not
Dalton and Wattenberg, op. cit., pp. 8-10.
Tillmann C. Lauk, op. cit., p. 29.
18 Kaare Strom, op. cit., p. 180.
19 Tillmann C. Lauk, op. cit., p. 29.
16
17

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

67

only possible, but also necessary due to the principle of functional
differentiation established at state level. The result of this procedure is the
eviction of society from the formatting process/implementation of politics,
thereby turning it into a status of individual.
In order to analyze this issue and the central working assumption of
our study, and so as to shed light on the exclusion of society from the
formation/implementation of intra-state politics, we use the
methodological framework of George Contogeorgis’ analysis concerning
political system categorization. This utilizes a typology of distinctive
historical sequences (phases) consistent with the anthropocentric
progress/evolution of Greek society, which demarcate and determine the
political systems in three categories – pro-representatives, representatives
and democratic.20 In the former, society is the state’s own estate. The state
embodies the political system and society retains the role of the individual
without any participation or say in policy formation. Conversely, the
political staff decides on and sets the course of political process from
beginning to end entirely assuming possession of the political system. In
particular, and insofar as the current pre-representative Greek political
system operates under the direction of the party system, the society's
relationship with politics is strictly limited to a patron-client system.
In the latter, (i.e. Kleisthenis political system)21 the municipality holds
the universal political competence. It is the master of the political system
and the society is not only the mandator expressing the political will, but
also a mandatee who implements its political decisions. Hence, in the
intermediary phase of political growth, (Solon) society is constituted in
municipality, namely in a perpetual political body, where it becomes the
principal of the political staff through representation.22
Therefore, the basic difference between a democratic and a
representative political system can be detected in the abolishment of the
mandator-mandatee (rulers and ruled) relationship that is established in
the latter. Both in representative and democratic political systems, the
political staff is controlled and held accountable by the municipality for its
acts. It is subject to justice and punished for any wrong or harm done to
the community decision.23 However, even if we assume that modernity’s
notion of democracy is familiar with representation, we have to check its
domestic institutional array. For instance, in representation, the political
20 Contogeorgis Contogeorgis, Η Δημοκρατία ως Ελευθερία, op. cit., pp. 31-3. Idem,
Οι Ολιγάρχες, op. cit., p. 43.
21 Aristotle notes the motive of Cleisthenes at 1319B21. See, John J. Keaney, The
Composition of Aristotle's Athenaion Politeia: Observation and Explanation, New York:
Oxford University Press, 1992, p. 22.
22 Keaney, The Composition of Aristotle's Athenaion Politeia, op. cit., p. 35.
23 Contogeorgis Contogeorgis, Οι Ολιγάρχες, op. cit., pp. 22-23.

68

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

system is shared between society (that is also established on
institution/municipality) and the political power/state. The society takes
on the responsibilities of the mandator (specifies the policies that will be
exercised, controls, divests the politicians of office etc.), while the political
staff assumes the responsibilities of the mandatee. In this sense,
representation as a political system is positioned in the middle of a
democracy pendulum.24 Similarly, in terms of essential features, the
political system of representation requires, firstly, the establishment of
civil society in a constant municipality, so as to be able to bear the
responsibility of a daily consultation on issues and manifestation of its
volition, and secondly, a clear outline of what it needs to deliver as a
mandator of the executive branch:25
-the design/dictation of the basic guidelines of politics practiced by the
authorized representative,
-the decision on the key issues it considers important for it,
-the demand of its representative to disprove or take back decisions
that diverted from the constitutional framework,
-the explicit prohibition of government action in cases where it would
try to alter the institution of political power, to alter the followed policies
without the express consent of municipality,
-and further, the control and revoking of the mandate at any time
which it deems appropriate via accountability and bringing to justice.
The transition to a representative state presupposes the emergence of
the concept of civil society in a distinct political category via its
institutionalization as a constant and organic part of the state and political
system. In this way, the function of representation, like democracy,
requires the transformation of civil society into demos-municipality.
Though, in representation, the political jurisdiction does not accrue
entirely to the municipality of society. The municipality takes on only the
competences pertaining to the property of the principal, while the powers
belonging to the carrier's agent remain with the political power of the state
(Contogeorgis 2011).26
Consequently, the parliamentary political system of modernity is prerepresentative and differs entirely from the classical notion of democracy.
It leaves the configuration of the political, social and economic fields
beyond the grasp of the State. Take as a given, that the latter does not get
Idem, Η Δημοκρατία ως Ελευθερία, op. cit., pp. 31-33.
Idem, “What is democracy”, in Cosmosysteme-Cosmosystem-Κοσμοσύστημα,
October 1, accessed January 3, 2015, http://contogeorgis.blogspot.gr/2011/10/blogpost.html.
26 Contogeorgis Contogeorgis, op. cit.
24
25

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

69

involved in the formation of social correlations and, indeed, this is left
entirely to ex-institutional agents, such as political parties.
Discerning modernity’s political triangle-state, peoples and
parties
To be more precise, we have to mention the false division that took
place in modernity’s political literature between direct democracy and
indirect representation and which indicates the abstention of civil society
from policy. The former takes plebiscites as a basic form to introduce civil
society into state policy formation/implementation and to also curb the
power of governmental parties. Although the main aim of referenda is to
lower “partyness of policy-making”27 by expanding the decision-making
process via the inclusion of citizens in political practice, empirically it is
used as an inverse measure to strengthen party government. More
precisely, “if parties can” frame and administer the referendum’s process,
“if (referendums) [...] are held only when the parties desire them, and if
the voters predictably take their cues from party leaders, then it is not clear
that government parties have anything to lose through such mechanisms
of decision‐making”.28 There are several examples of countries where their
political parties have manipulated and controlled referenda. In Italy, “after
the referendum mechanism came into use in the 1970s, it was exploited
extensively by the Radical Party, and even occasionally by the Christian
Democrats”.29 Likewise, “the use of direct democracy under French
President de Gaulle”30 was “a deliberate attempt by the President himself
to strengthen his party and his own grip on French politics”.31
Respectively, the indirect representation, either in parliamentary or in
functional form, dominated as the central control mechanisms of political
power through the role of parties. In particular the former (parliamentary
representation) is embodied by the existence and functioning of political
parties that occupy government, while the most characteristic form of the
latter (functional) is corporatism.32 In both cases, the actual role of society
Kaare Strom, op. cit., p.186.
Ibid.
29 Ibid, p. 187.
30 Henry W. Ehrmann, “Direct Democracy in France”, The American Political
Science Review 57, no. 4, (December 1963), pp. 883–901.
31 Kaare Strom, op. cit., p. 187.
32 Ibidem, p. 184, In Schmitter’s words, “Corporatism can be defined as a system of
interest representation in which the constituent units are organized into a limited number
of singular, compulsory, noncompetitive, hierarchically ordered and functionally
differentiated categories, recognized or licensed (if not created) by the state and granted a
deliberate representational monopoly within their respective categories in exchange for
observing certain controls on theirs election of leaders and articulation of demands and
27

28

70

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

is to legitimize, through its vote, the political staff. This also means that a
close relationship between parties, government and state exists, leading to
an “unhealthy symbiosis between those who represent (the party or
parties) and those who rule (government and public service)”.33 A
profound result of this process is the ‘invasion’ of the state by parties,
referred to as partitocracy. It is a situation in which the political parties
dominate the state and ‘colonize’ important segments of its institutions
and society, like public administration (at all levels), public enterprises,
education, the media, etc.34 As Puhle notes: “The privileges and the
services of the Parteienstaat (Partictocracy) [...], go to all significant
parties, including the opposition—a mechanism that has been further
intensified in Germany by federalism, in Austria by the long-standing
practice of Great Coalitions, and in Italy by the broad arco costituzionale,
the antifascist consensus, and a long tradition (until 1993) of an almost
equal distribution of the local and regional strongholds between the two
major parties. [...] One of the most prominent features of these practices
since the late 1950s has been the financing of parties out of the state
budget. Public financing of parties has usually favoured the parliamentary
group of the party, and currently covers about half of the budgets of the
major parties in most European countries (with the exception of the
Netherlands)”.35
At the broadest level, the privileges are distributed by party officials
who are “placed alongside ministers in the government” and ensure that it
(privileges distribution) “takes the form which the party approves of”.
Under these conditions, patronage is a permanent and a large-scale
phenomenon occurring in Westminster-type parliamentary systems. “This
was the case in Belgium, Austria, and pre-1992 Italy”.36

supports”. Philippe C. Schmitter, “Still the century of corporatism?” The Review of
politics 36, no. 1 (January 1974), pp. 93-94.
33 Jean Blondel, “Party Government, Patronage and Party Decline in WesternEurope”,
in Richard Gunther, José Ramón Montero, Juan Linz (ed.), Political Parties. Old Concepts
and New Challenges, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 235.
34 Klaus von Beyme, Die politische Klasse in Parteienstaat, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp,
1993). Christos Lyrintzis, “Greek politics in the era of economic crisis: reassessing causes
and effects”, Hellenic Observatory papers on Greece and Southeast Europe, GreeSE paper
no. 45 (March 2011). The Hellenic Observatory, London School of Economics and
Political Science, London, UK, 2011, p.: 5. Available at
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/33826/1/GreeSE_No45.pdf. Hans J. Puhle, 'Still the age of
catch-allism? Volksparteien and Parteienstaat in crisis and re-equilibration', in Richard
Gunther, Ramon Jose Montero, Juan J. Linz (ed.), Political Parties. Old Concepts and
New Challenges, Oxford: Oxford University Press 2002, p. 70.
35 Hans J. Puhle, op. cit., p.71.
36 Blondel, op. cit., p. 246.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

71

A logical consequence of these processes is a structurally interwoven
relationship between parties and state. The parties (represented by the party
elites) are no longer representing societal interests. Instead, they form a part
of the state, primarily representing themselves as a power elite or ‘political
class’. It is in this context that the formation of party government takes
place. We refer only to situations when “a single, cohesive party gains
control of the policy‐making apparatus through elections and formulates
policy that is then faithfully executed”.37 This has made it necessary for
societal interests to be represented by different groups and organizations,
like intermediaries38 –political parties,39 interest associations (unions and
guilds) and social movements, which, in turn, approach the parties in their
function as representatives of the state.40
The relationship between society and politics in modern
Greece. From the state of demos to the party state
Our ultimate objective in this section is to analyze whether the
“withdrawal of party leadership from the realm of civil society into that of
government and the state, leads to an amalgamation between parties and
government”.41.
We might start by investigating the actual role of political parties in
the modern Greek state, from the establishment of the parliamentary
system and the introduction of the catholic vote in 1843, long before it was
introduced in the so-called classic parliamentary countries, e.g. Great
Britain,42 in the current era. Actually, the introduction of a parliamentary
system in Greece was to be the core means of resolving the conflict
Kaare Strom, op. cit., p. 183.
The basic functions, of intermediaries’ institutions are:
a) to link the preferences of persons, families, and firms to various agents and
agencies of government;
b) to aggregate the individual preferences of their members or categories into
collective demands;
c) to protect formal political rights of assembly and petition in democracies.
39 In a democratic regime, political parties are the principal mediators between the
voters and their interests, on the one hand, and the institutions of decision-making, on
the other. See, Philippe C. Schmitter, “Parties are not what they once were”, in Larry
Diamond and Richard Gunther (eds), Political Parties and Democracy, Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001, p. 70.
40 Ibid.
41 Peter Mair, “Ruling the Void? The Hollowing of Western Democracy;” New Left
Review 42, (November 2006), p. 12., https://newleftreview.org/II/42/peter-mairrulingthe-void). Tillmann C. Lauk, op. cit., p. 29.
42 Nikos Alivizatos, An introduction to the Greek constitutional history Athens:
Sakoulas, 1981). Dimitrios Charalambis, Patronage relations and populism, Athens:
Exantas, 1989. Paul Petridis, Political force and constitutional institutions in Modern
Greece, 1844-1936, Salonica: Sakoulas, 1984.
37

38

72

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

"between central and local power" and, subsequently, the vehicle (via the
introduction of universal suffrage) of the political elites/dignitaries to
impose their political will and to occupy the state apparatus. 43 As
Panayiotis Kondylis analyzed, the founding of the parliamentary monarchy
in the Otto period gave to the party system the possibility of appropriation
of the state apparatus and converting it into a party state. 44 This is
because, from then on, the exercise of political power was not a way to
promote/defend the common interest, but a struggle for conquest and
appropriation of public wealth, so as to take up and retain government
power. The ownership of the state apparatus has been facilitated by the
fundamental needs of social groups, since both the rural population and
landless people turned to the state to solve their problems, at least until
the beginning of the 20th century. The former attempted to channel its
labor surplus into the state market and the latter struggled for the
distribution of national land.45 From the moment that the Greek state
acted as central employer, it was easy for its main agencies to use it as an
instrument for its expansion and consolidation of their political influence.
This process was embedded in a patron-client network, which was
developed by the transfer of the patronage relationship from society to the
political structure or via the use of political institutions to strengthen
“interpersonal dependency relations at the level of the local community”.46
E.g. the farmer expects a share of state benefits, which may be achieved
through voting, thereby entitling the patron to ownership of the political
system-state apparatus. In this manner, “the parliamentary party leader
[...] requires from their people obedience, [...] but at the same time
undertakes to "act on their own affairs", i.e. he helps them to "arrange",
and ensures through his influence, comparative advantages in their
competition with fans of other parties”.47 In other words, the ruling party
becomes a possessor of public wealth so as to fulfill the selfish needs of
private individuals. Also, we should not overlook the extensive autonomy
of the political party game of patron-client relationships between
politicians and voters, in which each voter provides support in return for
protection, while a politician sells off the state to voters in exchange for
staying in office. A politician establishes his power on the ability to
distribute lucrative posts and positions. This procession of the autonomy
Dimitrios Charalambis, op. cit., p. 26.
Panayiotis Kondylis, The decline of urban civilization. From the modern to the
postmodern era of and from liberalism to mass democracy, Athens: Themelio, 1991, pp.
51, 56.
45 George Contogeorgis, Political system and policy, Athens: Polytypo, 1985, p. 95.
Konstantinos Tsoukalas, Social growth and statem Athens: Themelio, 1999.
46 Idem, p. 95.
47 Panayiotis Kondylis, The decline of urban civilization, op. cit., p. 20.
43

44

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

73

of the political party game leads to the abolishment of ideological contrasts
by making them minor or merely pre-textual.48 In particular insofar as the
current pre-representative Greek political system operates under the
direction of the party system, the relationship of society with politics is
strictly limited to the patron-client context. By using the parliamentary
political system as a vehicle to promote patronage interest and practices
under the auspices of a patronage network, the governing party has
occupied the whole political system and diminished the Greek society. This
was accomplished by the total exclusion of society from the constitution
and the conduct of politics, thereby turning its status into that of a private
individual –“idiot” in ancient Greek.49 The de-collection of the Greek
society, as a logical consequence of the de-construction of its historical
acquis upon entering into the modern era,50 leads to the citizen’s personal
dependency on the politician.51 Especially in the Greek political system, the
relation between society and politics is intermediate due to the absence of
a representative authority. The principle of the mandator and the meaning
of politics do not belong to society, so as to be able to control the linkage
between society and politics. As G. Contogeorgis mentions, “the principle
of the originator belongs exclusively to the agent-state, whereas the
meaning of policy refers to the “nation” or to the “public interest” and not
to the will of society or its interest”.52 The state –government represents
the nation and not the society. The final result of this process is the
weakening “of formal civil society,53 which has been characterized as

Dimitrios Charalambis, Patronage relations and populism, op. cit.
George Contogeorgis, “Political Culture in Greece”, op. cit.
http://contogeorgis.blogspot.gr/2008/02/political-science-in-greece.html
50 For this issue see, Anthony Giddens, The consequences of modernity, Cambridge:
Polity Press, 1991. Panayiotis Kondylis, op. cit., pp. 50-67. Alberto Martinelli, Global
Modernization. Rethinking the Project of Modernity, London: Sage, 2005, p. 8. Timothy
Mitchell (ed.), Questions of modernity, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2000. Stuart Hall, David Held, Don Humbert and Kenneth Thompson (ed.), Modernity:
an introduction to modern societies, Oxford: Blackwell, 1996. Gertrude Himmelfarb, The
roads to modernity: the British, French and American enlightenments, New York:
Vintage books, 2005. Robin W. Winks and Joan Neuberger, Europe and the making of
Modernity: 1815-1914, USA: Oxford University Press, 2005.
51 George Contogeorgis, Partitocrazia and dynastic state. An interpretation of the
Greek stalemate, Athens, Patakis, 2012.
52 Idem, Η Δημοκρατία ως Ελευθερία, op. cit., p. 749.
53 George Mavrogordatos, “From traditional clientelism to machine politics: the
impact of PASOK populism in Greece”, South European Society and Politics 2, no. 3
(Winter 1997), pp. 1–26. George Mavrogordatos, “Civil society under populism”, in
Richard Clogg (ed.) The Populist Decade, London: St. Martin’s Press, 1993, pp. 47–64.
Nikos Mouzelis, Modern Greece: Facets of Underdevelopment, London: Macmillan,
1978.
48
49

74

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

relatively underdeveloped, poorly organized, with few weak civil society
organizations and dominated by a powerful government.54
The dispute of the political function of democracy from
society
In the aforementioned analysis, we stressed that the essence of
modernity’s approach to political function lies in the essential dichotomy
between society and politics, making policy an exclusive operation of the
state and being expressed in terms of sovereignty. In detail, it has not
approached the society as a coherent political entity, and it has not
recognized society’s position in the political system or its role in the
political process due to the fact that it has not considered the capability or
the maturity of civil society to take part in the political function.55
Throughout this discussion, the central question is why “public doubts
about politicians, political parties, and political institutions are spreading
across almost all advanced industrial democracies”.56 A formal answer
confirms the internal democratic deficit, due to the divide between society
and policy, as a primary cause of delegitimisation of public policies.
Although the mainstream view of public policies’ legitimacy puts emphasis
on “the link between institutions and their polities (their degree of societal
embeddedness), on the link between policies and institutions (the
effectiveness of the electoral process) and on the link between policies and
their social and economic effects (output-orientation)”,57 in reality, the
primary tie between society and public policy-making is a necessary
fiction. As Verdun & Christiansen describes, a basic dictum of liberal
democracy is the determination of public policy by citizens’ preferences.
But “in modern state this only rarely occurs. Instead, the institutions of
54 Nikoleta Jones, Chrisovaladis Malesios, Theodoros Iosifides and Costas M.
Sophoulis, “Social capital in Greece: measurement and comparative perspectives”, South
European Society and Politics 13, no. 2 (Autumn 2008), pp. 175-193. Dimitris
Sotiropoulos and Evika Karamagioli, The Greek civil society: the road to maturity, 2006.
Available
at
http://www.civicus.org/media/CSI_Greece_Executive_Summary.pdf,
(accessed 23 May 2015). Yannis Theocharis and Jan W. van Deth, “A Modern Tragedy?
Institutional Causes and Democratic Consequences of the Greek Crisis”, Representation
51, no. 1 (Winter 2015), p. 65.
55 George Contogeorgis, Modernity and Progress. The Greek Paradigm, Athens:
Cactus, 2001, pp. 18-19.
56 Russell J. Dalton, Democratic Challenges, Democratic Choices. The Erosion of.
Political Support in Advanced Industrial Democracies, Oxford, New York: Oxford
University Press, 2004, p. 3.
57 Amy Verdun and Thomas Christiansen, “Policies, Institutions and the Euro:
Dilemmas of Legitimacy and Democratic Control”, in Colin Crouch (ed.), After the Euro:
Shaping Institutions for Governance in the Wake of European Monetary Union, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000, p. 174.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

75

representative democracy ensure that elected governments fulfill the
demands of ‘most people, most of the time”. 58 It is in this context that we
now encounter the actual role of the modern state as the sole institution to
carry out politics, i.e. legislative, judiciary and executive, and the only voice
of the national interest. Especially modern democracies are facing an
endogenous challenge from their own citizens “who have grown distrustful
of politicians, skeptical about democratic institutions, and disillusioned
about how the democratic process functions”. Citizens’ dissatisfaction with
their government has increased because the gap between reality and
expectations has widened. It is not so much that governments produce
less, but that citizens expect more. The existing literature contains the
assumption “that citizens’ expectations are the source of eroding faith in
government (for example, Huntington 1981)”. I.e. people expect
governments to “be responsible both for promoting the economy and for
promoting a large array of non-economic issues that have entered the
government’s policy agenda. The crucial factor, however, is [...] the
expanding diversity of policy goals may create a dynamic in which
dissatisfaction easily develops”.59
The events that took place in many European countries and Greece in
particular in recent years of sociopolitical and economic crisis showed an
“unbridgeable chasm” between the rulers and the ruled and an
unconvincing claim by the political elites that they represent public
interest. In the case of Greece, “the financial crisis, the numerous political
scandals and the solutions proposed by the ruling party – in line with the
IMF-EU recommendations – have led many people to believe that the
social contract is up for renegotiation”.60 Large sections of the population,
Ibid, p. 172.
Russell J. Dalton, Democratic Challenges, Democratic Choices, op. cit., p. 152.
60 Harrys Mylonas, “Is Greece a Failing Developed State? Causes and Socioeconomic Consequences of the Financial Crisis”, In Konstantina E. Botsiou and Antonis
Klapsis (ed.), The Konstantinos Karamanlis Institute for Democracy Yearbook 2011: The
Global Economic Crisis and the Case of Greece, Athens: Springer, 2011, pp. 82-83. The
58
59

electorate’s disappointment by the political system is constantly rising. On behalf of
Kathimerini newspaper, the political Barometer of the Public Issue pollster records the
electorate’s growing frustration and alienation from the political system; eight out of ten
(78%) citizens are disappointed by the government’s work and nine out of ten (89%) are
disappointed by the opposition. The stance of the citizens towards the parties is also
deteriorating: political parties and their leaders –except for Mrs. Aleka Papariga- see their
popularity decrease, a tendency towards depoliticization is rising and one third of the
citizens chose to abstain from voting. At the same time, Prime Minister George
Papandreou’s and PASOK’s image is deteriorating, despite their leading in percentage
rates. “Expands the frustration of voters from the political system”, Kathimerini, Oct. 10,
2010, http://news.kathimerini.gr/4dcgi/ _w_articles_politics_2_10/10/2010_418257
(accessed Dec.17, 2011).

76

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

traditionally voting for the two ruling parties, are increasingly detached
from the political system. Some PASOK MPs and many trade unionists
broke away from the government and participate in the escalating
campaigns. Social repulsion for the political elites is changing from passive
disengagement into active force. These deficit and legitimacy crises are
spreading on the EU institutional level and are crystallized in the absence
of citizens from the process of shaping and implementing basic political,
economic and social measures.61
On a global level, we also came across a social uprising against the
core problem of modernity as well as a request for a complete and utter reformulation of politics in a way that lets society actively participate in it, as
the worldwide demonstrations on 15 October 2011 have shown. So the
main questions are: What are the basic claims of the indignant peoples
around the globe?62 What are the alternative policy proposals that would
get us out of this political and economic impasse?
The basic claims of the indignant peoples come down to the fulfillment
of their basic needs: employment, health, education and social policy. All
people want to actively participate in the management of the main political
and social problems of their countries so as to decide on the best available
economic-political system that would help them to leave the current
worldwide social, political and economic impasse behind. In this reading,
61 As Guardian notes: “Eurozone policymakers too often treat democratic
accountability as a luxury rather than a necessity, as shall be made amply clear this week
when Brussels will force the Athens parliament to pass a raft of sharp spending cuts, tax
hikes and privatisations – despite the hostility of Greek voters”. Quoted in The
Democratic Deficit in Europe and the Crisis in the Periphery, 29 June 2011.
http://www.macroresilience.com/2011/06/29/the-democratic-deficit-in-europe-andthe-crisis-in-the-periphery/ (accessed May 11, 2012).
62 Here, we refer to the Global demonstrations held on October 15 th in more than 950
cities in 82 countries around the world, October 15th: Dreaming of a “new global citizen
power”, Periodismo Humano (Human Journalism), Oct. 12, 2011,
http://english.periodismohumano. com/2011/10/12/october-15th-dreaming-of-a%E2%80%9Cnew-global-citizen-power%E2%80%9D/ (accessed May 3, 2012).
See, “'Indignant' protests to go global on Saturday”, France 24, Oct. 15, 2011. Article
quotes: "Protesters will take to the streets worldwide on Saturday, inspired by the 'Occupy
Wall Street' and 'Indignants' movements, to vent their anger against alleged corporate
greed and government cutbacks. The organisers, relying heavily on Facebook and Twitter,
say demonstrations will be held in 951 cities across 82 countries in Europe, North
America, Latin America, Asia and Africa." http://www.france24.com/en/20111015indignant-protests-go-global-saturday (accessed May 3, 2012).
“'Indignant' protests across Asia”, Bangkok Post, Oct. 15, 2011. Article quote:
"Protesters across the Asia-Pacific region Saturday joined worldwide demonstrations
inspired
by
the
'Occupy
Wall
Street'
and
'Indignants'
movements."
http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/asia/261525/indignant-protests-across-asia
(accessed May 3, 2012).

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

77

we now confront the question of the Greek society’s abstention from the
voting procedure as a comprehensible revulsion with the political parties.
This event is highlighted and confirmed by the highest rates (44.1%) of
Greek citizens’ abstention from the latest polls. Abstention as a political act
challenges both the nature of the political system as a pre-representative
one and also the civilian staff itself as being inconsistent in its physical role
of mandatee of the society. Especially in the Greek case, the main reason
for the high levels of abstention is the institutional separation between
society and policy. As a result, society seeks a discrete status in politics so
as to be able to operate as a mandator and not as a private individual.
Conclusion
By summing up the key points of the foregoing analysis, we are getting
to the fundamental assumption underlying the misuse of the democracy
notion in the era of modernity as an instrument of political parties to check
civil society, occupy the state apparatus and establish an oligarchic
political regime.
The implications of the declining relationship between citizens and
government as well as the challenges to the confidence in government are
far-reaching in “Trilateral democracies—Japan, North America, and
Europe- [...]. Citizens are cynical about their representative institutions,
political parties, and, most of all, their politicians. Trust or confidence in
these institutions is almost everywhere low (with more than half the public
cynical or distrusting) and it has been steadily declining” (Diamond
& Gunther 2001: ix). Also, the impact upon the formation and
implementation of politics, as a result of the pre-representative relation
between society and the executive branch, is profound. The problem of
misappropriation of the political practice or the crisis of politics is
crystallized exclusively in that executive power is proving capable to
ensure or enforce policy at odds with the social structure and dynamic, and
this can be discerned on three levels of intrastate politics:63
- at the level of political institutions,
- at the level of the electoral base of the party, [...]
- at the level of intra-party operation of democracy, which implies
essentially equal and decisive involvement of all actors in the shaping of
real-life party ideology and the political program.
What is happening right now in European countries and Greece in
particular is the creation of an “unbridgeable chasm” between the rulers
and the ruled and an unconvincing claim by the political elites that they
represent public interest.
63

78

Contogeorgis Contogeorgis, Political system and policy, op. cit., pp. 32-33.

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Following the conclusion of Mair, we assert that: “all over Western
Europe, and in all likelihood all over the advanced democracies, citizens
are heading for the exits of the national political arena . . . As citizens exit
the national political arena, they inevitably weaken the major actors who
survive there – the parties. [...] Just as voters retreat to their own
particularized spheres of interest, so too have political and party leaders
withdrawn into the closed world of the governing institutions”.64
References
Alivizatos, Nikos, (1981), An introduction to the Greek constitutional
history, Athens: Sakoulas.
Aristotle’s, Politics, available online at http://classics. mit.edu//
Aristotle/politics.html at http://eprints.lse.ac.uk /33826/1/GreeSE_
No45. pdf, (accessed 7 June 2015).
BBC, (2011), Greek government austerity measures, available online at
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-13940431.
Berlin, Isaiah, (2002), ‘‘Two Concepts of Liberty.’’ In idem, Liberty,
ed. Henry Hardy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969.
Beyme, Klaus von., (1993), Die politische Klasse in Parteienstaat.
Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Blackwell, Cristopher W., (2003), “Athenian Democracy: an
overview”, in Dēmos: Classical Athenian Democracy, Edited by Blackwell
C., The Stoa: a consortium for electronic publication in the humanities
[www.stoa.org]. (Accessed 25 January 2016)
Blondel, Jean, (2002), “Party Government, Patronage, andParty
Decline in Western Europe”, In Political Parties. Old Concepts and New
Challenges, pp. 233-256, Edited by R. Gunther, J. Montero and J. Linz,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carter, Ian, (1999), A Measure of Freedom, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Charalambis, Dimitrios, (1989), Patronage relations and populism,
Athens: Exantas.
Christman, John, (1991), ‘‘Liberalism and Individual Positive
Freedom’’, Ethics 101, nο. 2 (January), pp. 343-359.
Christman, John, (2005), ‘‘Saving Positive Freedom’’, Political Theory
33, no.1 (February), pp. 79-88.
Chorafas, Dimitris N., (2011), Sovereign Debt Crisis: The New
Normal and the Newly Poor, New York: Palgrave Macmillan Studies in
Banking and Financial Institutions.
Peter Mair, Ruling the Void: The Hollowing of Western Democracy (London,
Verso, 2013). Quoted in Tillmann C. Lauk, op. cit., pp. 29-30.
64

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

79

Cimbalo Jeff, (2011), “Europe's Greatest Deficit Is its Democracy”, The
Huffington Post, Nov. 8, Available at http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/jeff-cim
balo/ european-debt-crisis_b_1080179.html. (Accessed 11 January 2012).
Contogeorgis, George, (2001), Modernity and Progress. The Greek
Paradigm, Athens: Cactus.
Idem, (1985), Political system and policy, Athens: Polytypo.
Idem, (2001), Modernity and Progress. The Greek Paradigm, Athens:
Cactus.
Idem, (2007), “Political Science in Greece”, in The State of the
Political Science in Western Europe, pp.187-228, Edited by Hans –Dieter
Klingemenn. Barbara Budrich Publishers, Opladen, http://contogeorgis.
blogspot. Gr / 2008/02/political-science-in-greece.html, accessed January
15, 2015.
Idem, (2006), The Hellenic Cosmosystem, vol. 1. Athens: Sideris.
Idem, (2007), Democracy as Freedom. Freedom and Represantation.
Athens: Patakis.
Idem, (2012), Partitocrazia and dynastic state. An interpretation of
the Greek stalemate, Athens, Patakis.
Contogeorgis, George, (2011), “What is democracy”, In
Cosmosysteme-Cosmosystem-Κοσμοσύστημα, October 1, (accesed
January 3), http:// contogeorgis.blogspot.gr/2011/10/blog-post.html.
Idem, (2013), The Oligarchs. Athens: Patakis.
Idem, (2015), “Political Culture in Greece”. http://contogeorgis.
blogspot.gr/2008/02/political-science-in-greece.html, accessed January 15.
Cox Gary and McCubbins Mathew, (1993), Legislative Leviathan:
Party Government in the House. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Dahl, Robert A., (1986), Democracy, Liberty, and Equality, Oslo:
Norwegian University Press.
Dalton, Russell J., (2004), Democratic Challenges, Democratic
Choices. The Erosion of Political Support in Advanced Industrial
Democracies, Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
Dalton Russell J and Wattenberg Martin P., (2000), “Unthinkable
democracy. Political change in advanced industrial democracies”, In
Parties without Partisans. Political Change in Advanced Industrial
Democracies, pp. 3-16, Edited by Dalton R.J. and Wattenberg M.P.,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Ste Croix Geoffrey, (2004), Athenian democratic origins and other
essays, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Diamond Larry and Gunther Richard Ed. (2001), Political Parties and
Democracy, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

80

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Ehrmann, Henry W., (1963), “Direct Democracy in France”, The
American Political Science Review 57, no. 4, [American Political Science
Association, Cambridge University Press], pp. 883–901. doi: 10.2307/
1952607.
Featherstone, Kevin, (2008), “Varieties of capitalism and the Greek
case: explaining the constraints on domestic reform?”, GreeSE/Hellenic
Observatory, 11, Available at http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/ hellenic
Observato, (accessed 6 June 2012).
Featherstone, Kevin and Papadimitriou, Dimitris, (2008), The limits
of Europeanization. Reform capacity and Policy conflict in Greece,
London: Macmillan.
Featherstone, Kevin, (2010), “The Greek Crisis”, Journal of Modern
Greek Studies 28, no.2, pp. 298-301, Available at http://muse.jhu.edu/
(accessed June 28, 2013).
Idem, (2011), “The Greek Sovereign Debt Crisis and EMU: A Failing
State in a Skewed. Regime”, Journal of Common Market Studies 49, no. 2
(March), pp.193-217.
Featherstone, Kevin, (Ed.) (2005), The Challenge of Modernization:
Politics and Policy in Greece, London: Routledge.
Finley, Moses I., (1985), Democracy ancient and modern, London:
Hogarth.
Frank, Jill, (2005), A Democracy of Distinction: Aristotle and the
Work of Politics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Giddens, Anthony, (1991), The consequences of modernity,
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Idem, (1990), The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity.
Gottfried, Paul E., (1999), After liberalism: Mass democracy in the
managerial state. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gunther, Richard; Montero, Jose Ramon and Linz, Juan J., (eds)
(2002), Political Parties. Old Concepts and New Challenges, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Hall, Stuart; Held, David and McGrew, Tony (eds) (1992), Modernity
and its futures, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hall, Stuart; Held, David; Humbert, Don and Thompson, Kenneth
(ed.) (1996), Modernity: an introduction to modern societies, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Held, David, (2006), Models of Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Himmelfarb, Gertrude, (2005), The roads to modernity: the British,
French and American enlightenments. New York: Vintage books.
Hirst, Paul, (1988), “Representative Democracy and its limits”. The
Political Quarterly 59 no. 2, pp. 199-213.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

81

Huntington, Samuel, (1981), American Politics. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Jones, Nikoleta; Malesios, Chrisovaladis; Iosifides, Theodoros and
Sophoulis, Costas M., (2008), “Social capital in Greece: measurement and
comparative perspectives”, South European Society and Politics 13, no. 2
(Autumn), pp. 175-193.
Ignatieff, Michael, (2007), The Rights Revolution. Toronto: House of
Anansi Press.
Kalberg, Stephen, (ed.) (2005), Max Weber: Readings and
Commentary on Modernity. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Keaney, John J., (1992), The Composition of Aristotle's Athenaion
Politeia: Observation and Explanation. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Kondylis, Panayiotis, (1991), The decline of urban civilization. From
the modern to the postmodern era of and from liberalism to mass
democracy, Athens: Themelio.
Lauk, Tillmann C., (2014), The Triple Crisis of Western Capitalism:
democracy, banking and currency, New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lijphart, Arendt, (1999), Patterns of democracy. Government forms
and performance in thirty-six countries, New Haven/London: Yale
University Press.
Lyrintzis, Christos, (2011), “Greek politics in the era of economic
crisis: reassessing causes and effects”, Hellenic Observatory papers on
Greece and Southeast Europe, GreeSE paper no. 45. The Hellenic
Observatory (2011), London School of Economics and Political Science,
London, UK, pp. 1-25. Available at
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/33826/1/GreeSE_No45.pdf.
Mair, Peter, (2006), Ruling the Void? The Hollowing of Western
Democracy,
New
Left
Review,
42,
(November).
(https://newleftreview.org/II/42/peter-mair-rulingthe-void).
Mahler, Gustav S., (1997), “The ‘Westminster Model’ Away from West
minster: Is It Always the Most Appropriate Model?”, pp. 35-51, In Designs
for Democratic Stability: Studies in Viable Constitutionalism, Edited by
Baaklini Abdo I. and Desfosses Helen, Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Manolopoulos, Jason, (2011), Greece's Odious Debt: the Looting of the
Hellenic Republic by the Euro, the Political Elite and the Investment
Community, London, New York: Anthem Press.
Martinelli, Alberto, (2005), Global Modernization. Rethinking the
Project of Modernity, London: Sage.
Mavrogordatos, George, (1997), “From traditional clientelism to
machine politics: the impact of PASOK populism in Greece”, South
European Society and Politics 2, no.3 (Winter), pp. 1–26.
82

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Idem, (1993), “Civil society under populism”, 47-64, In The Populist
Decade, London: St. Martin’s Press, Edited by Clogg Richard.
Meskill, David, (2013), Concepts and consequences of Liberty: From
Smith and Mill to Libertian Paternalism, Critical Review 25 no. 1
(September), pp. 86-106.
Mill, John Stuart, (1991), ‘‘On Liberty’’, In idem, On Liberty and Other
Essays, New York: Oxford University Press, 1859.
Mitsopoulos,
Michael
and
Pelagidis,
Theodoros,
(2011),
Understanding the Crisis in Greece: From Boom to Bust. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Mitchell, Timothy, (Ed.), (2000), Questions of modernity.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Mouzelis,
Nikos,
(1978),
Modern
Greece:
Facets
of
Underdevelopment, London: Macmillan.
Mylonas, Harrys, (2011), “Is Greece a Failing Developed State? Causes
and Socio-economic Consequences of the Financial Crisis”, pp.77-88, In
The Konstantinos Karamanlis Institute for Democracy Yearbook 2011:
The Global Economic Crisis and the Case of Greece, Edited by Botsiou
Konstantina E. and Klapsis Antonis, Athens: Springer.
Ober, Josiah, (1989), "The Nature of Athenian Democracy” (review
article: Hansen, Athenian Assembly), Classical Philology 84, no. 4
(October), pp. 322-334.
Idem, (2008), “What the Greeks can tell us about democracy”, Annual
Review of Political Science 11 (June), pp. 67–91.
Petridis Paul (198), Political force and constitutional institutions in
Modern Greece, 1844-1936, Salonica: Sakoulas, 1984.
Puhle, H.-J., (2002), 'Still the age of catch-allism? Volksparteien and
Parteienstaat in crisis and re-equilibration', pp. 58-83, In Political Parties.
Old Concepts and New Challenges, Gunther Richard, Montero Ramon
Jose and Linz Juan J. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Robertson, David, (1976), A Theory of Party Competition, London:
John Wiley.
Schmitter, Philippe C., (1974), “Still the century of corporatism?”, The
Review of politics 36, no. 1 (January), pp. 85-139.
Schmitter, Philippe C., (2001), 'Parties are not what they once were',
pp. 67-89, In Political Parties and Democracy, Edited by Larry Diamond
and Richard Gunther, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Sotiropoulos, Dimitris and Karamagioli, Evika, (2006), The Greek
civil society: the road to maturity, Available at http://www.civicus. org/
media/CSI_Greece_Executive_Summary.pdf, (accessed 23 May 2015).
Strom, Kaare, “Parties at the core of government”, In Parties Without
Partisans. Political Change in Advanced Industrial Democracies, Edited

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

83

by Dalton Russell J. and Wattenberg Martin P., Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 180-207.
Theocharis, Yannis and van Deth Jan W., (2015), “A Modern Tragedy?
Institutional Causes and Democratic Consequences of the Greek Crisis”,
Representation 51, no.1 (Winter), pp. 63-79.
Tsoukalas, Konstantinos, (1999), Social growth and state. Athens:
Themelio.
Verdun, Amy and Christiansen, Thomas, (2000), “Policies,
Institutions and the Euro: Dilemmas of Legitimacy and Democratic
Control”, In After the Euro: Shaping Institutions for Governance in the
Wake of European Monetary Union, pp. 162-178, Edited by Grouch Colin,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Winks, Robin W. and Neuberger, Joan, (2005), Europe and the
making of Modernity: 1815-1914, USA: Oxford University Press.

84

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

RUSSIA’S INVASION OF UKRAINE: THE
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE AMERICAN HEGEMONY
Murat Güneylioğlu
guneylioglumurat@yahoo.com
Abstract: Realists such as Stephen Walt and John Mearsheimer have
viewed the escalation of the Ukraine crisis as detrimental to the US strategic
interests on the assumption that it would push Russia further towards rising
China. This paper proposes an alternative account that the dual containment of
Russia and China is an inevitable choice for the US to ensure its predominance
in the world and the Ukraine war could contribute to the success of such a
strategy. It does not only consider traditional geopolitics based on military
means but also the current era geoeconomics that relies on economic
instruments and plays an increasingly crucial factor in reshaping the global
balance of power. The Ukraine crisis could boost geopolitical threat perceptions
from authoritarian and revisionist powers and produce centripetal forces in
international politics. The increasing leverage of Washington on its traditional
allies throughout the world may remove the greatest handicap of the US
strategic rebalance to Asia and consolidate the American political, economic,
and military influence both in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region. However, the
success of the American dual containment strategy also depends on how China
will react to the crisis and how Beijing’s behavior in its neighborhood will be
affected by the Russian-Ukrainian war.
Keywords: Geopolitics, Geoeconomics, the Russian-Ukrainian war, the
United States, China

Introduction
Stephen Walt and John Mearsheimer who are the most prominent
realist scholars of the contemporary era view the Ukraine crisis as harmful
to American strategic interests as it would push Russia further to rising
China, the next peer competitor of the United States. Below is an alternative
account that the dual containment of Russia and China is an inevitable
choice for the US to ensure its predominance in the world and the Ukraine
war might contribute to the success of such a strategy. It does not only
consider traditional geopolitics that is based on military means but also the
current era geoeconomics that relies on economic instruments to project
power. This separation is analytically important because the rise of


PhD., Department of International Relations, Kırklareli University,
Kırklareli, Turkey.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

85

geopolitical or geoeconomic power competition between great powers
stimulates diverging dynamics in international politics. As suggested by
Mikael Wigell and Antto Vihma, geoeconomics produces low or medium
threat perceptions, underbalancing behavior, and “centrifugal forces.” In
contrast, geopolitics creates high-level threat perceptions, counterbalancing
or bandwagoning behavior, and therefore, “centripetal forces” in the
international system.1
The Ukraine crisis has again increased geopolitical threat perceptions
from authoritarian powers with revisionist aspirations and triggered
centripetal forces in international politics. Under these conditions,
American traditional allies in Europe would likely commit themselves
more to balance resurgent Russia and call the US to provide greater
support in that respect. The increasing leverage of Washington on its
Europe allies could remove the greatest handicap of the US strategic
rebalance to Asia. While counterbalancing China in its neighborhood
together with the United Kingdom and its Asia-Pacific allies, the United
States would enjoy a continuing strategic influence over Europe through
re-consolidated NATO and bilateral defense ties with European countries.
The rising threat perceptions from Russia and its quasi-ally China may
also push European states to take the side of Washington in the latter’s
growing disputes with Moscow and Beijing in different areas such as
economy, trade, technology, and energy. This would provide great
advantages to the United States in the rising geoeconomic power
competition between great powers, which plays an increasingly crucial role
in shaping the future of the global balance of power.
This paper is structured as follows. The first section examines the
Ukraine crisis from the mainstream international relations perspectives.
Besides the realist theory, it also touches upon the liberal perspective
towards the crisis, as the US containment strategy towards both Russia
and China is championed on idealist grounds such as the need to defend
the liberal order against rising authoritarian powers. The second section
deals with the argument on the decline of the US hegemony considering
the geopolitical and geoeconomic developments. It emphasizes the US’s
enduring comparative advantages vis-à-vis all other great powers in
geopolitical terms such as its preponderant military capabilities and its farreaching alliance network that facilitates American military power
projections in different parts of the globe. Yet, it also underlines how
geoeconomic power projections by Russia and China could easily penetrate
the US traditional spheres of influence and undermine Washington’s
political, economic, and security interests in those regions. The third
M. Wigell and A. Vihma, Geopolitics versus Geoeconomics: The Case of Russia's
Geostrategy and its Effects on the EU, International Affairs, 92(3), 2016, p. 605.
1

86

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

section examines how Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has led to the rise of
geopolitical threat perceptions which might again reinforce centripetal
forces concerning the relationship between the US and its traditional
military allies. The fourth section elaborates the future prospects
concerning the implications of the Ukraine war for great power politics.
Those prospects would be dependent on China’s reaction to the ongoing
security crisis in Europe and how its behavior in its neighborhood will be
affected by the Russian-Ukrainian war.
The Ukraine Crisis from the Liberal and Realist Perspectives
It is a widely held argument that the issue of NATO enlargement has
played a major factor in the emergence of the Ukraine crisis. The liberal
perspective on the NATO enlargement views it as a key instrument to
promote liberal and democratic values in Eastern Europe and to expand
the zone of stability, peace, and prosperity towards this region.2 According
to this account, NATO does not pose any threat to Russia and the
Kremlin’s resistance to the enlargement has no legitimate basis. The
problem is that Russia has an authoritarian regime with revisionist and
expansionist aspirations towards its neighborhood. Democratic states do
not fight with each other but they must retain their deterrent capability
against such authoritarian powers to ensure international peace and
stability and the independence of smaller liberal countries as well. The
making of concessions to the threats by authoritarian powers would be
self-defeating as it would only encourage them to more aggression.3
Realists such as Stephen Walt and John Mearsheimer have always
been critical to the NATO expansion towards the Russian borders. They
have considered that it would provoke Russian threat perceptions and
move it into a more aggressive path, and more critically, towards rising
China. Both Walt and Mearsheimer view the Ukraine crisis as a classic
example of a security dilemma between two nuclear-armed great powers,
the United States and Russia. Geopolitics 101 suggests that Russia would
not permit Ukraine to become a Western military bulwark on its borders

See S. Lucarelli, Peace and Democracy: The Rediscovered Link the EU, NATO and
the European System of Liberal-Democratic Security Communities, Research project
funded by the NATO Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council Individual Research Fellowships
– 2000-2002 Programme, 2002. Available at: https://www.nato.int/acad/fellow/0002/Lucarelli's.pdf (Accessed: March 12, 2022); D. Zagorcheva, NATO Enlargement and
Security in the Balkans, Journal of Regional Security, 7(1), 2012, pp. 7-31.
3 I. Bond, Why The West Should Deter A Russian Attack On Ukraine, CER Insight,
Centre for European Reform, November 30, 2021. Available at:
https://www.cer.eu/sites/default/files/insight_IB_ukraine_30.11.21.pdf (Accessed:
March 12, 2022).
2

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

87

and fight against this possibility with all its might.4 The liberal illusions in
the United States have disabled the decision-makers from seeing this
reality despite the clear position taken by Moscow since the NATO
Bucharest Summit of 2008 declaring Ukraine’s and Georgia’s future
memberships.5 Both Walt and Mearsheimer have opposed the arming of
Kyiv against Russian forces and separatists in Donbas. They advocated
Ukraine’s “neutrality” as the best solution for the crisis, which was rejected
by the West during the last peace negotiations before the Russian
invasion.6 Stephen Walt and John Mearsheimer view the renewed war in
Ukraine as detrimental to the US strategic interest as it would move
Washington’s central focus to Eastern Europe from the Asia-Pacific
region.7 Given that rising China is the next peer competitor of the US,
Washington’s approach towards the Ukraine crisis would lead to selfdefeating consequences concerning the future of the American
preponderance in the international system.
Reconsidering the US Hegemony: The Geopolitical and
Geoeconomic Aspects
A critical review of Walt’s and Mearsheimer’s arguments summarized
above requires a reconsideration of the American hegemony from
geopolitical and geoeconomic standpoints. Indeed, the contemporary
discussions on the decline of the US hegemony are not based on any shift
in the military balance of power between great powers. Still, the United
States has the strongest army with the greatest power projection
capabilities, which is supported by a huge military budget that is far

4 J.J. Mearsheimer, Why the Ukraine Crisis is the West's Fault: The Liberal
Delusions that Provoked Putin, Foreign Affairs, 93, 2014, pp. 77-89.
5 Ibid.; S.M. Walt, Liberal Illusions Caused the Ukraine Crisis, Foreign Policy,
January 19, 2022. Available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/01/19/ukraine-russianato-crisis-liberal-illusions/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
6 S.M. Walt, Why Arming Kiev Is a Really, Really Bad Idea, Foreign Policy, February
9, 2015. Available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/02/09/how-not-to-save-ukrainearming-kiev-is-a-bad-idea/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022); J.J. Mearsheimer, Don't Arm
Ukraine,
New
York
Times,
Feburary
8,
2015.
Available
at:
https://46.4.108.76/2015/02/09/opinion/dont-armukraine.html?__cpo=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubnl0aW1lcy5jb20 (Accessed: March 22,
2022).
7 See S.M. Walt, The West is sleepwalking into war in Ukraine, Foreign Policy,
February 23, 2022. Available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/02/23/united-stateseurope-war-russia-ukraine-sleepwalking/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022); I. Chotiner, Why
John Mearsheimer Blames the U.S. for the Crisis in Ukraine, The New Yorker, March 1,
2022. Available at: https://www.newyorker.com/news/q-and-a/why-john-mearsheimerblames-the-us-for-the-crisis-in-ukraine (Accessed: March 12, 2022).

88

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

greater than that of China and Russia combined. 8 Furthermore, the United
States has by far the most comprehensive and established network of
military alliances, which extends from Europe to the Asia-Pacific region
and dates back to the Cold War years.9 This alliance structure continues to
serve Washington's strategic interests, as it manages its rivals by
discouraging expansionist threats and providing grounds for American
military power projection in offshore regions.10
The most significant reason for questioning the US hegemony is that
Washington has been losing its leverage on its traditional allies which have
been increasingly inclined to cooperate with the American strategic rivals
such as China and Russia mainly in the areas of the economy, technology,
transportation, and energy.11 During the last decade, the US has not been
successful enough in convincing its European allies that both authoritarian
powers pose a major threat to international stability and the liberal world
order. This situation is closely related to the rise of geoeconomic power
competition that relies on economic instruments vis-à-vis traditional
geopolitics driving on military means. The rise of geoeconomics in the
contemporary world has influenced significant dynamics of international
power politics, which is yet to be acknowledged by realists. As Mikael
Wigell and Antto Vihma put it, traditional geopolitics creates high-level
threat perceptions, counterbalancing or bandwagoning behavior, and
therefore, centripetal forces in the international system. By contrast,
geoeconomics produces low or medium threat perceptions,
underbalancing behavior, and centrifugal forces in international politics.12
Geoeconomics is a variant of realist power politics conducted through
economic means including trade policy, investment policy, commodity and
8 See D.L. da Silva, N. Tian, and A. Marksteiner, A., Trends in World Military
Expenditure, 2020, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, April 2021.
Available
at:
https://sipri.org/sites/default/files/2021-04/fs_2104_milex_0.pdf
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
9 B. Tertrais, The Changing Nature of Military Alliances, Washington Quarterly,
27(2), 2004, pp. 136-137.
10 Ibid., p. 136.
11 See D. Twining, China’s Trans-Atlantic Wedge, Foreign Policy, March 25, 2015.
Available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/03/23/chinas-transatlantic-wedge/ (Accessed:
December 25, 2021); D. Voelsen, 5G and the US–China Tech Rivalry – A Test for Europe’s
Future in the Digital Age, SWP Comment No 29, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, June
2019. Available at: https://www.swp-berlin.org/10.18449/2019C29/ (Accessed: March 22,
2022); and S. Lohmann and K. Westphal, US-Russia Policy Hits European Energy Supply:
The Consequences of Unilateral Sanctions and Growing Market Competition, SWP Comment
No. 6, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, February, 2019. Available at:
https://www.swpberlin.org/publications/products/comments/2019C06_lom_wep.pdf (Accessed: March
12, 2022).
12 M. Wigell and A. Vihma, Geopolitics versus Geoeconomics, p. 605.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

89

energy policies, and financial assistance. The declaration of the Belt and
Road Initiative (BRI) by China in 2013 has been a crucial factor that
transformed the global and regional power competition into an economic
exercise rather than a military activity.13 This project supports Chinese
geostrategic goals such as asserting control over trade and energy routes
connecting Europe and Asia, advancing its comparative advantages in trade,
and accelerating its rise as a great power.14 While pursuing such objectives
China avoids confrontation associated with geopolitics. Following the
operational logic of geoeconomics, Beijing appeals to selective
accommodation of economic interests of individual countries including the
US military allies.15 The promotion of economic interdependence and the
manipulation of economic ties discourage those states from completely
joining the anti-China coalition led by the United States.16
On the other side, Russia contributes to Beijing’s wedge strategies
towards NATO and the European Union. Energy pricing policy, pipeline
politics, and trade restrictions have all played significant roles in the
Russian geoeconomic strategy towards Europe, while Moscow has also
appealed to more direct tactics such as supporting anti-EU political parties
in different member countries. All those moves aim at expanding the
Russian influence in Europe and keeping the EU too weak and disunited to
oppose Russia. 17 A divided Europe that could not resist even Russia’s
geopolitical and geoeconomic ambitions would be much more unwilling to
support the United States in its efforts to build a worldwide
counterbalancing coalition against rising China.
Those developments in Europe represent the biggest handicap of the
US strategic rebalance to Asia-Pacific which is sought since the Obama
years. The US should move its geopolitical focus to the region to deal with
rising China but it could not just leave the “back door” open for Chinese
See M. Beeson, Geoeconomics with Chinese Characteristics: the BRI and China’s
Evolving Grand Strategy, Economic and Political Studies, 6(3), 2018, pp. 240-244; and R.
D. Blackwill and J. M. Harris, War by Other Means: Geoeconomics and Statecraft,
Cambrigde: Harvard University Press, 2016, p. 10, 93.
14 See G. Gertz and M. M. Evers, Geoeconomic Competition: Will State Capitalism
Win?', The Washington Quarterly, 43(2), 2020, p. 122; M. Leonard, Introduction, In
Geo-economics with Chinese characteristics: How China’s economic might is reshaping
world politics, The World Economic Forum, January 2016. Available at:
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Geoeconomics_with_Chinese_Characteristics.p
df (Accessed: December 25, 2021); and S. Shen and W. Chan, A Comparative Study of the
Belt and Road Initiative and the Marshall Plan', Palgrave Communications, 4(1), 2018,
pp. 1-11.
15 M. Wigell and A. Vihma, Geopolitics versus Geoeconomics, p. 605.
16 See S. Shen and W. Chan, A comparative study of the Belt and Road Initiative
and the Marshall plan, p. 9.
17 M. Wigell and A. Vihma, Geopolitics versus Geoeconomics, pp. 605-627.
13

90

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

and Russian geoeconomic initiatives seeking to drive a wedge both in
NATO and the European Union. Realists consider that the abandoning of
NATO’s “open-door” policy would ease Russia’s threat perceptions and
make Moscow more prone to cooperate with the West to balance Chinese
influence expanding towards its near abroad. However it is also likely that
Russia would go on attempting to break up a less threatening NATO and
the European Union as well, even Brussels also declares that it would not
enlarge further eastwards. Russia’s economic, energy, diplomatic, and
security interests all favor dealing with European countries one by one and
playing with their conflicts of interest with each other. Therefore, Russia
would likely continue to support anti-EU and anti-NATO movements and
to accommodate the interests of individual European countries which seek
more strategic autonomy. Furthermore, the weakening of NATO and the
EU by such moves of Russia would make Europe much more vulnerable to
China’s wedge strategies and geoeconomic power projections. Today, the
EU combined is the second-largest economy in the world, whose total GDP
remains behind that of the US and ahead of China’s.18 The growing
interdependence between Europe and Washington’s main strategic rivals
such as resurgent Russia and rising China could undermine the American
hegemony and the US power preponderance in the longer term.
Those facts render the dual containment policy towards Russia and
China an inevitable choice for the United States. NATO could not be
mobilized against China in recent years due to the factor of geography and
the low-level perceptions by Europeans. Therefore, the US has to
cooperate with its regional allies Asia-Pacific and the United Kingdom, its
staunch strategic partner, in rebalancing towards China’s neighborhood.
At the same time, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine might eliminate the
greatest handicap of the US rebalance strategy by mobilizing NATO and
European countries against the Russian threat. It has already flared up
high-level geopolitical threat perceptions and reinforced “centripetal
forces” in Europe reminiscent of the Cold War era.
Russia’s Aggression towards Ukraine and the Resurgence of
Geopolitics
Realists have tended to empathize with Russia’s threat perceptions
that have increased since the 2000s due to the US offshore military
interventions into Eurasia and NATO’s enlargement towards Eastern
Europe and the Baltics. They view Russia as a declining great power, which
seeks just to defend the military balance and status quo in its close
Data from the World Bank. Available at
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=US-EU-CN
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
18

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

91

neighborhood and falls short of posing a revisionist threat towards
European security. During the escalation of the Ukraine crisis, the leading
European powers such as France and Germany showed some signals that
they were not very distanced from such a perspective. However, Putin’s
adaptation of a revisionist historical narrative in his televised address on
Ukraine, which he used partly to legitimize Russia’s recognition of the selfproclaimed republics led to the questioning of that viewpoint. 19 It was
widely interpreted that Putin denies the legitimacy of Ukraine’s
sovereignty, as he views it “artificial” country created by the founders of
the Soviet Union, which had been once ruled by the Russian empire.
Furthermore, unlike Russia’s intervention in Georgia in 2008, the Russian
military forces moved beyond the breakaway republics in Ukraine with the
objectives of changing the regime in Kyiv, the demilitarization, and the
neutralization of the country. It was responded to by an unexpected level
of resistance by the Ukrainian side, which might return the Russian
invasion into a prolonged interstate war inside of Europe with serious
civilian casualties and critical repercussions for the European security.
On February 28, Putin announced that he was putting Russia’s nuclear
forces in a “high alert” position, presumably to deter a Western military
involvement in support of Kyiv.20 Yet, this development might well be
perceived that Putin ceased to be a rational actor as the realities on the
ground were evolving into a direction not anticipated by the Kremlin.21 The
perceived threat of Russian aggression and expansionism managed to
unite NATO to an unpreceded level since the Cold War years, 22 which had
been designated as “obsolete” by Donald Trump and a “brain-dead”

19 The Kremlin website, Address by the President of the Russian Federation,
February 21, 2022. Available at: http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/67828
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
20 J. Shapiro, Russia’s Nuclear Alert Means NATO Must Tread Carefully, Financial
Times, March 4, 2022. Available at: https://www.ft.com/content/b6bfd338-f2e0-43c296f2-0cd918303ea2 (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
21 For example see M. McFaul, Opinion: Putin is Menacing The World. Here’s How
Biden Should Respond to His Nuclear Threats, Washington Post, March 3, 2022. Available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/03/how-biden-should-respond-toputin-nuclear-threats/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022); and T.L. Friedman, Putin Has No Good
Way Out, and That Really Scares Me, New York Times, March 8, 2022. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/08/opinion/putin-ukraine-russia-war.html (Accessed:
March 12, 2022).
22 M. Becker et al, United By Danger: How Vladimir Putin Brought the West
Together, Spiegel International, March 4, 2022. Available at:
https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/united-by-danger-how-putin-broughtthe-west-together-a-f2b871da-500a-41d4-8e13-db7cdd99567c (Accessed: March 22,
2022).

92

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

alliance by Emmanuel Macron in recent years.23 Germany, which had been
repeatedly criticized for failing to reach NATO’s objective of spending 2%
of GDP on defense, announced that it would devote 100 billion euros to a
special fund for its military.24 Denmark, Romania, Latvia, and Poland all
followed Berlin to declare their commitment to increase their defense
expenditure over 2% of their GDP.25 Germany also removed its ban on
arms supplies to Ukraine and joined the US to provide Kyiv with anti-tank
weapons and surface-to-air missiles against the Russian forces.26 The
Ukraine war underlined the role of NATO for European security which
literally draws the red line for any possible Russian aggression further
towards the west. Two long-standing neutral countries of Europe, Sweden
and Finland, also participated in the emergency meetings of NATO where
they have shown an interest in expanding their cooperation with the
Alliance. In response, the Russian Foreign Ministry threatened that
Moscow would be pushed to take retaliatory steps if those two states move
to join NATO.27
The resurgence of geopolitical threats and conflicts would inevitably
increase the United States’ strategic significance for the European security,
as the only great power with actual nuclear deterrent capability against
Russia. This might provide Washington with significant leverage on its
NATO allies on many issues including those related to geoeconomics. As
suggested by Edward Luttwak, the geopolitical threats of the Cold-War era
mitigated economic disagreements and trade quarrels between the US and
W. Michnik, Why NATO is not Brain Dead, New Eastern Europe, November 12.,
2019. Available at: https://neweasterneurope.eu/2019/11/12/why-nato-is-not-braindead/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
24 R. Casert, One Putin Move and Behold: West’s Unity Tightens Overnight,
Associated Press News, March 1, 2022. Available at: https://apnews.com/article/russiaukraine-vladimir-putin-west-eu-nato-f810a6d94524b804730a9704ad4f0a87 (Accessed:
March 12, 2022).
25 A.D.H. Scheffer and G. Weber, Russia’s War on Ukraine: the EU’s Geopolitical
Awakening, German Marshall Fund of United States March 8, 2022. Available at:
https://www.gmfus.org/news/russias-war-ukraine-eus-geopolitical-awakening
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
26 Deutsche Welle, Germany Reverses Ban on Weapon Sales to Ukraine — as It
Happened, February 26, 2022. Available at: https://www.dw.com/en/germany-reversesban-on-weapon-sales-to-ukraine-as-it-happened/a-60924798 (Accessed: March 12,
2022); D.E. Sanger et al, Arming Ukraine: 17,000 Anti-Tank Weapons in 6 Days and a
Clandestine Cybercorps, New York Times, March 6, 2022. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/06/us/politics/us-ukraine-weapons.html (Accessed:
March 12, 2022).
27 A. Brzozowski, Finland, Sweden to Receive Enhanced Access to NATO Intel over
Ukraine, Euractiv, February 26, 2022. Available at:
https://www.euractiv.com/section/defence-and-security/news/finland-sweden-toreceive-enhanced-access-to-nato-intel-over-ukraine/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
23

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

93

its smaller allies such as European countries and Japan.28 Since its
inception, Washington has attempted to block the Nord Stream 2 project
through diplomatic efforts including sanction acts enacted by the US
Congress such as “the Countering Russian Influence in Europe and Eurasia
Act of 2017.”29 After resisting the US pressure for several years, Germany
finally suspended the project on February 22, in response to Putin’s
declaration of the recognition of the breakaway republics in Donbas.30 The
Russian invasion of Ukraine was soon reacted by concerted sanctions by the
US and the EU on Russia in the areas of energy, technology, transport,
trade, and finance.31 Those heavy measurements, making Russia the most
sanctioned nation ever in the world,32 would not likely end Russia’s
aggression immediately but they have the potential to isolate Russia from
Europe in a foreseeable future. It would be a serious blow to Russia’s
attempts to drive a wedge in the EU and transatlantic solidarity. However,
we are yet to see whether the US increasing leverage on the EU countries
could convince Europeans to take the side of Washington also in its growing
economic disputes with China in the future.
The Future Prospects: Will Dual Containment of Russia and
China Work?
Since the Wilsonian era, the US initiatives to reshape the international
order have always been championed on idealist grounds, though those
plans have been also driven by realist objectives not to mention ensuring
the American predominance. The dual containment of Russia and China
by the US is also based on the liberal assumption that those authoritarian
powers inherently threaten the liberal world order that could only ensure
28 E.N. Luttwak, From Geopolitics to Geo-Economics: Logic of Conflict, Grammar of
Commerce, The National Interest, (20), 1990, pp. 17-23.
29 Congressional Research Service, Russia’s Nord Stream 2 Natural Gas Pipeline to
Germany Halted, CRS Reports, Version 19, Updated: March 10, 2022. Available at:
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11138 (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
30 S. Marsh and M. Chambers, Germany Freezes Nord Stream 2 Gas Project as
Ukraine Crisis Deepens, Reuters, February 22, 2022. Available at:
https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/germanys-scholz-halts-nord-stream-2certification-2022-02-22/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
31 See V. Pop, US, EU Discuss Latest Russia Sanctions, as Some Call for More,
Financial Times, March 4, 2022. Available at: https://www.ft.com/content/344d0dd2e82a-4e3a-a622-b4ee43166e2d (Accessed: March 12, 2022); and European Council,
Infographic - EU Sanctions against Russia over Ukraine, Last reviewed: March 15, 2022.
Available at: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/infographics/eu-sanctions-againstrussia-over-ukraine/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
32 T. Bella, Putin Turns Russia into the World’s Most-Sanctioned Country, Dwarfing
Iran and North Korea, Washington Post, March 8, 2022. Available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/03/08/russia-most-sanctions-putinukraine/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).

94

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

the maintenance of peace and stability. This logic also drives President Joe
Biden’s diplomatic efforts to forge a global alliance of democracies
including the Summit for Democracy of 2021. Russia’s aggression
represents a convincing example for the supporters of such a view that an
authoritarian great power ruled by a strong and reckless leader could
readily take a decision to attack its smaller neighbors to fulfill their
geopolitical expansionist ambitions.33 The fact that Japan, South Korea,
and Australia supported the West’s sanctions on Russia34 shows that those
states do not view the war in Ukraine just as “a fire burning on the other
shore," but rather a crisis that requires a firm commitment from US allies
from all over the world against such aggressive moves taken by an
authoritarian and revisionist power.35
Against this backdrop, the rise of such geopolitical threats could
mobilize American allies from Europe to the Asia Pacific under the
leadership of Washington which is committed to protecting the liberal
world order. Yet, the success of the American strategy also depends on how
China’s behavior in its neighborhood will be affected by the RussianUkrainian war and how Beijing will react to Russia concerning its actions
towards Ukraine. The US shifting focus to the war in Eastern Europe and
its reluctance for military involvement not to risk a direct conflict with
Russia may encourage China to intervene in Taiwan. Such an aggressive
move following Russia would acknowledge that China is an authoritarian
power alike, which might also risk a nuclear war for its national goals and
geopolitical aspirations in Asia-Pacific. Still, China accepts the Russian
narrative on the crisis based on Moscow’s security concerns and blames
the West for the escalation of the war.36 It is believed that China’s
resistance to joining the international sanctions on Russia and its ongoing
energy cooperation with Moscow would undermine the efficiency of those
measurements leaving Europeans with a more powerful Russian threat.37
S. Hamid, There Are Many Things Worse Than American Power, The Atlantic,
March 6, 2022. Available at: https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2022/03/putinkremlin-imperialism-ukraine-american-power/624180/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
34 S.R. Anderson, What Sanctions Has the World Put on Russia? Lawfare, March 4,
2022. Available at: https://www.lawfareblog.com/what-sanctions-has-world-put-russia
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
35 M. Becker et al, United by Danger.
36 C.F. Marques, China’s Ukraine Doublespeak is Becoming Unsustainable, The
Japan Times, March 4, 2022. Available at:
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2022/03/04/commentary/worldcommentary/china-ukraine-doublespeak/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
37 S.-J. Wei, Can Sanctions on Russia Work Without China?, Project Syndicate,
March 9, 2022. Available at: https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-andextending-economic-sanctions-against-russia-by-shang-jin-wei-2022-03
(Accessed:
March 12, 2022).
33

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

95

Some also argue that China’s flagrant violation of the US sanctions would
risk Beijing’s access to the international financial system denominated in
US dollars.38 Therefore, Beijing's unconditional support to Russia might
both increase American allies’ threat perceptions from China and
jeopardize its peaceful rise based on the logic of economic interdependence
with its neighbors and European countries.
There is a second possibility that China would take the lessons of the
Russian-Ukrainian war seriously and induce itself to self-restraint.
Immediately after Russia’s assault, Beijing adopted a more threatening
language towards Taiwan but toned down its discourse shortly following
the Western united response supported by unprecedented sanctions.39
Since then, China began to shift towards a more neutral position from its
earlier pro-Russian stance probably to avoid the risk of making a lot more
adversaries for the sake of supporting Putin.40 Despite Beijing’s statement
that it disagrees with the sanctions imposed by the West on Russia, China
has taken steps to comply with some of them, including the restriction of
Chinese funding of certain transactions with Russia.41 Some commentators
in the West consider that only China can stop Russia’s aggression towards
Ukraine by joining the economic embargo and demanding Russia’s
withdrawal from Ukraine.42 China could also use its huge economic
leverage on an internationally isolated Russia to negotiate a quick end to
the crisis in Europe.43 On March 8, French President Macron, German

J.Li and M. Hui, How China Can Help Russia Survive Economic Sanctions,
Quartz, February 28, 2022. Available at: https://qz.com/2134620/how-china-can-helprussia-survive-swift-sanctions/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
39 Bloomberg, Putin's War on Ukraine Shows Xi the Dangers of Attacking Taiwan,
March 8, 2022. Available at: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-0307/what-china-s-xi-is-learning-about-taiwan-from-putin-s-war-in-ukraine
(Accessed:
March 12, 2022).
40 K.B. Richburg, Opinion: China Faces a New, Uneasy Balancing Act on Russia and
Ukraine, Washington Post, March 5, 2022. Available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/05/china-russia-ukraineuneasy-balancing-act/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
41 J. Huang, China’s Moment of Decision, The Japan Times, March 11, 2022.
Available at: https://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2022/03/11/commentary/worldcommentary/chinas-decision-moment/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
42 S.S. Roach, Only China Can Stop Russia, Project Syndicate, March 7, 2022.
Available at: https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-russia-cooperationagreement-under-ukraine-pressure-by-stephen-s-roach-2022-03 (Accessed: March 12,
2022); T. L. Friedman, The Cancellation of Mother Russia Is Underway, New York Times,
March 6, 2022. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/06/opinion/putinukraine-china.html (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
43 D. Von Drehle, Opinion: The Xi-Putin Bromance is Surely on the Rocks,
Washington Post, March 8, 2022. Available at:
38

96

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Chancellor Scholz, and Chinese President Xi Jinping joined a video
conference together, which raised the prospect of such a diplomatic
imitative.44 Some even claim that an active role played by China for the
settlement of the crisis would “cement its great power status”45 and make it
“a true global leader.”46 Therefore, China could also choose to adopt a
conciliatory approach towards the Ukraine crisis and begin to distance
itself from Russia. In this case, Beijing’s ongoing relations with Europe and
its growing leverage on Russia might complicate the US dual containment
policy that is based on the dichotomy between the authoritarian and
democratic powers.
Conclusion
The two different prospects described above run contrary to the realist
assumption that if Russia and China get closer it will be detrimental to the
American strategic interests. A closer alignment between Moscow and
Beijing following such a great security crisis would increase geopolitical
threat perceptions and reinforce centripetal forces in international politics
which would unite the US traditional allies in Europe and the Asia Pacific
together under Washington’s leadership. A reconsolidated NATO would be
much stronger against Beijing’s wedge strategies towards Europe through
geoeconomic power projections. If China provides Russia with substantial
economic and even military support, it could alienate itself from European
countries. Those states would be more inclined to support Washington in
its geopolitical and geoeconomic competition with Beijing on the
assumption that a China that is more powerful than the United States
might put the international peace and stability at serious risk.
Conversely, Beijing may distance itself from Russia, contribute to
international efforts to build peace, and avoid military provocations in its
neighborhood. Such an alternative path taken by China could decrease
threat perceptions of European and Asia-Pacific countries from Beijing
and make many of them more prone to cooperation with China despite the
US opposition. While struggling with the negative repercussions of the
sanctions imposed on Russia, European countries would not be willing to
bear the costs of delimiting their economic cooperation with China, though
their relationship with Russia and China matters in different economic
sectors. As a result, Beijing could continue its geoeconomic power
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/08/china-russia-xi-jinpingrethinking-putin-bromance/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
44 D. Goldman, Could China Mediate the Ukraine War?, Asia Times, March 9, 2022.
Available at: https://asiatimes.com/2022/03/could-china-mediate-the-ukraine-war/
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
45 S.S. Roach, Only China can stop Russia.
46 T.L. Friedman, The Cancellation of Mother Russia Is Underway.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

97

projections extending from Asia to Europe which produce underbalancing
behavior and centrifugal forces in international politics. This would lead to
further questioning the American hegemony and the future of its power
preponderance in the international system.
References
Anderson, S.R., Burman, D.L., Fraley, A., Klehm, B., Lapidor, E. and
Svoboda, E., (2022), What Sanctions Has the World Put on Russia?
Lawfare, March 4. Available at: https://www.lawfareblog.com/whatsanctions-has-world-put-russia (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Becker, M., Fahrion, G., Peters, G.K., Neukirch, R., Pfister, R., Popp,
M., Puhl, J., Sandberg, B., Verschwele, L. and Zand, B., (2022), United By
Danger: How Vladimir Putin Brought the West Together, Spiegel
International, March 4. Available at:
https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/united-by-danger-howputin-brought-the-west-together-a-f2b871da-500a-41d4-8e13db7cdd99567c (Accessed: March 22, 2022).
Beeson, M., (2018), Geoeconomics with Chinese Characteristics: the
BRI and China’s Evolving Grand Strategy', Economic and Political Studies,
6(3), pp. 240-256.
Bella, T., (2022), Putin Turns Russia into the World’s MostSanctioned Country, Dwarfing Iran and North Korea, Washington Post,
March 8. Available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/03/08/russia-mostsanctions-putin-ukraine/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Blackwill, R.D. and Harris, J.M., (2016), War by Other Means:
Geoeconomics and Statecraft, Cambrigde: Harvard University Press.
Bloomberg, (2022), Putin's War on Ukraine Shows Xi the Dangers of
Attacking Taiwan, March 8. Available at:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-03-07/whatchina-s-xi-is-learning-about-taiwan-from-putin-s-war-in-ukraine
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Bond, I., (2021), Why the West Should Deter a Russian Attack on
Ukraine, CER Insight, Centre for European Reform, November 30.
Available at:
https://www.cer.eu/sites/default/files/insight_IB_ukraine_30.11.21.
pdf (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Brzozowski, A., (2022), Finland, Sweden to Receive Enhanced Access
to NATO Intel over Ukraine, Euractiv, February 26. Available at:
https://www.euractiv.com/section/defence-and-security/news/finland-

98

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

sweden-to-receive-enhanced-access-to-nato-intel-over-ukraine/
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Casert, R., (2022), One Putin Move and Behold: West’s Unity Tightens
Overnight, Associated Press News, March 1. Available at:
https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-vladimir-putin-west-eu-natof810a6d94524b804730a9704ad4f0a87 (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Chotiner, I., (2022), Why John Mearsheimer Blames the U.S. for the
Crisis in Ukraine, The New Yorker, March 1. Available at:
https://www.newyorker.com/news/q-and-a/why-john-mearsheimerblames-the-us-for-the-crisis-in-ukraine (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Congressional Research Service, (2022), Russia’s Nord Stream 2
Natural Gas Pipeline to Germany Halted, CRS Reports, Version 19,
Updated: March 10. Available at:
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11138
(Accessed:
March 12, 2022).
da Silva, D. L., Tian, N. and Marksteiner, A., (2021), Trends in World
Military Expenditure, 2020, Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, April. Available at: https://sipri.org/sites/default/files/202104/fs_2104_milex_0.pdf (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Deutsche Welle, (2022), Germany Reverses Ban on Weapon Sales to
Ukraine — as It Happened, February 26. Available at:
https://www.dw.com/en/germany-reverses-ban-on-weapon-sales-toukraine-as-it-happened/a-60924798 (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
European Council, (2022), Infographic - EU Sanctions against Russia
over Ukraine, Last reviewed: March 15. Available at:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/infographics/eu-sanctionsagainst-russia-over-ukraine/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Friedman, T.L., (2022), The Cancellation of Mother Russia Is
Underway, New York Times, March 6. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/06/opinion/putin-ukrainechina.html (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Friedman, T.L., (2022), Putin Has No Good Way Out, and That Really
Scares Me, New York Times, March 8. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/08/opinion/putin-ukrainerussia-war.html (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Gertz, G., and Evers, M.M., (2020), Geoeconomic Competition: Will
State Capitalism Win?, The Washington Quarterly, 43(2), pp. 117-136.
Goldman, D., (2022), Could China mediate the Ukraine war? Asia
Times, March 9. Available at: https://asiatimes.com/2022/03/couldchina-mediate-the-ukraine-war/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Hamid, S., (2022), There are Many Things Worse Than American
Power, The Atlantic, March 6. Available at:

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

99

https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2022/03/putin-kremlinimperialism-ukraine-american-power/624180/ (Accessed: March 12,
2022).
Huang, J., (2022), China’s Moment of Decision, The Japan Times,
March 11. Available at:
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2022/03/11/commentary/wor
ld-commentary/chinas-decision-moment/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Leonard, M., (2016), Introduction. In Geo-economics with Chinese
Characteristics: How China’s Economic Might is Reshaping World Politics,
The World Economic Forum, January. Available at:
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Geoeconomics_with_Chines
e_Characteristics.pdf (Accessed: December 25, 2021).
Li, J. and Hui, M., (2022), How China Can Help Russia Survive
Economic Sanctions, Quartz, February 28. Available at:
https://qz.com/2134620/how-china-can-help-russia-survive-swiftsanctions/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Lohmann, S. and Westphal, K., (2019), US-Russia Policy Hits
European Energy Supply: The Consequences of Unilateral Sanctions and
Growing Market Competition, SWP Comment No. 6, Stiftung Wissenschaft
und
Politik,
February.
Available
at:
https://www.swpberlin.org/publications/products/comments/2019C06_lom_wep.pdf
(Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Lucarelli, S., (2002), Peace and Democracy: The Rediscovered Link
the EU, NATO and the European System of Liberal-Democratic Security
Communities. Research project funded by the NATO Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council Individual Research Fellowships – 2000-2002
Programme.
Available
at:
https://www.nato.int/acad/fellow/0002/Lucarelli's.pdf (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Luttwak, E.N., (1990), From Geopolitics to Geo-economics: Logic of
Conflict, Grammar of Commerce, The National Interest, (20), pp. 17-23.
Marques, C.F., (2022), China’s Ukraine Doublespeak is Becoming
Unsustainable, The Japan Times, March 4. Available at:
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2022/03/04/commentary/worldcommentary/china-ukraine-doublespeak/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Marsh, S. and Chambers, M., (2022), Germany Freezes Nord Stream 2
Gas Project as Ukraine Crisis Deepens, Reuters, February 22. Available at:
https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/germanys-scholz-halts-nordstream-2-certification-2022-02-22/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
McFaul, M., (2022), Opinion: Putin is Menacing the World. Here’s
How Biden Should Respond to His Nuclear Threats, Washington Post,
March 3. Available at:

100

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/03/how-bidenshould-respond-to-putin-nuclear-threats/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Mearsheimer, J.J., (2014), Why the Ukraine Crisis is the West's Fault:
The Liberal Delusions that Provoked Putin, Foreign Affairs, 93, pp. 77-89.
Mearsheimer, J.J., (2015), Don't Arm Ukraine, New York Times,
Feburary 8. Available at: https://46.4.108.76/2015/02/09/opinion/dontarm-ukraine.html?__cpo=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubnl0aW1lcy5jb20
(Accessed: March 22, 2022).
Michnik, W., (2019), Why NATO is not Brain Dead, New Eastern
Europe, November 12. Available at:
https://neweasterneurope.eu/2019/11/12/why-nato-is-not-braindead/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Pop, V., (2022), US, EU Discuss Latest Russia Sanctions, as Some Call
for More, Financial Times, March 4. Available at:
https://www.ft.com/content/344d0dd2-e82a-4e3a-a622b4ee43166e2d (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Richburg, K.B., (2022), Opinion: China Faces a New, Uneasy
Balancing Act on Russia and Ukraine, Washington Post, March 5.
Available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/05/chinarussia-ukraine-uneasy-balancing-act/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Roach, S.S., (2022), Only China Can Stop Russia, Project Syndicate,
March 7. Available at:
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-russiacooperation-agreement-under-ukraine-pressure-by-stephen-s-roach2022-03 (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Sanger, D.E., Schmitt, E., Cooper, H., Barnes, J.E. and Vogel, K.P.,
(2022), Arming Ukraine: 17,000 Anti-Tank Weapons in 6 Days and a
Clandestine Cybercorps, New York Times, March 6. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/06/us/politics/us-ukraineweapons.html (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Scheffer, A.D.H. and Weber, G., (2022), Russia’s War on Ukraine: the
EU’s Geopolitical Awakening, German Marshall Fund of United States,
March 8. Available at: https://www.gmfus.org/news/russias-war-ukraineeus-geopolitical-awakening (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Shapiro, J., (2022), Russia’s Nuclear Alert Means Nato Must Tread
Carefully, Financial Times, March 4. Available at:
https://www.ft.com/content/b6bfd338-f2e0-43c2-96f20cd918303ea2 (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Shen, S. and Chan, W., (2018), A Comparative Study of the Belt and
Road Initiative and the Marshall Plan, Palgrave Communications, 4(1),
pp. 1-11.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

101

Tertrais, B., (2004), The Changing Nature of Military Alliances,
Washington Quarterly, 27(2), pp. 133-150.
The Kremlin Website, (2022), Address by the President of the Russian
Federation, February 21. Available at:
http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/67828 (Accessed: March
12, 2022).
Twining, D., (2015), China’s Trans-Atlantic Wedge, Foreign Policy.
March 25, 2015. Available at:
https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/03/23/chinas-transatlantic-wedge/
(Accessed: December 25, 2021).
Voelsen, D., (2019), 5G and the US–China Tech Rivalry – a Test for
Europe’s Future in the Digital Age, SWP Comment No 29, Stiftung
Wissenschaft und Politik, June. Available at: https://www.swpberlin.org/10.18449/2019C29/ (Accessed: March 22, 2022).
Von Drehle, D., (2022), Opinion: The Xi-Putin Bromance is Surely on
the Rocks, Washington Post, March 8. Available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/08/chinarussia-xi-jinping-rethinking-putin-bromance/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Walt, S. M., (2015), Why Arming Kiev Is a Really, Really Bad Idea,
Foreign Policy, February 9. Available at:
https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/02/09/how-not-to-save-ukrainearming-kiev-is-a-bad-idea/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Walt, S.M., (2022) Liberal Illusions Caused the Ukraine Crisis,
Foreign Policy, January 19. Available at:
https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/01/19/ukraine-russia-nato-crisisliberal-illusions/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Walt, S.M., (2022), The West is Sleepwalking into War in Ukraine,
Foreign Policy, February 23. Available at:
https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/02/23/united-states-europe-warrussia-ukraine-sleepwalking/ (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Wei, S.-J., (2022), Can Sanctions on Russia Work Without China?,
Project Syndicate, March 9. Available at: https://www.projectsyndicate.org/commentary/china-and-extending-economic-sanctionsagainst-russia-by-shang-jin-wei-2022-03 (Accessed: March 12, 2022).
Wigell, M. and Vihma, A., (2016), Geopolitics versus Geoeconomics:
The case of Russia's Geostrategy and its Effects on the EU, International
Affairs, 92(3), pp. 605-627.
Zagorcheva, D., (2012), NATO Enlargement and Security in the
Balkans, Journal of Regional Security, 7(1), pp. 7-31.

102

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

RUSSIAN FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC POLICIES
TOWARDS THE NEAR ABROAD
Stephen Adi Odey,
adiodey@unical.edu.ng
Andi Octamaya Tenri Awaru,
a.octamaya@unm.ac.id
Oduora Okpokam Asuo
asuooduoraokpokam@gmail.com
Abstract: Since the Soviet Union’s (USSR) collapse, Russia’s domestic and
foreign policies have changed. With the loss of “superpower” status, Russians
struggled to define their “national identity,” which influenced the country’s new
foreign policy. This struggle affected Russia’s ties with its sovereign neighbours,
the former Soviet states termed the “Near Abroad” (blizhnee zarubezhe). The
struggle specifically led to a series of territorial, leadership, economic, diaspora,
and military conflicts with some countries in the Near-Abroad. The question of
the legitimacy of territories and borders in Nagorno-Karabakh (Azerbaijan),
Abkhazia and South Ossetia (Georgia), the Trans-Dniester area (Moldova), and
Crimea, Donetsk, and Luhansk areas of Ukraine is largely a result of the
struggle. This paper discusses the factors affecting Russian domestic and
foreign policy towards the Near-Abroad nations, which have influenced Russia’s
behaviour in contemporary international politics. Firstly, this essay analysed
Russia’s identity crisis and foreign strategy. The effect of Marxism-Leninism on
Soviet foreign policy and the new Russian State was also discussed. This paper
also analysed Vladimir Putin’s pragmatic strategy in the Near-Abroad, focusing
on Ukraine. This paper submits that Russia’s determination to see the NearAbroad states as largely within its sphere of influence and geopolitical interests
hinders the establishment of equal ties with these countries.
Keywords: Soviet Union, Russia, Russian foreign policy, Realpolitik,
Ukraine.



Lecturer, Department of Sociology, University of Calabar, Nigeria.
Lecturer, Department of Philosophy, University of Calabar, Nigeria.

Lecturer, Department of Sociology Education, Universitas Negeri
Makassar, Indonesia.


Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

103

Introduction
The dissolution of the Soviet Union was one of the most dramatic,
unexpected, and defining political events of the 20th century. The Soviet
Union, formally known as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR),
was a socialist state in Eurasia from 1922 until 1991. From 1945 until its
dissolution in 1991, it was one of the world’s two superpowers along with
the United States. The Soviet Union was created and expanded as a union
of Soviet republics built on the land of the Russian Empire, which was
overthrown by the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the Russian Civil War of
1918–19201. The political borders of the Soviet Union changed over time,
but after the last major territorial annexations of eastern Poland, Finnish
Karelia, the Baltic States, Bessarabia, and some other territories during
World War II, the borders roughly matched those of late Imperial Russia
from 1945 until it broke up, except for Poland and Finland 2. By 1956, there
were 15 union republics that comprised the USSR. However, the end of an
era in international relations was marked by the dissolution of the Soviet
Union into 15 sovereign, independent republics at the end of 1991 3. As the
legal successor to the former Soviet Union’s status, the Russian
Federation, under the leadership of President Boris Yeltsin, inherited all of
the Soviet Union’s international rights, privileges, and obligations. More
crucially, though, for policymakers, it inherited a vastly different
geopolitical framework than the Tsarist and Soviet rulers had to deal with.
Not only had the exterior environment moved beyond the knowledge of
the Russian political elite, but also had the domestic picture. And, like his
predecessors—from the Tsars to Stalin, Khrushchev, Brezhnev, and M.
Gorbachev— Boris Yeltsin was required to adjust to changing situations,
especially when it came to foreign policy, which had to take both internal
and external pressures into consideration.
Russia was never a nation-state but rather a multinational empire with
messianic ambitions throughout both the Tsarist and Soviet eras 4. Russian
identity is divided between the ethnic Russian (russkiy) group and the
rossiyskiy, which refers to all Russians regardless of nationality or
religion. Both terms are translated as Rus-sian, but there is a significant
difference between russkaya zemlya (Russian land) and Rossiyskaya
Federatsiya (Russian Federation) because russkiy “describes something
G. Suny, The baku commune, 1917-1918: class and nationality in the russian
revolution, Princeton University Press, 2019, p. 51.
2 S. Bridger, Sue, and P. Frances, Surviving post-socialism: Local strategies and
regional responses in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Routledge, 2013, p. 22.
3 R. Szporluk, Russia, Ukraine, and the breakup of the Soviet Union, Hoover Press,
2020, p. 64.
4 P. Tsygankov, The strong state in Russia: Development and crisis. Oxford
University Press, 2014, p. 101.
1

104

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

that belongs to the Rus-sian ethnos” and rossiyskiy “describes something
that belongs to the Russian state”5.The term rossiyane, on the other hand,
refers to all Russian nationals.
The collapse of the Soviet Union created a “vacuum” in the new Russian
Federation’s foreign policy, which raised the issue of Russia’s national
identity6. No precedent existed to follow. Besides psychologically, the
residue of being a global superpower was too powerful to ignore. Moreover,
both Russia’s internal and foreign settings were radically altered because of
the security issues it faces. These new security concerns of the new Russian
state were at the core of Moscow’s strategic considerations. Externally, the
eastward expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to
include the former allies of the Soviet Union was seen as the greatest
security danger to Russia. Even after more than a decade, NATO expansion
is still seen as a significant danger to Russia’s security. However, the most
complicated difficulty that Russia faced immediately following the fall of the
Soviet Union was its relationship with its newly independent neighbours,
the former Soviet republics, which is termed the “near abroad” (blizhnee
zarube-zhye). In its dealings with the nations of the near abroad, the new
Russian state had to confront the historical legacies of Imperial Soviet
Union—polities in which Russia had often played a dominant and repressive
role in non-Russian territories.
After the Soviet Union’s breakup, countries in the near abroad were
engaged in various conflicts that influenced Russian foreign policy. Russia
and its neighbours (near abroad) have had some territorial, economic,
diaspora, and military clashes. The territorial issues include NagornoKarabakh (Azerbaijan), Abkhazia and South Ossetia (Georgia), the TransDniester area (Moldova), Crimea (Ukraine), and the invading of Ukraine in
February, 2022. There have also been military confrontations over former
Soviet military assets, including the Black Sea Fleet, nuclear weapons,
stations, and bases, as well as the surrounding Russian military. A second
major source of tension between Russia and countries in the near abroad is
the status and the future of the 25 million Russian ethnic minorities who
live in these countries.
The crisis of Russian identity
During the early years after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia
has been grappling with the loss of its identity. More than half a century of
5 O. Fridman, Ofer, Strategiya: The Foundations of the Russian Art of Strategy.
Oxford University Press, 2021, p. 21.
6 A. Odey, and S. A. Bassey. “Ukrainian Foreign Policy Toward Russia Between 1991
And 2004: The Start of The Conflict.” Journal of Liberty and International Affairs, vol.
8, no. 2, 2022, p. 346.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

105

superpower status has left some permanent psychological impressions on
the minds of the Russian people. The political elite had to cater to this
craving for a new identity among the people – at least subtly, if not overtly.
Though there have been some Russian leaders who have insisted on
retaining the “superpower” status. Instead, most policy documents have
tried to deliberately and strongly reinforce the position of Russia as a
“regional power”, deserving its rightful place in international politics7. The
Russian Federation’s vacillation in foreign policy stems in large part from
the difficulties Russians have encountered in defining their national
identity after the collapse of the Soviet Union. This search for a new
identity had played a significant role in determining the course of Russian
foreign policy, at least in the first few years of the post-USSR period. While
all other former Soviet Republics benefited from the Soviet Union’s
demise, Russia has suffered overall. Moscow has lost an empire and all the
benefits that apparently go with it. The collapse has been a setback for the
pride of the Russians. The new realities and the degraded status have been
hard to digest.
The obvious reliance on Western financial aid had hurt the sentiments
of the Russians, especially the patriotic lot. One of the cardinal questions
of Russian national identity is whether “Russia as a civilization embraces
only the Russian Federation or [whether] it also includes Ukraine and
Belarus”8. For many Russians, the Soviet Union rather than the Russian
FSSR was their homeland, the more so that the latter was purely formal
rather than actual polity, the non-existence of the Communist Party of the
Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RFSSR) being the best
example. It is not surprising that it has been difficult in the post-Soviet era
to limit the Russian national consciousness to the boundaries of the
Russian Federation. In fact, opinion polls in Russia have consistently
shown that a majority of Russians do not see Ukrainians and Belarusians
as separate ethnic groups, but as somehow Russian. This fact stems from
the traditional Russian terminology, in which adjective russkiy applies
both to Russia and (Kievan) Rus’. These considerations have influenced
Russian foreign policy toward the near abroad.
The Evolution of Russian Foreign Policy
The Russian Federation was confronted with enormous domestic and
foreign crises at the end of December 1991, when the Soviet Union
dissolved into fifteen sovereign states. The rise of Russian foreign policy
J. Mankoff, Russian foreign policy: the return of great power politics. Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers, 2009, p. 53.
8 K. Wolczuk, “History, Europe and the “national idea”: The “official” narrative of
national identity in Ukraine.” Nationalities Papers, Vol. 28, No. 4, 2000, p. 672.
7

106

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

must be understood in this context. These difficulties and problems would
form the basis of Russia’s new foreign strategy. The historical turning
point in foreign policy thought was the shift from the imperial and
ideological paradigms of the Leonid Brezhnev period to the New Thinking
paradigms of the Gorbachev era. Externally, in the international arena,
Gorbachev initiated in the late 1980s a trend in which the Soviet Union
voluntarily lowered its responsibilities to the rest of the world, especially in
Asia, Africa, and Latin America9. In addition, the Soviet Union had begun
to reduce its influence in East Central Europe by disbanding the Warsaw
Pact and removing its soldiers from those nations10. Despite the fact that a
great deal of the motivation for these momentous choices sprang from the
internal realities of the Soviet Union, particularly the economic collapse,
this had a significant effect on the USSR, which lost its status as a global
powerhouse. Boris Yeltsin’s new Russian Federation had to take into
account how the world had changed when it set up its foreign policy
paradigm and framework.
The end of the cold war and the seeming ideological reunion with the
West (notably the United States) was the second significant external event.
Gorbachev referred to Europe as “our common home”; his perestroika and
glasnost reflected the reconciliation of two formerly opposing
philosophies. It was evident that Gorbachev’s Soviet Union had begun to
seek the West for socioeconomic and political growth inspiration. As Boris
Yeltsin’s first foreign minister, Andrey Kozyrev, subsequently
acknowledged, “The last decade (i.e., 1982–1992) was not a time of eclipse,
but rather a period of fight against the cruel communist system” 11. The
inevitable outcome of this conflict would be Russia’s merger with the
West12. However, the ideological differences between the West and the new
Russian Federation had vanished by the time Moscow formulated its new
foreign policy. It was now a matter of how quickly Moscow would accept
the new ideology as the fundamental paradigm of its new foreign policy.
The Role of Ideology in Soviet Union Foreign Policy
For more than seven decades, the USSR was one of the two pillars of
the bipolar world, the other being the United States of America (USA). It
was the most prominent player in the cold war that dominated most of the
twentieth-century international politics. Most countries during the Soviet
9 R. Strayer, Why Did the Soviet Union Collapse?: Understanding Historical
Change: Understanding Historical Change. Routledge, 2016, p. 52.
10 S. Mason, Revolution and transition in east-central Europe. Routledge, 2018, p. 73.
11 M. Dembińska, and M. Frédéric, Cooperation and Conflict Between Europe and
Russia. Routledge, 2021, p. 93.
12 C. Lynch, “The evolution of Russian foreign policy in the 1990s.” The Journal of
Communist Studies and Transition Politics, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2002, p. 161.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

107

era were either pro-USSR or anti-USSR. One either looked up to the Soviet
ideology with great reverence or looked down on it with greater contempt.
Indeed, both political thinkers and Soviet practitioners were drawn to the
ideological component of the Soviet polity. Ideology has been considered
the cornerstone of the former Soviet Union. Only during the Soviet period
was the prevailing idea encompassed in an official ideology, MarxismLeninism. According to Stephen White “there has been general agreement
that official ideology plays a central role in Soviet politics”13. Hunt explains
that the foreign policy attitudes of the Soviet leadership “are not simply
based on Marxist-Leninist ideas in some abstract sense – they are soaked
into its bones”14.
One major example is that the influence of Karl Marx’s internationalist
theme on the thoughts and actions of the Soviet Union could be clearly
seen during the First World War. Karl Marx stated that “workingmen have
no country”15. In other words, Marx replaced “national loyalty” with the
“common interest” of the international working class. Vladimir Lenin’s
theory of imperialism also states that the task of a world socialist
revolution could be successfully accomplished by turning the “imperialist
world war” into a series of civil wars. Thus, Marxist thought extended by
Lenin’s doctrine of imperialism provided the theoretical justification for
the conclusion that the most effective course of action for the proletariat
from the Marxist point of view during the First World War would be to
turn weapons against its own government rather than support this
government by fighting fellow proletarians from other countries. As V.
Lenin summarised this position, “A revolutionary class in a reactionary
war cannot but desire the defeat of its own government”16.
This tactical conclusion had a theoretical grounding in European
Marxism, but only Russian Marxists, especially Bolsheviks, followed its
premises. In September 1914, the Bolshevik-controlled Central Committee
of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party produced a “manifesto
against the war” claiming that socialism’s duty was to convert the conflict
into a civil war. The Manifesto urged socialists in each country to defeat
their own bourgeoisie and turn the conflict into a civil war17. The
assumption was based on the Soviet political elite’s verbal communications
S. White, “Ideology and Soviet politics.” Ideology and Soviet Politics, Palgrave
Macmillan, London, 1988, p. 1.
14 C. Hunt, “The importance of doctrine.” Soviet Conduct in World Affairs. Columbia
University Press, 1960, p. 107.
15 K. Marx, and E. Friedrich. “The communist manifesto, 1848.” London: Penguin,
1967, p. 97.
16 A. Erdogan. A. Lenin on Anti-Imperialist Wars. Durham: Lulu Press, 2020, p. 90.
17 E. Marcobelli, “Commitment Against War.” Internationalism Toward Diplomatic
Crisis. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 2021, p. 229.
13

108

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

concerning foreign policy aims, tools, and execution. Thus, foreign policy
was founded on Soviet leaders’ claims to follow Marxism-Leninism ideology.
This was the Soviet Union’s principal motivation for almost sixty years.
Revolutionary movements necessitate revolutionary ideologies. Soviet
intellectuals, lawmakers, and officials have repeatedly said their foreign
policy was Marxist-Leninist. The Marxist-Leninist ideology ruled. In the
Soviet Union, doctrine and practise were never criticised. This tight control
of ideology by the Communist Party led to terrible policy rigidity, which
helped bring about the fall of the Soviet Union in the early 1900s 18. Many
scholars had expressed doubts about the Soviet Union’s philosophy. Some
scholars argue that Soviet politics was more about power than philosophy.
It never existed for them. If it did, it was out of convenience, not ideology.
Others contend that Soviet foreign policy was more pragmatic than
ideological. Soviet philosophy, however, did not distinguish between
theory and practise. This ideology-based viewpoint backs it up.
Truth resides between the extremes. Foreign policy in the Soviet Union
was undoubtedly ideological. Perestroika (the policy of restructuring or
reforming the economic and political system) and glasnost (the policy
practise of a more open, consultative government and wider dissemination
of information) ushered in a radical transformation in the Soviet Union’s
foreign policy. For the first time in socialist empire history, Marxist-Leninist
foreign policy was questioned. Perestroika was Gorbachev’s effort to rethink
national security19. He wished to improve the image of the USSR by
promoting democracy and market reforms. Mikhail Gorbachev used
democracy as a vital component both externally and globally.
Vladimir Lenin and Self-Determination
Though Vladimir Lenin was not immune to the drive toward national
self-determination in the early twentieth century, he was a statesman
capable of adapting the right to self-determination to Russian reality. In
the view of Vladimir Lenin, self-determination included making a
temporary concession to nationalist feelings in return for political support
for socialism. Lenin developed a concept of national self-determination
that allowed national groups to join the Bolshevik ranks voluntarily and
freely20. The party rapidly seized the “right” to command and control their
national destiny after accepting the offer. Therefore, the right to self18 L.R. James, World revolution, 1917–1936: The rise and fall of the Communist
International. Duke University Press, 2017, p. 634.
19 D. Nordlander, “Khrushchev’s Image in the Light of Glasnost and Perestroika.”
The Soviet Union. Routledge, 2018, p. 359.
20 S.W. Page, “Lenin and self-determination,” The Slavonic and East European
Review, 1950, p. 344.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

109

determination became a one-time option rather than an ongoing legal
right to self-government. If you granted them autonomy, they would not
exercise it; if you denied them autonomy, they would demand it. According
to Lenin, national autonomy included the right to self-determination and
secession; the establishment of separate administrations for national
groupings; and the complete legal, political, and economic equality of all
nationalities in the fields of social and political life of the country 21. Lenin
believed that the establishment of a single party as the organisation of the
proletariat and the idea of “democratic centralism” inside the party would
keep nationalist impulses under control. In his last days, he saw that his
administration was encouraging the forcible integration of other
ethnicities into the Soviet Union, as opposed to the gradual, natural
absorption he had envisaged. Stalin’s attempt to consolidate economic
commissariats in Moscow in the wake of the Treaty of the Soviet Union of
1922 was thwarted in what may have been his last effort to repress
deviations and implement his views22. Lenin compelled Stalin to alter the
text, but by the time it was to be implemented, Lenin had passed away.
On the foundation of Lenin’s nationalities policy, successive Moscow
Republic partnerships were constructed. The peripheral nations often used
Lenin’s programme to deny greater rights and also as a shield against the
center’s oppressive measures. According to Critchlow, it has been
customary for advocates of minority rights to use Leninist references “to
bolster every case for national rights”23. On the other hand, national rights
opponents have long maintained that Lenin was essentially an
integrationist. They claimed national integration was Lenin’s goal in
handling nationality relations. Marxist communism was in opposition to
the property-based and territorial foundations of political organisation.
Such an ideological justification facilitated the Bolsheviks’ denial of
individual rights, localist parties’ rights, and territorial governments’
rights. Thus, ideology once again came to Moscow’s aid and was employed
to tie the distant republics to the centre. However, the Soviet officials could
not dismiss nationalist feelings entirely. By combining nationalist feelings
with the weakened political structures of the territorial federation, they
tried to harness the existing political dynamics. This became the main
compromise of the Soviet Socialist Federation, which was a mix of
nationalist and territorial ideas.

21 I. Levkov, “Self-Determination in Soviet Politics.” Self-Determination: National,
Regional, and Global Dimensions. Routledge, 2019, p. 136.
22 R. Elsie, Historical dictionary of Albania, Vol. 75, Scarecrow Press, 2010, p. 33.
23 G. Amato, et al., The history of the European Union: Constructing utopia.
Bloomsbury Publishing, 2019, p. 128.

110

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

New Approaches to the Russian Foreign Policy
During the Mikhail Gorbachev regime, the dominating MarxistLeninist doctrine, which had been the cornerstone of Moscow’s foreign
policy for more than seven decades, began to lose favour. In all practical
terms, it ceased to exist following the formal dissolution of the Soviet
Union. The disintegration of the monopolistic, all-encompassing socialist
ideology spawned a number of competing conceptions in Russian foreign
policy. Like true neophytes, just about anyone and everyone proposed a
viable and effective model of dealing with the new situation. While some
argued for a clean rupture with the past, others refused to accept the Soviet
Union’s disintegration. Others, on the other hand, supported a middle
ground that acknowledged the new circumstances but advocated modest
future improvement. In the post-Soviet era, the contradictory conceptions
and techniques of Russian foreign policy revealed a true challenge for
policymakers—first recognising new national interests and then building
the mechanisms to attain and safeguard them. In short, Russia’s foreign
policy in the first few years after the Soviet Union broke up was based on
three main ideas, which will be discussed in more depth below.
The Atlanticists, Eurasianists and Russian nationalists
The Atlanticists, or Westerners, championed one of the first and most
influential ideas. It was centred on the notion that Russia would
completely sever ties with Soviet foreign policy, which was mostly
motivated by ideological considerations24. They wanted to connect Russia’s
foreign policy to the country’s aspiration to become a normal capitalist
nation with a position in Europe. The Atlanticists promoted a blatantly
pro-Western stance intending to become members of the liberal,
democratic West. This group was led by the first foreign minister of
independent Russia, A. Kozyrev, a young professional diplomat who had
spent sixteen years in the Department of International Organizations at
the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs25. He had grown to appreciate and
embrace M. Gorbachev’s “new thinking” after serving under him for an
extended time. Not unexpectedly, he strongly favoured Russia’s
membership in international organisations. He intended to wean Russia
from its decades-long dependence on military means and build foreign
policy concepts centred on the promotion of human rights and universal
principles of global economic, environmental, and nuclear security, to be
realised through a community of democratic nations. Throughout the first
A. Wivel, and C. Matthew, “Punching above their weight, but why? Explaining
Denmark and Estonia in the transatlantic relationship.” Journal of transatlantic studies,
Vol. 17, No. 3, 2019, p. 397.
25 Ibid, 398.
24

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

111

few months of 1992, Yeltsin and Deputy Prime Minister Gai-dar, who were
pushing Russia’s dramatic economic changes, regularly expressed these
“liberal” westernising views of Russia’s national interests. For them,
Western democracies constituted the perfect model and ally for Russia 26.
The Atlanticists were criticised for unquestioningly adhering to the United
States’ position on economic assistance. They were singled out for their
support of the United States on matters of weapons control and the
Bosnian war. As a consequence of the subsequent discussions and
critiques, the Russian government began to consider other options in the
spring and summer of 1992. The voice of the Pragmatic Nationalists, or
Eurasianists, was the loudest among them.
Eurasianists promoted continuity with Soviet history without hostility
or confrontation with the United States or the West in general. Eurasianists
were antagonistic to NATO and felt Russia’s main interests should lie in its
ties with its neighbours. As opposed to the Atlanticists, they believed that
Russia was genuinely unique and apart from the West. Sergei Stankevich, an
adviser to President Boris Yeltsin, was among the most ardent proponents
of this strategy27. Even though it was more important to focus on the East
than the West, this school of thought didn’t reject the West. Instead, it called
for a balanced approach. In addition, they demanded harder negotiations to
protect the Russian people and their Russian history in other ex-Soviet
countries. As a Russian version of the United States Monroe Doctrine, one
of B. Yeltsin’s advisers, A. Migranian, argued in August 1992: “Russia should
announce to the world that the whole geopolitical region of the former
Soviet Union is a sphere of its vital interests”28. The Eurasialists did not call
for the forced redrawing of the borders of the Russian Federation. They
disagreed with A. Kozyrev and Y. Gaidar argued that Russia needed to
develop deeper ties with the republics of the former Soviet Union, which
were Russia’s newest neighbors.
The strategy espoused by Russian nationalists was the third option
that gained widespread support. The proponents of this strategy denied
the end of the Soviet Union. They argued that the fall of the Soviet Union
was a mistake and saw the resurgence of the Soviet Union as inevitable.
Zhirinovsky, the head of the deceptively named Liberal Democratic Party
(LDP)—a neo-fascist party whose performance in the December 1993
parliamentary elections shocked everyone—obtained the top spot in this
26
R. Legvold, “Russian Foreign Policy During Periods of Great State
Transformation.” Russian foreign policy in the twenty-first century and the shadow of
the past. Columbia University Press, 2007, p. 79.
27 M. McFaul, “Yeltsin’s Legacy.” The Wilson Quarterly (1976-), Vol. 24, No. 2, 2000,
p. 58.
28 H. Donaldson, and N. Vidya, The foreign policy of Russia: changing systems,
enduring interests. Routledge, 2018, p. 119.

112

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

category29. A. Ziuganov, the head of the Communist Party of the Russian
Federation; A. Prokhanov, the editor of the extremist newspaper “Den,”
and Colonel V. Alksnis, the head of the conservative Soyuz party in the
Congress of Deputies, were also in favor30.
This organisation was intended to reestablish the Soviet Union by
whatever means necessary. They were openly anti-Western and opposed the
integration of the Russian economy into the international economy. They
were the successors of the Slavophiles in the twentieth century, deriding
with disdain anyone who believed Western culture or political systems were
worthy of imitation and hailing Russian civilization as unique and superior.
Even though their programmes ultimately proved to be more empty talk
than reality, the Russian Nationalists did garner widespread sympathy
among the disillusioned and disgraced Russian people.
Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin’s Russia and the near abroad
On May 7, 2000, Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin was sworn in as the
second president of Russia, although he had been serving as acting
president since January of that year. Yeltsin left Vladimir Putin with a
peculiar combination of success and failure in international policy. B.
Yeltsin was successful in resolving several very complicated situations,
such as the settlement of many disputes with Ukraine and the transfer of
nuclear weapons to Russian territory. He endeavoured to reassure the
nations of Russia’s near abroad of their independence, a major cause of
annoyance and mistrust in Russia’s relations with these nations. However,
he was unable to create confidence with the majority of former Soviet
states. His attitude to the situation overseas was, at best, random. His
changing foreign ministers demonstrated a lack of confidence in his
approach to the former Soviet Union. In addition to the legacy he inherited
from Boris Yeltsin, Vladimir Putin’s rise to power was marked by three
important events that would later have a big impact on how he dealt with
the rest of the world.
The NATO push to the east was followed by the Kosovo War31. In the
eyes of Russians, these actions exemplified the US-led campaign to isolate
Russia and disregard her genuine security concerns. The second marked
the beginning of another conflict in Chechnya. This time, the battle was
stated to be a struggle against Islamic extremists and worldwide terrorism
29 A. Umland, “Zhirinovskii as a Fascist: palingenetic ultra-nationalism and the
emergence of the Liberal-Democratic party of Russia in 1992-93.” Forum für
osteuropäische Ideen-und Zeitgeschichte. Vol. 14. No. 2. De Gruyter, 2010, p. 99.
30 Ibid, p. 106.
31 A. Cottey, “The Kosovo war in perspective.” International Affairs, Vol. 85, No. 3,
2009, p. 593.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

113

as opposed to just a separatist movement. In 1998, the third occurrence
was the financial collapse of the rubble32. Despite the currency collapse,
there was little assistance available from the world community through the
Foreign Monetary Fund (IMF) and other international lenders who were
pouring billions of Russian rubles into Indonesia, South Korea, Brazil, and
other nations. Putin and the political elite internalised the harsh reality
that the international community could not be relied upon to help Russia
rebuild its economy, provide security assurances, or support Moscow’s
efforts to counter the rise of Muslim extremism. To put it another way,
Russia was seen as fundamentally isolated. The Russians had adopted
ruthless and unromantic practicality. No longer would the energy-starved
countries of the former Soviet Union receive “free lunches.” Furthermore,
more emphasis should be placed on bilateral relations rather than seeking
group consensus through mechanisms such as the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). Therefore, Russia must pursue its own interests
and define its allies based on “what’s in it for Russia.”
During the March 2000 presidential election campaign, Vladimir
Putin refused to outline his policy programme in detail or engage in a
debate with other candidates, but he did take positions on some issues. He
advocated for a strong and stable Russia that fought crime and maintained
order (exemplified by fighting Chechen terrorists as convenient
scapegoats). He emphasised that “the stronger the state, the greater the
individual’s freedom”33, attempting to equate security and liberty.
Additionally, he argued that a strong state is “written into Russia’s genetic
code”. These statements provided ample indications of where Vladimir
Putin wished to lead Russia and the image he wished to cultivate for the
nation in the new millennium, despite their lack of clarity. Putin gave
assurances that Russia’s foreign policy would not change after he became
acting president. Soon, however, a debate on Russia’s foreign policy course
began, encompassing such traditional topics as whether Russia should be
oriented toward the West or the East, should embrace “globalism” that
emphasises ties with the West or “multipolarity” that emphasises equality
in foreign relations and reliance on multilateral institutions. While
Vladimir Putin focused primarily on domestic issues during his election
campaign, he appeared to reject an anti-Western foreign policy. In a letter
to the Russian people, Vladimir Putin wrote, “Russian foreign policy
should serve national interests” (Light 2015: 17). The actions of Russian
diplomats should be determined solely by the actual, especially economic,
M. Goldman, “The Russian ruble and why it collapsed.” Challenge, Vol. 41, No. 6,
1998, p. 13.
33 H. Donaldson, and N. Vidya, The foreign policy of Russia: changing systems,
enduring interests. Routledge, 2018, p. 78.
32

114

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

interests of the nation. This focus on the economy became a big part of the
vast majority of Vladimir Putin’s policy decisions after that, especially
when it came to the countries in near abroad.
Pragmatism: the cornerstone of Vladimir Putin’s policy
Putin began readjusting Russian foreign policy while he was still
serving as acting president. The objectives were to preserve Russian
interests to the greatest degree possible, strengthen the country and its
people, and revitalise the economy. However, the new Russian president’s
guiding principle was pragmatism. Given the emphasis on pragmatism,
Vladimir Putin was willing to try again with the West despite the recent
deterioration in ties. He realised that Russia could not afford to forego the
financial assistance necessary for its economic revival for at least the next
decade. Because he was focused on Russia’s economic interests, he was
willing to overlook the West’s apathy, as shown by NATO’s actions. In an
attempt to persuade the West, particularly the United States, of his
intentions, Putin pressed the Duma to swiftly approve START II. Russia
pursued friendships with European nations aggressively. Putin summoned
the foreign ministers of Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and Italy
to Russia for discussions on bilateral and global issues. On April 16, 2003,
he defied precedent by travelling to Britain on the night of his
inauguration as president, where he met with Prime Minister Tony Blair
and business executives. This not only indicated that Putin was willing to
embrace a flexible approach to Russian diplomacy, but it also revealed that
Putin’s pragmatism was centred on economic concerns. He was willing to
forget past mistakes if he thought it would help Russia become
economically successful and free.
This adaptability was most evident in Vladimir Putin’s attitude to
NATO. In an interview with the BBC, Putin said he wanted closer ties with
the West and more say in NATO matters. This was in line with his decision
to fix some of the broken ties between Russia and NATO during the
Kosovo war. “We feel we can discuss more integration with NATO, but
only if Russia is viewed as an equal partner,” he said 34. Putin said that
Russia’s opposition to the eastern expansion of NATO was due to
Moscow’s exclusion from the issue’s debate, but this does not imply that
Russians would close themselves off from the rest of the world.
Isolationism is not a viable choice. When G. Robertson went to Russia in
March 2000, V. Putin talked with him and decided to make up with NATO
and get relations back on track. As acting president, he did not even rule
A. Gülnur, and M. Rebecca, NATO: in search of a vision. Georgetown University
Press, 2010, p. 108.
34

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

115

out “the idea of Russia joining NATO”35. As long as NATO paid attention to
Russian interests and saw Russia as an equal partner. The reaction of the
west to Vladimir Putin’s signals was quick. The western creditors agreed to
a package of postponements, principal and interest rate reductions, and a
30-year repayment extension.
As soon as Putin was proclaimed acting president, Russia’s foreign
policy toward the West underwent a dramatic transformation. Not
surprisingly, his pro-Western foreign policy caused a lot of talk and even
some worry among Russian academics and people in the West who study
Russia. According to one school of thought, Vladimir Putin has shown nearvisionary qualities by rejecting the instinctive anti-Americanism of his
country’s political elite and directing foreign policy unambiguously toward
the west36. For some proponents of this perspective, Putin’s progress in this
direction has been heroic, considering the opposition from Russia’s foreign
policy, military, and security agencies, as well as the Russian parliament37.
The alternative, more cynical interpretation of Putin’s foreign policy change
said that it was intended to gain Western approval for Russia’s restrictions
on press freedom, vote-rigging, and human rights abuses. The supporters of
this school also stated that Kremlin propagandists were purposefully stoking
nationalistic opposition to Putin’s foreign policy to persuade the West that
he is surrounded by “nationalistic and anti-Western wolves”, and therefore
merits more support. However, such scepticism has received little backing
from others38.
Putin endorsed a new foreign policy theory in July of 2000 that
emphasised economic interests, the rights of Russians abroad, and
information gathering. Before his victory in May, V. Putin also approved a
document issued by the Russian Security Council on March 24, 2000.
According to many news sources reporting on the V. Putin doctrine, the
foreign ministry’s first objective would be to safeguard Russian economic
interests overseas39. The declaration also addressed the status of Russians
residing in the 14 other countries of the former Soviet Union. The alleged
discriminatory treatment of Russian communities in Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, and Ukraine was of particular concern. The element of
pragmatism in the new ideology, however, seemed to capture everyone’s
attention. Igor Ivanov, the foreign minister, was cited as stating, “The
T. Forsberg and H. Graeme, “Russia and NATO: From windows of opportunities to
closed doors.” Journal of Contemporary European Studies, 23.1 (2015)41-57.
36 S. Werning, and B. James, “Understanding the sources of anti-Americanism in the
Russian elite.” Post-Soviet Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 5-6, 2019, p. 392.
37 Ibid, p. 380.
38 Ibid, p. 382.
39 K. Abushov, “Policing the near abroad: Russian foreign policy in the South
Caucasus.” Australian Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 63, No. 2, 2009, p. 189.
35

116

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

unique aspect of this new idea is that it is more practical than the one
authorised in 1993.”40 The new foreign policy doctrine was tied to a new
Russian security doctrine established by the Kremlin earlier in the same
year, in which Russia tightened its stance on the use of its nuclear weapons.
The new defence plan went further than the 1997 doctrine, which said that
Russia could launch the first nuclear attack in response to a military attack
that seemed to threaten the survival of the Russian Federation41. Russia may
use all troops and measures at its disposal, including nuclear weapons, if all
other options for resolving a crisis have failed or been exhausted. Observers
have said that Russia’s reliance on nuclear weapons as a form of security
shows that it can’t deal with threats in other ways.
The development of a free economic zone among the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) members had proven elusive for over a decade
before Vladimir Putin’s inauguration as president of Russia. After Russia’s
economic crisis in August 1998, many CIS nations began trade wars42. In
general, if Russian goods were competitive, they were subject to customs
taxes, while the CIS member states pleaded with Moscow to maintain the
supply of inexpensive petroleum. When Russia complied, it quickly learned
that even subsidised gasoline was often not reimbursed; the CIS member
states were much more preoccupied with clearing their international
obligations to Western financial institutions and governments than with
erasing their debts to Moscow. Putin was enraged by the fact that certain
CIS members while retaining the appearance of the CIS, were engaging in
other geopolitical games that were detrimental to Russia. Kazakhstan,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan formed the Central Asian Union of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) to oppose Russia’s military
actions in the area while extracting maximum financial aid from the
Kremlin. The formation of the GUUAM, which comprises Georgia, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, and Moldova, was much more important. These
nations planned to construct their free trade zones without taking Russia’s
interests into account. Putin responded in the way that has become his
signature. Moscow revoked its visa-free travel policy for all of these nations.
There were suggestions that Vladimir Putin would take the extreme step of
destroying the CIS entirely and replacing it with the bullying of major
former Soviet nations. The classic Russian tools are oil supplies and the
military. Putin is keen to alter Russia’s near-abroad policy despite
Ibid, 200.
A.L. Fink, and O. Olga, “Russia’s Nuclear Weapons in a Multipolar World:
Guarantors of Sovereignty, Great Power Status & More.” Daedalus, Vol. 149, No. 2, 2020,
No. 39.
42 M. Dabrowski, “Currency crises in post-Soviet economies—a never ending story?.”
Russian Journal of Economics, Vol. 2, No. 3, 2016, p. 306.
40
41

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

117

opposition from several governments. Moscow’s message inside the
Commonwealth of Independent States is no longer rhetoric or paper
institutions, but rather raw dominance and aggression. From a different
perspective, Vladimir Putin is deploying a “carrot and stick” strategy in the
near abroad. His new approach is an illustration of his new approach. By
visiting Kiev as the Russian president’s first stop, Putin has shown
enormous regard for Ukraine. However, Putin also informed the Ukrainians
that if they cannot pay their gas bills, Russia will take a portion of Ukraine’s
oil pipelines as payment. Ukraine will lose a portion of its independence if
Russia ends up officially owning the pipelines.
Vladimir Putin and Ukraine
Ukraine is undoubtedly the clearest illustration of Vladimir Putin’s
new pragmatic approach to the near abroad. Due to protectionism on both
sides, Russian-Ukrainian economic ties were deteriorating when Vladimir
Putin became president of Russia. In terms of public debt and energy,
however, Russia remains Ukraine’s major economic provider. When Putin
took over the Russian presidency, Ukraine’s energy debt had reached a
staggering $3.5 billion43. Utilizing its near monopoly on Russian gas
transportation, Ukraine has postponed repayments and syphoned about
two to three billion cubic metres of gas. Several debt payback schemes
were never implemented. However, because of how weak its economy was,
Russia could no longer afford to give Ukraine money. Putin, seeing the
necessity to exert pressure on Ukraine, adopted a “no more free lunches”
approach as opposed to his prior fraternal dispositions towards Ukraine.
The donor-recipient paradigm of economic ties between Russia and
Ukraine was dismantled, principally by diminishing Russia’s reliance on
Ukrainian transit. Alternative ways to move gas, like through Belarus and
Poland, were planned and put into place. Russian manufacturers who had
not been paid ceased supplying nuclear power reactors in Ukraine with
energy and fuel. At the beginning of December 1999, Russia placed an oil
and energy embargo on Ukraine to discourage it from stealing gas from
pipelines. In addition, Russia frequently attempted to promote a businessrelated agenda during loan discussions. This was different from the past,
when all negotiations ended with Ukraine agreeing to pay later and Russia
agreeing to take (almost) any form of payment.
Furthermore, since Vladimir Putin’s ascension to power, Russian
policy toward Ukraine has been increasingly economically motivated and
geared toward advancing Russian commercial as well as political interests
in Ukraine. It is evident in Vladimir Putin’s numerous increasing pressures
K.E. Stoner, Russia Resurrected: Its Power and Purpose in a New Global Order.
Oxford University Press, 2020, p. 63.
43

118

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

on Ukraine. Russia exerted pressure on Kuchma in 2000 to dismiss the
pro-Western Foreign Minister of Ukraine, Tarasyuk, and Prime Minister
Yushchenko in 2001. Moscow and Kiev signed a 52-clause secret military
pact in January 2001, giving Russia significant influence over Ukrainian
military strategy due to its numerous debts to the former44. This move may
be intended to quietly alienate Ukraine from NATO. On the economic
front, however, Russian companies were on a buying spree to take control
of Ukraine’s power grids, oil and gas pipelines, and aluminium refineries.
This made it easier for Ukraine to do business with Russia. Russian
corporations paid hundreds of billions of dollars to buy these assets during
this period. As expected, Kiev moved closer to Moscow in June 2001 when
it signed important agreements with other governments. Some of these
agreements were for 15 years and had to do with gas transit, military
science, steel, and shipbuilding45.
Furthermore, since early in Vladimir Putin’s presidency, Moscow has
maintained a policy toward Ukraine based on the premise that both nations’
national identities are fabricated. Putin often uses the ideas of the theorists
who emphasised the organic unity of the Russian Empire and its peoples,
especially its Slavic and Orthodox core, in a way that Snyder calls the
“politics of eternity”46. This is the belief in an unchanging historical essence.
The speech delivered by Vladimir Putin on February 21, 2022, confirmed
the above. Putin has long maintained that Russians and Ukrainians are “one
people” and that their common history necessitates a shared political future.
During a 2008 meeting with the then-president of the United States,
Vladimir Putin reportedly said, “Ukraine is not even a country”47. Even in
his March 2014 address to the Russian parliament announcing the
annexation of Crimea, he also referred to Russians and Ukrainians as “one
people.” He has returned to the theme in subsequent years, most notably in
a 6,000-word article titled “On the historical unity of Russians and
Ukrainians” published in July 202148. In his speech before the invasion,
Vladimir Putin said that the current Ukrainian state was made by the Soviet

44 K. Davenport, “States Review Nuclear Security Treaty.” Arms Control Today, Vol.
52, No. 4 2022, p. 35.
45 O. Melnyk, “Ukraine’s cold war legacy 12 years on: a burden from the past, a
problem for the future.” Relics of Cold War: Europe’s Challenge, Ukraine’s Experience by
Policy Paper 6, 2003, p. 48.
46 R.B. Snyder, The Politics of Propaganda in Putin’s Russia: A Study on the
Treatment of Alexei Navalny. Diss. 2022.
47 E.W. Merry, “The Origins of Russia’s War in Ukraine.” Roots of Russia’s War in
Ukraine. Columbia University Press, 2015, p. 50.
48 E.P. Sauvageot, “Between Russia as producer and Ukraine as a transit country: EU
dilemma of interdependence and energy security.” Energy Policy, 145, 2020, p. 145.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

119

Union and that it should be renamed after the Bolshevik leader Vladimir
Lenin, who he said was its “founder and architect.”
In the last 30 years, Ukrainian civic identity has become much
stronger. This is especially true after the “Revolution of Dignity” in 2014
and Russia’s annexation of Crimea and involvement in the Donbas. This
Ukrainian civic country comprises not just Ukrainian speakers in the west
but also a substantial portion of the Russian-speaking, but increasingly
bilingual, eastern region. A generation has come of age in an independent
Ukraine that, despite its flaws, has maintained a robust democracy and is
growing more pro-European (in part due to Russia’s active participation),
while Vladimir Putin’s Russia remains preoccupied with quasi-imperial
great-power fantasies. The ongoing crisis has reinforced ties among
Ukrainians of all areas including dialects, and faiths. It has also widened
the gap between Ukrainian and Russian identities.
Conclusion
The establishment of equal relations between Russia and the former
Soviet republics is greatly hindered by the Russian desire to continue to
see these countries as exclusively within the Russian sphere of influence
and geopolitical interests. On many occasions, Russia has not hesitated to
use military force to protect the Russian-speaking populations in the
countries of the near abroad, just like in the recent invasion of Ukraine. In
fact, the military doctrine approved by the Russian Federation Security
Council in 1993 specifically mentioned this right to defend Russian
minorities. This doctrine has been executed by Russia on several
occasions, as seen in the cases of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Ukraine. The
Near Abroad states have often criticised Russia for interfering in their
internal affairs.
References
Amato, G., Moavero-Milanesi, E., Pasquino, G., & Reichlin, L. (Eds.).
(2019), The history of the European Union: Constructing utopia.
Bloomsbury Publishing.
Bridger, S., & Pine, F., (2013), Surviving post-socialism: Local
strategies and regional responses in Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union. Routledge.
Cottey, A., (2009), The Kosovo war in perspective. International
Affairs, 85(3), 593-608.
Dabrowski, M., (2016), Currency crises in post-Soviet economies—a
never ending story?. Russian Journal of Economics, 2(3), 302-326.

120

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Davenport, K., (2022), States Review Nuclear Security Treaty. Arms
Control Today, 52(4), 35-35.
Dembińska, M., & Mérand, F. (Eds.). (2021), Cooperation and
Conflict Between Europe and Russia. Routledge.
Donaldson, R.H., & Nadkarni, V., (2018), The foreign policy of
Russia: changing systems, enduring interests. Routledge.
Elsie, R., (2010), Historical dictionary of Albania (Vol. 75). Scarecrow
Press.
Erdogan, A., (2020), Lenin on Anti-Imperialist Wars. Durham: Lulu
Press.
Fink, A.L., & Oliker, O., (2020), Russia’s Nuclear Weapons in a
Multipolar World: Guarantors of Sovereignty, Great Power Status & More.
Daedalus, 149(2), 37-55.
Fridman, O., (Ed.). (2021), Strategiya: The Foundations of the
Russian Art of Strategy. Oxford University Press.
Goldman, M., (1998), The Russian ruble and why it collapsed.
Challenge, 41(6), 9-13.
Gülnur, Aybet, & Moore, R.R., (2010), NATO: in search of a vision.
Georgetown University Press.
Hunt, R.C., (1960), The importance of doctrine. In Soviet Conduct in
World Affairs (pp. 37-46). Columbia University Press.
James, C.L.R., (2017), World revolution, 1917–1936: The rise and fall
of the Communist International. Duke University Press.
Legvold, R., (2007), 2. Russian Foreign Policy During Periods of Great
State Transformation. In Russian foreign policy in the twenty-first century
and the shadow of the past (pp. 77-144). Columbia University Press.
Levkov, I., (2019), Self-Determination in Soviet Politics. In SelfDetermination: National, Regional, and Global Dimensions (pp. 133190). Routledge.
Lynch, A.C., (2002), The evolution of Russian foreign policy in the
1990s. The Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics, 18(1),
161-182.
Mankoff, Jeffrey, Russian foreign policy: the return of great power
politics. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2009.
Marcobelli, E., (2021), Commitment Against War. In Internationalism
Toward Diplomatic Crisis (pp. 229-265). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Marx, K., & Engels, F., (1967), The communist manifesto. 1848. Trans.
Samuel Moore. London: Penguin, 15(10.1215), 9780822392583-049.
Mason, D.S., (2018), Revolution and transition in east-central
Europe. Routledge.
McFaul, M., (2000), Yeltsin’s Legacy. The Wilson Quarterly (1976-),
24(2), 42-58.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

121

Melnyk, O., (2003), Ukraine’s cold war legacy 12 years on: a burden
from the past, a problem for the future. Relics of Cold War: Europe’s
Challenge, Ukraine’s Experience by Policy Paper, (6), 35-64.
Merry, E.W., (2015), The Origins of Russia’s War in Ukraine. In Roots
of Russia’s War in Ukraine (pp. 27-50). Columbia University Press.
Nordlander, D. (2018). Khrushchev’s Image in the Light of Glasnost
and Perestroika. In The Soviet Union (pp. 357-373). Routledge.
Odey, S.A., & Bassey, S.A., (2022), Ukrainian Foreign Policy toward
Russia between 1991 and 2004: The Start of the Conflict. Journal of
Liberty and International Affairs, 8(2), 346-361.
Page, S.W., (1950), Lenin and self-determination. The Slavonic and
East European Review, 342-358.
Snyder, R.B., (2022), The Politics of Propaganda in Putin’s Russia: A
Study on the Treatment of Alexei Navalny (Doctoral dissertation).
Stoner, K.E., (2020), Russia Resurrected: Its Power and Purpose in a
New Global Order. Oxford University Press.
Strayer, R., (2016), Why Did the Soviet Union Collapse?:
Understanding Historical Change: Understanding Historical Change.
Routledge.
Suny, R.G., (2019), The baku commune, 1917-1918: class and
nationality in the russian revolution. Princeton University Press.
Szporluk, R., (2020), Russia, Ukraine, and the breakup of the Soviet
Union. Hoover Press.
Tsygankov, A.P., (2014), The strong state in Russia: Development and
crisis. Oxford University Press.
Werning Rivera, S., & Bryan, J.D., (2019), Understanding the sources
of anti-Americanism in the Russian elite. Post-Soviet Affairs, 35(5-6), 376392.
White, S., (1988), Ideology and Soviet politics. In Ideology and Soviet
Politics (pp. 1-20). Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Wivel, A., & Crandall, M., (2019), Punching above their weight, but
why? Explaining Denmark and Estonia in the transatlantic relationship.
Journal of transatlantic studies, 17(3), 392-419.
Wolczuk, K., (2000), History, Europe and the “national idea”: The
“official” narrative of national identity in Ukraine. Nationalities Papers,
28(4), 671-694.

122

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

ASEAN AND CONFLICT MANAGEMENT IN
SOUTHEAST ASIA
Lita Limpo,
litalimpo3@gmail.com
Beauty Beauty
beauty@lecturer.uajm.ac.id
Abstract: Until date, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has managed disputes with significant success. This is not an easy task for a
body composed of multiethnic nations with very different colonial histories and
social, economic, and political difficulties. The Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) was able to escape complete submersion despite the longstanding competition between the world’s super powers, which utilized local
issues as pretexts to intervene in regional affairs. ASEAN has been successful in
establishing a regional identity that has brought neighboring nations closer
together and allowed them to take a stand on significant regional issues.
Unexpected were the political cohesion, regional collaboration, and diplomatic
successes of ASEAN. Despite several obstacles, ASEAN has attained a
remarkable global standing, particularly in comparison to other regional
organizations. The purpose of this research is to investigate ASEAN’s unique
and relatively successful role in settling conflicts and maintaining regional
peace and stability. This article also explores the dynamic character of ASEAN
as a regional organization.
Keywords: Conflict Management, ASEAN, the Cambodian crisis, The
Sabah Dispute, The Spratly Dispute.

Introduction
Internal and external security constraints have shaped the history of
Southeast Asian regionalism1. The region endured communism, inter-state


Lecturer, Department of Management, Faculty of Economics,
Universitas Atma Jaya, Makassar, Indonesia.

Lecturer, Department of Management, Faculty of Economics,
Universitas Atma Jaya, Makassar, Indonesia.
1 S.A. Odey and S.A. Bassey, “Ukrainian Foreign Policy toward Russia between 1991
and 2004: The Start of the Conflict.” Journal of Liberty and International Affairs, 8, 2,
2022, p. 346.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

123

incursions, boundary conflicts, limited democracy, frequent riots, lack of
political leadership, and financial instability2. ASEAN have become
Southeast Asia’s lowest common denominator. Each country’s choice to
join ASEAN was unique. Indonesia, the region’s biggest country,
supported regional cooperation via ASEAN when it realized regional
events affected its national growth3. Thailand wanted a robust regional
organization to balance its United States relationship. Malaysia sought
regional backing as Britain left Southeast Asia. Singapore desired to
stabilize its regional economic importance, while the Philippines aspired to
reinforce its Asian character4. Despite widespread scepticism and a limited
mission, ASEAN has become a functioning regional organisation engaged
in managing crises and fostering peace in Southeast Asia and the AsiaPacific region.
In this study, the detailed ASEAN conflict management method will be
explained. This conflict management method called the “ASEAN Way” It
involves consensus building, non-binding discourse, and non-interference
in member nations’ domestic affairs. The strategy fosters confidence among
political leaders and enables discussion and conflict settlement feasible
away from media scrutiny, which combative posturing and formal decision
making processes in western international talks typically fail to do.
ASEAN’s Evolving Conflict Management Mechanism:
Structures and Norms
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is one of the
most successful regional organizations in the developing world,
particularly in Asia5. It is known for resolving disputes and maintaining
peace in Southeast Asia. Since ASEAN’s inception, its members have not
engaged in open conflict. This remarkable achievement may be ascribed to
“The ASEAN Way” and conflict management.
ASEAN was established on August 8, 1967 by the Bangkok Declaration
in order to foster economic cooperation and the prosperity of its members
(Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, and the Philippines 6. Southeast
Asia was a tumultuous area at the time ASEAN was founded. The region
D.M. Jones and R. S. Michael, ASEAN and East Asian international relations:
Regional delusion. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2006.
3 R. Djalante, et al. “COVID-19 and ASEAN responses: Comparative policy analysis.”
Progress in Disaster Science, 8, 2020, p. 100129.
4 S. Narine, Explaining ASEAN: Regionalism in Southeast Asia. Lynne Rienner
Publishers, 2002, p. 64.
5 H.S. Nesadurai, “The association of Southeast Asian nations (ASEAN).” New
political economy, 13, 2, 2008, p. 239.
6 M.F. Keling, et al. “The development of ASEAN from historical approach,” Asian
Social Science, 7, 7, 2011, 169-189.
2

124

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

was characterised by poverty, instability, and underdevelopment 7. The
region was recovering from the effects of colonialism. The British
colonised Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philippines, while the Dutch
colonised Indonesia8. On the one hand, the development of regional
organisations was hindered by various colonial histories, cultural legacies,
and religious beliefs. As each nation’s pioneering leaders concentrated on
constructing the economies of the new countries. Mutual mistrust and
hostility, as well as shaky regional ties, characterised the region’s nations 9.
In contrast, a variety of challenges necessitated the establishment of a
regional organisation to enhance collaboration. As colonial powers
receded, Southeast Asian nations were also concerned that a power
vacuum might invite “rogue states” seeking political advantage10.
The Association of South East Asia (ASA), the first regional
organisation, was plagued by internal strife from the start11. The
Philippines’ claim to North Borneo (now Sabah) strained ties between
Malaya and the Philippines, impeding ASA’s growth. Indonesia’s absence
from the ASA also hurt its ambitions12. As Thailand and the Philippines
were members of the anticommunist Southeast Asia Treaty Organization
(SEATO), ASA was seen as anticommunist, hence deepening the
ideological chasm. ASA was replaced by MAPHILINDO (The Greater
Malayan Confederation). MAPHILINDO was established in 1962 in order
to unify Malaysia’s borders13. Also unsuccessful. The independence of
Malaysia was challenged by President Sukarno of Indonesia on September
16, 1963. Indonesia opposed Sabah and Sarawak joining Malaysia,
triggering “Konfrontasf” (confrontation). Indonesia considered the
proposed federation as anti-Borneo and neocolonialist. Member
disagreements prevented MAPHILINDO from ever achieving more than a

C. Renshaw, “Indonesia, Australia and ASEAN.” Strangers Next Door?: Indonesia
and Australia in the Asian Century, 2018, p. 169.
8 L. Lim, “14 Standards of English in South-East Asia,” Standards of English:
Codified varieties around the world, 2012, p. 274.
9 C.S. Hau, The Chinese question: Ethnicity, nation, and region in and beyond the
Philippines. Nus Press, 2014.
10 D.J. Lang, Daniel et al., “Transdisciplinary research in sustainability science:
practice, principles, and challenges.” Sustainability science, 7, 1, 2012, p. 29.
11 M. Caballero-Anthony, ed. Regional security in Southeast Asia: Beyond the
ASEAN way. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2005.
12 M.C C. Ortuoste, Internal and external institutional dynamics in member-states
and ASEAN: Tracing creation, change and reciprocal influences. Arizona State
University, 2008.
13 W.J. Ju, The rise and fall of the Djakarta-Peking axis, 1949-1966. Mississippi
State University, 1967.
7

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

125

declaratory status14. In 1966, prior to ASEAN, the United States funded the
Asian and Pacific Council (ASPAC)15. Thailand, South Vietnam, Japan,
South Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Australia, Taiwan, and New
Zealand were included. International politics brought down ASPAC. The
exclusion of Taiwan and the inclusion of China prevented some council
members from sitting together16. ASPAC disintegrated in 1975 as regional
and global politics developed.
Prior to the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), few events occurred. In 1966, Suharto assumed power in
Indonesia, ushering in the “New Order”. The new Indonesian military
leadership under the leadership of Suharto sought stability, prosperity,
and a pro-Western, anticommunist position. It was anticipated that a
larger body would boost the probability of a permanent settlement of the
Malaysia-Indonesia issue17. The civil war in Vietnam was drawing the
attention of foreign powers. Oldfield said that Thailand was being
endangered by the Indochina conflict. Myanmar was isolated by socialism.
Some countries in the region were also concerned about China’s growing
dominance. In summary, the Southeast Asian nations created a “shared
sense of vulnerability to the domestic adversary,” notably the Vietnamese
and Chinese-funded communist rebellion18. These events led to the
formation of ASEAN.
In 1966, Thai diplomat and politician Thanat Khoman and Malaysian
leader Tun Abdul Razak initially explored regional cooperation. Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand convened in Bangkok
on August 5, 1967, to consider the possibility of forming a regional
association. The Bangkok Declaration of 1967 established ASEAN19. The
formation of ASEAN regional cooperation was primarily motivated by the
desire to develop a peaceful region in order to prevent conflicts and
achieve cultural and economic union. They also desired a Southeast Asian
14 Daud, Mohd Afendi, Mohd Sufiean Hassan, and Abd Aziz A’zmi. “Tunku Abdul
Rahman: The Challenge Of Establishing Malaysia.” Jurnal’Ulwan 6.1 (2021): 127-143.
15 K. Koga, “ASPAC or ASEAN? Institutional Evolution and Survival in
Contemporary Maritime Asia.” Changing Dynamics and Mechanisms of Maritime Asia
in Comparative Perspectives. Palgrave Macmillan, Singapore, 2021, p. 235.
16 D. Halvorson, Dan. “From Cold War Solidarity to Transactional Engagement:
Reinterpreting Australia’s Relations with East Asia, 1950–1974.” Journal of Cold War
Studies, 18, 2, 2016, p. 130.
17 A. M. Taylor, “Malaysia, Indonesia–and Maphilindo.” International Journal, 19, 2,
1964, p. 171.
18 E.A. Laksmana, “Regional order by other means? examining the rise of defense
diplomacy in southeast Asia.” Asian Security, 8, 3, 2012, p. 270.
19 A. Jorgensen-Dahl, Regional organization and order in South-East Asia.
Springer, 2016, p. 54.

126

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Regional Order based on collaboration. Regional and international
subjects were discussed.
According to the Bangkok Declaration (ASEAN Declaration), the
association’s goals and objectives were20:
1. To advance the region’s economic growth, social progress, and
cultural development via joint efforts in the spirit of equality and
collaboration to build a successful and peaceful Southeast Asian
community;
2. To promote regional peace and security by respect for justice, the
rule of law, and the UN Charter;
3. Promote active cooperation and mutual support in economic, social,
cultural, technological, scientific, and administrative domains;
4. To provide assistance to each other in the form of training and
research facilities in the educational, professional, technical and
administrative spheres;
5. To collaborate more effectively for the greater utilisation of their
agriculture and industries, the expansion of their trade, including the
study of the problems of international commodity trade, the improvement
of their transportation and communications facilities, and the raising of
their living standards;
6. To encourage the study of Southeast Asia;
7. To maintain close and beneficial cooperation with existing
international and regional organizations with similar aims and purposes.
In line with the idealistic objectives of their respective peoples, the
Declaration also reaffirmed the determination of the five member states to
safeguard their stability and security against outside meddling. According
to some analysts, the Declaration revealed ASEAN’s intention to expand
political and security cooperation from the outset21. The Bangkok
Declaration did not include cooperation on the political and security
fronts. The Declaration was limited and ambiguous; it lacked a
comprehensive strategy for accomplishing its objectives. Despite the
absence of any allusion to political participation in the Declaration.
According to Marchi, the matter of cooperation on the political and
security fronts was of paramount importance to the founders of ASEAN22.
20 R. Amer, “The Conflict Management Framework of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).” Conflict Management and Dispute Settlement in East Asia.
Routledge, 2016, p. 39.
21 M.A. Glosny, “Stabilizing the Backyard: Recent Developments in China’s Policy
Toward Southeast Asia.” China and the Developing World, 2015, p. 157.
22 R. Emmers, Cooperative Security and the Balance of Power in ASEAN and the
ARF, Routledge, 2012, p. 53.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

127

Evolution of ASEAN’s Conflict Management Mechanism
during the Cold War Era
ASEAN’s conflict-management approach relies on informal
conversations and adjustments at prominent political levels rather than
formal legal processes and practises. ASEAN has no charter, which reflects
its informality23. The Bangkok Statement effectively remained a joint
declaration that did not need approval by the member governments24.
ASEAN’s informality and low structure benefited its collaboration. As one
study states:
One encouraging characteristic of ASEAN was
that it was built with the least amount of pain; it was
not bogged down with heavy structures in its
formative years, but was instituted with the
minimum weight necessary for the anticipated
functions. This was crucial because the more
restrictions at the initial stage, the more difficulties
in getting an association accepted by prospective
members, especially in a region (historically)
crisscrossed by conflicts and mutual suspicions25.
ASEAN was subsequently institutionalised. Such institutional
mechanisms established a framework for dialogues, consultations, and
debates on matters of mutual interest in order to foster greater mutual
understanding, good neighbourliness, and collaboration, and to prevent
bilateral misunderstandings and disputes26.
The ASEAN Declaration suggested some procedures. It urged annual
ASEAN Ministerial Meetings27. Initially, the policy function of Special
Meetings was not well defined, but the annual conference of foreign
ministers now specifies all Association policy. Since 1976, foreign ministers
have met annually in the middle of the year, with the exception of 1970.
The Declaration also established a Standing Committee, chaired by the
host country’s foreign minister or his representative and comprised of
accredited ambassadors from other member countries, to carry out the
R. Emmers, and S. S. Tan, “The ASEAN Regional Forum and preventive
diplomacy: built to fail?,” Asian Security, 7, 1, 2011, p. 44.
24 Ibid, p.46.
25 P. Thambipillai, and S. Jayaratnam, “ASEAN Negotiations.” In ASEAN
Negotiations. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, 2013, p. 13.
26 A. Acharya, “Culture, Security, Multilateralism: The ‘ASEAN Way’and Regional
Order.” Culture and Security. Routledge, 2012, p. 59.
27 S. Kneebone, “ASEAN and the conceptualization of refugee protection in
Southeastern Asian states.” Regional Approaches to the Protection of Asylum Seekers.
Routledge, 2016, p. 298.
23

128

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

work of the Association between meetings of foreign ministers, Ad-Hoc
Committees and Permanent Committees of specialists and officials on
specific subjects, and a National Secretariat in each member country.
The Cambodian crisis: Vietnamese Intervention and Beyond
With the end of direct U.S. military involvement in Southeast Asia and
communist triumphs in Phnom Penh and Saigon in April 1975, many
anticipated peace and stability on the peninsula28. Cambodian-Vietnamese
border conflicts occurred in the middle of 1975. Both sides laid blame on
the other. In 1977, boundary disputes lead to a bigger conflict. Vietnam
launched a 15-day blitzkrieg against Cambodia on December 25, 1978,
evicting Pol Pot from Phnom Penh and seizing critical cities and
communication networks29.
On January 10, 1979, Pol Pot’s regime was replaced by the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea (PRK), supported by the Vietnamese government.
Within a week, the PRK proclaimed itself to be Cambodia’s only legitimate
government30. At their first meeting in Phnom Penh, the PRK and Vietnam
signed a 25-year peace agreement. The Treaty recognised that the peace
and security of both nations are interdependent and must be maintained.
Article 2 of the pact required unified defence against imperialist and
reactionary forces31. Both countries agreed to work together on economic,
cultural, educational, public health, scientific, and technological matters.
The new People’s Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) administration was
recognised by the Soviet Union, communist countries, and other states
with ties to Moscow.
The participation of China and the Soviet Union in the Cambodian war
made the situation worse. Observers referred to the conflict as a proxy war
between communist governments. Since 1978, the Soviet Union has
provided Vietnam with a substantial amount of military weaponry32. The
pact may have encouraged Vietnam’s ambitions to occupy. Cambodia’s
frequent and large border incursions may have encouraged Vietnamese
authorities to depose the Pol Pot regime, which was already unpopular in
Cambodia due to its excesses and brutality.

K. Mahbubani, and S. Jeffery, The ASEAN miracle: A catalyst for peace. NUS
Press, 2017.
29 S. Joo, Gorbachev’s foreign policy toward the two Koreas, 1985-1991: Power and
the new political thinking. The Pennsylvania State University, 1993.
30 B. Kiernan, The Pol Pot regime: Race, power, and genocide in Cambodia under
the Khmer Rouge, 1975-79. Yale University Press, 2002.
31 T.M. Franck, Recourse to force: state action against threats and armed attacks.
Vol. 15. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
32 M. Lind, Vietnam: The necessary war. Simon and Schuster, 2013.
28

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

129

Some ASEAN nations attempted to prevent Vietnam from
consolidating its authority over Cambodia. After the invasion, the ASEAN
states used a variety of diplomatic and political measures to compel
Hanoi’s withdrawal from Cambodia. According to Michael Leifer,
Vietnam’s invasion and occupation of Kampuchea divided and united
ASEAN33. Thailand denounced Vietnam’s participation in Kampuchea. The
Thai government urged Vietnam’s quick departure from Cambodia so
Cambodians could elect their own government. Indonesia’s first response
to the invasion was subdued because of its alternate strategic stance.
Singapore’s strategy resembled Thailand’s. At least under Prime Minister
Datuk Hussein Onn, Malaysia remained closer to Indonesia’s stance
despite its closeness to the war and dispute with Vietnam over Spratly
Islands sovereignty.
Vietnam’s conduct posed a difficulty for the ASEAN government.
Though neither Vietnam nor Cambodia were ASEAN members at the time,
ASEAN felt obligated to intervene for a variety of reasons. ASEAN’s
Standing Committee Chairman, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, denounced the
Vietnamese action on January 9, 197934. The ASEAN Foreign Ministers
applauded the UN Security Council’s decision to address Indochina
without delay and encouraged it to restore peace, security, and stability in
the region. ASEAN countries rallied around Thailand during the Annual
Ministerial Meeting in Bali from June 28–30, 197935. In the issued
communiqué, they criticised Vietnam’s actions and held it responsible for
ongoing illegal immigration. They also asked Vietnam to show that it is
friendly toward Thailand and other member nations by pulling its troops
back from the border between Thailand and Kampuchea36. The ministers
also emphasised the international community’s support for ASEAN’s
efforts to restore peace and security in the area, particularly the
overwhelming majority of UN Security Council members.
ASEAN maintained worldwide interest in the Indochina issue. Its
diplomatic actions affected the international debate on Cambodia.
Members of ASEAN talked worldwide in unanimity. At the autumn session
of the United Nations General Assembly in 1979, ASEAN countries
attempted to put the Cambodia problem on spotlight. According to Joseph
Brown, 52 nations participated in a three-day debate on the issue. Outside
A.M. Murphy, “ASEAN’s External Policy.” China, The United States, and the
Future of Southeast Asia: US-China Relations, 2, 2017, p. 50.
34 A.C. Guan, Singapore, ASEAN and the Cambodian Conflict 1978-1991. NUS Press,
2013, p. 62.
35 D.W.B. Chua and E.M.C. Lim. ASEAN 50: Regional Security Cooperation through
Selected Documents. World Scientific, 2017, p. 543.
36 M. Brown and J.Z. Joseph, Cambodia confounds the peacemakers, 1979-1998.
Cornell University Press, 2019.
33

130

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

of the communist bloc and Soviet allies, Vietnam got scant backing for
armed war37. Vietnam continued to claim in the General Assembly that it
had acted in self-defense and that the Khmer Rouge regime had been
overthrown by the Cambodian people themselves, but it also admitted that
its forces had helped the Cambodian people overthrow Pol Pot without
acknowledging the massive nature of Vietnamese assistance38.
Members of ASEAN emphasised that a state should not military
engage in another state, even to prevent breaches of human rights. On
November 14, the General Assembly approved, by a vote of 81 to 21, with
29 abstentions, a resolution presented by ASEAN requesting the
immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from Cambodia. 39 The resolution
urged all governments to avoid interfering with Cambodia and its
Southeast Asian neighbors. ASEAN, the West, most Latin American
nations, and other governments endorsed the resolution. By 1979, ASEAN
had won some diplomatic victories against Kampuchea.
The Sabah Dispute
The Sabah conflict predates ASEAN. Malaysia and the Philippines’
quarrel contributed to the collapse of ASA (Association of Southeast Asia,
created in 1961), the first effort at forming a regional entity in Southeast
Asia from which ASEAN evolved40. The simmering issue challenged the
young ASEAN at a time when it was trying to build regional cohesiveness
and develop collaboration among its founding members. Sabah is the
second-largest state in Malaysia. In exchange for his assistance in
suppressing a Bruneian uprising, the region was ceded to the Sultan of
Sulu in 1703 A.D. On January 23, 1878, a second Sabah treaty pertaining
to the commerce of arms was signed. Sultan Jamalul Alam leased North
Borneo to Gustavus Von Overbeck, the Austro-Hungarian Consul-General
in Hong Kong, in exchange for modern weapons to keep the Spanish away
from the Sulu Archipelago41.
In 1946, Sabah became a British province after a brief spell under the
British North Borneo Company42. Diasdado Macapagal submitted the
37 J.A. Fry, Debating Vietnam: Fulbright, Stennis, and Their Senate Hearings.
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2006, p. 344.
38 J.A. Tyner, From rice fields to killing fields: Nature, life, and labor under the
Khmer Rouge. Syracuse University Press, 2017, p. 54.
39 D.E. Weatherbee, “The Diplomacy of Stalemate.” Southeast Asia Divided.
Routledge, 2019, p. 22.
40 M. Natalegawa, “Does ASEAN matter?.” Does ASEAN Matter?. ISEAS Publishing,
2018.
41 H. Lim, “Regional trade agreements and conflict.” Regional Trade Integration
and Conflict Resolution, 15, 2008, p. 93.
42 Ibid, p. 94.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

131

Philippines’ claim to Sabah on June 22, 1962, just before to the formation
of Malaysia.43 Since Sabah was formerly part of the Sultanate of Sulu,
which joined the Philippines, it was claimed by the Philippines. The
national territory of the Philippines encompasses all territories having
historical or legal claims to the Philippines, according to the constitution of
194644. The Philippines informed the British Crown that Sabah belonged
to them. Malaysia claimed the sovereignty of Sabah. It declared that Sabah
belongs to Malaysia according to Baron von Overbeck and Alfred Dent’s
agreements with the Bruni Sultanate on December 29, 1877 and the Sulu
Sultanate on January 23, 1878.
The British Crown had handed Sabah to Malaysia on September 16,
1963, transferring the Sultan of Sulu’s lease to Malaysia 45. Two referenda
increased Malaysian authority over Sabah: the first between February and
April 1962, sponsored by the UN-backed Cobbold Commission; the second
soon before Malaysia’s establishment in September 1963. 70% of Sabah’s
population voted for Malaysia in both referendums. Singapore, Sarawak,
and North Borneo (now Sabah) were joined to peninsular Malaya on
September 16, 1963, to become Malaysia. Indonesia criticized the
unification of Sarawak and Sabah with Malaysia and began a
‘confrontation strategy’ The Philippines cut diplomatic connections with
Malaysia in 1963 and didn’t rebuild them until Ferdinand Marcos’s
election in 196646.
At the 1971 Fourth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting (Manila, 12–13
March), ASEAN members were optimistic. Malaysia and the Philippines
appeared to realize by then that escalating conflict over Sabah would
accomplish little47. The organization’s effectiveness inspired optimism for
a Sabah resolution. President Marcos of the Philippines said during the
Second ASEAN Heads of Government Meeting in Kuala Lumpur in August
1977 that he was dropping his country’s territorial claim to East Malaysian
Sabah48. He commended the group’s increased coordination and
cohesiveness. Following his remarks in Kuala Lumpur, Marcos made a
quick visit to Sabah, which was seen as an implicit recognition of
Ibid, p. 95.
Ibid, p. 96.
45 M.Z. M. Kib, “The Philippines’ claim over Sabah from the Cold War perspective.”
Malaysia and the Cold War Era. Routledge, 2020, p. 203.
46 S.B. Kadam-Kiai, and L.D. Dick, “Revisiting early Political History of Modern
Sarawak through the making of Stephen Kalong Ningkan as Sarawak’s first Chief
Minister.” Journal of Borneo-Kalimantan, 6,1 2020.
47 D.M. Jones and L.S. Mike, “The changing security agenda in Southeast Asia:
globalization, new terror, and the delusions of regionalism.” Studies in Conflict &
Terrorism, 24, 4, 2001, p. 272.
48 Ibid, p. 273.
43

44

132

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Malaysian sovereignty in Sabah. Later, in Manila, he expressed his desire
to refute the accusation. This was not immediately implemented. Malaysia
needed more concrete measures. It demanded a change to the Philippine
constitution, which under martial law may be seen as an assertion of
sovereignty over Sabah. This would have been a humiliating situation for
Marcos. Weakening domestic support hampered Marcos’ ability to act.
ASEAN continued to be impacted by the conflict, while Malaysia and
the Philippines maintained hostile relations. The worst has passed. Since
then, the Sabah dispute has ceased to be a major issue and no longer
impedes ASEAN cooperation. Even under extreme pressure, both
countries remained committed to moderation, mutual respect, and
accountability. The disputants conformed to these norms despite the fact
that they were still in the process of developing and had not yet been
established in ASEAN. The standoff was resolved by utilising the evolving
conflict management approach of ASEAN, which emphasised third-party
mediation and informal dialogue. Once the Corregidor incident was
disclosed, Malaysia issued a formal diplomatic protest. Despite a military
demonstration by Malaysia, with the assistance of its British ally, the
Philippines refrained from a military response that may have led to a
direct confrontation.
The Philippines’ withdrawal of its diplomatic order challenging
Malaysia’s ability to represent Sabah in ASEAN ministerial sessions was a
sign of respect for other members. Respect, which in the context of ASEAN
entails giving up uniqueness by seeking advice and ideas, was shown by
both states when they agreed to a cooling off period at Indonesia’s request
and when, before the first ASEAN Summit, the Philippines pledged not to
raise the Sabah claim. Both countries have remained dedicated to the
concept of “responsibility”, i.e., consideration of the interests and
sensitivities of other members and awareness of the impact of domestic
policy on neighbors. During ethnic unrest in Sabah, the Philippines did not
exploit Malaysia’s weakness by enforcing the Sabah claim. In the Sabah
issue, mediation, a key aspect of ASEAN’s conflict management, has been
used. The conflict has been managed by Indonesia, avoiding it from
damaging ASEAN. The problem in Sabah has also gotten better because
politicians and leaders have talked and talked to each other informally.
This case study demonstrates that Malaysia and the Philippines
demonstrated restraint in pursuing their claims even in the early days of
ASEAN. All ASEAN members benefit from this thriving regional
organization, which has ensured peace and security in the region and
promoted trade in Southeast Asia. The Philippines considers participation
in ASEAN to be its most important foreign policy objective and the
foundation of its relations with its neighbours and the Asia-Pacific region.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

133

The unknown is whether the Philippine government will risk it all by
reviving the claim, or whether it will continue to give it lip service until
circumstances allow it to be dismissed. Because the Philippines is aware of
the advantages of being a responsible ASEAN member and has an interest
in fostering ties with Malaysia, the second option looks to be the most
plausible. In truth, regional cooperation via ASEAN is very important for
both states, and ASEAN has indirectly helped to lessen political tensions
between them, especially in Sabah.
The Spratly Dispute
The South China Sea spans from Singapore to the Strait of Taiwan,
south of China. It borders eight ASEAN countries (excluding Laos and
Myanmar), China, and Taiwan. Disputed islands in the South China Sea
includes Pratas, Macclesfield Bank, Paracels and the Spratlys. This
research addresses the disputed Spratly Islands since it affects some
ASEAN countries. The conflicts include Spratly Island sovereignty and
maritime boundary delimitation in the southern South China Sea. The
Spratly Islands include 400 islands, banks, reefs, shoals, tolls, and cays. A
land-based 38% of the South China Sea is covered by these islands. The
Spratly Islands are named after Richard Spratly, a British whaler who
visited the islands in 184049.
ASEAN countries and China have tried to legitimise their Spraly
claims. Malaysia utilised the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the
Continental Shelf Act of 1966 to justify its claims50. The Philippines claims
“discovery”, “proximity”, and “national security”. Manila argues that
Spratly Islands are vital to the Philippines’ defence 51. The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), adopted in 1982, provides
Indonesia with 200-mile EEZ rights52. Vietnam’s argument is historical in
nature. In May 1975, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry’s Chinese
Department declared the Truong Sa Islands (Nansha Islands) had always
been Vietnamese territory53.
China lays claim to almost the entire South China Sea54. The Chinese
think they were the first to discover and utilise these islands. Beijing
asserts that Chinese navigators discovered the area in 1292, under the Han
G.B. Poling, On Dangerous Ground: America’s Century in the South China Sea.
Oxford University Press, 2022, p. 53.
50 H.T. Nguyen, “Vietnam’s Position on the Sovereignty over the Paracels and the
Spratlys: Its Maritime Claims.” JE Asia, 5, 2012, p. 165.
51 Ibid, p. 166.
52 Ibid, p. 167.
53 Ibid, p. 166.
54 Ibid, p. 168.
49

134

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

dynasty, and that locals had fished and sailed there for generations55. In
the 1980s and 1990s, China and Vietnam constructed military bases on
some of the islands to buttress their claims 56. Although both have pledged
to resolve conflicts peacefully. However, in the 1990s, China agreed to
ASEAN’s plan to use the natural resources of the Spratly Islands together
while increasing its military presence in the area57.
ASEAN’s attempts to resolve the South China Sea conflict revolve
upon “constructive engagement” with China. ASEAN nations were initially
apprehensive about China. China’s stature, economic might, and military
prowess prompted justifiable alarm among ASEAN nations. Moreover,
ASEAN’s policy towards the South China Sea and Spratly Islands disagree.
The first Indonesian workshop on the Spratly Islands issues was conducted
in 199058. Its major objective was to divert attention away from
sovereignty disputes over the Spratlys and onto other regional concerns.
The workshop approach conceived by Indonesian Ambassador Hasjilal
Djalal and lan-Townsend Gault had two goals59:
1. To resolve possible disputes, all parties must work together.
2. Manage potential conflicts and employ confidence-building
measures, so fostering an environment conducive to settling territorial or
jurisdictional concerns.
ASEAN officials and specialists in marine cooperation, security, and
resource development on the continent attended the inaugural Indonesian
workshop on the Spratly issue. Since the inaugural workshop in 1991,
China and Taiwan have often sent representatives. The workshop often
adopt the non-confrontational approach of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN). The ASEAN procedures matched the Chinese
requirements for informality, sovereignty, and international advisory
roles. The informality, sovereignty, and advisory roles of the Chinese
overseas. ASEAN formed the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) in 1994 in
order to bolster its role as a mediator in the Asia-Pacific region60. The
purpose of ARF is to include non-ASEAN Asian states. ASEAN retains its
Ibid, p. 166.
D.J. Timothy, “Tourism, border disputes and claims to territorial sovereignty.”
Tourism and hospitality in conflict-ridden destinations. Routledge, 2019, p. 27.
57 Z. Hong, “The South China sea dispute and China-ASEAN relations.” Asian
Affairs, 44, 1, 2013, p. 28.
58 D.M. Lampton, The three faces of Chinese power: Might, money, and minds. Univ
of California Press, 2008.
59 H. Djalal, “The joint development concept in the South China Sea workshop
process.” Recent Developments in the South China Sea Dispute. Routledge, 2014, p. 152.
60 D.M. Jones and J. Nicole, “Weak states’ regionalism: ASEAN and the limits of
security cooperation in Pacific Asia,” International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 16, 2,
2016, p. 209.
55

56

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

135

“ASEAN way” for managing conflicts, which is based on consensus. China
joined the ARF in July of 199461. China initially refused any talks on the
Spratlys. In July 1994, China’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, Qian Qichen,
refused to meet with his Indonesian counterpart62. The official position of
China then was that sovereignty over the island was not negotiable, but a
cooperation to exploit the area’s natural resources was. However, ASEAN
members stressed that the regional organisation had achieved a high
degree of cohesiveness among its members, which China must respect.
ASEAN has been tenacious in its attempts to absorb China and has
succeeded in enticing China into multilateral agreements with ASEAN. The
slow but perceptible change in China’s foreign policy is the result of
internal pressure, ASEAN’s efforts, and China’s recognition of ASEAN’s
rising cohesion and negotiating might. Examples include the 1992 ASEAN
Declaration, ZOPFAN, and the Amity and Cooperation Treaty. China’s
decision to sign the South China Sea Declaration was ASEAN’s finest
accomplishment63. The November 2002 Declaration between ASEAN and
China strives to create a peaceful, amicable, and harmonious environment
in the South China Sea. Consequently, despite the Spratlys issue, ASEAN
has helped avert direct confrontation and large-scale violence.
Conclusion
The Cambodian conflict, Sabah conflict, and South China Sea dispute
case studies have shown the positive aspects of ASEAN’s conflict
management initiatives. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) is one of the most successful examples of regionalization in the
developing world, with a long history of regional problem-solving. This
perspective is shared by regional experts like Amitav Acharya and ASEAN
officials. According to Swee-Hock,64 “We are delighted to announce that
ASEAN is the most successful collection of small and medium-sized
developing countries seeking peace, stability, and growth.” ASEAN’s
longevity is a sign of its success despite many researchers predicting that
ASEAN will die prematurely like its predecessors.
Tensions in Southeast Asia remain. Unresolved issues continue.
Mistrust among nations continues. Since the foundation of ASEAN, there
has been no bloodshed among its members. The majority of analysts credit
ASEAN with maintaining peace and stability in Southeast Asia by assisting
61 T. Yukawa, “The ASEAN way as a symbol: An analysis of discourses on the ASEAN
norms.” The Pacific Review, 31, 3, 2018, p. 298.
62 Ibid, p. 299.
63 Ibid, p. 300.
64 S. Swee-Hock, L. Sheng, and K.W. Chin, ASEAN-China relations: realities and
prospects. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2005.

136

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

its members in avoiding violence. Southeast Asia’s peace and stability
enabled the region to achieve unprecedented economic and social growth
in the developing world.
ASEAN’s distinctive approach to conflict management emphasises
informal consultation and consensus-building, networking (via dialogues
or constructive relationships with numerous partners), and an
independent stance. Given the politics of Southeast Asia, institutional and
legal systems would have been ineffectual. The cooperative, but adaptable,
approach of ASEAN helps protect independence, sovereignty, and national
interests while retaining sufficient cooperation and dedication to succeed.
The majority of commentators believe the “ASEAN Way” is indispensable
to ASEAN’s continued existence and success in maintaining regional
peace. According to a prominent ASEAN leader, The ASEAN Way is a
dynamic, clever, and adaptive approach that maximises our geopolitical
regional strength. Respecting and judiciously adopting ASEAN’s core
principles, such as consensus and non-interference, is vital to The ASEAN
Way. The ASEAN Way emphasises that there shouldn't be too many
institutions, that there should be continual talks, that participants won't be
compelled to agree to difficult choices, and that everyone should be
satisfied with the rate of progress.
References
Acharya, A., (2012), Culture, Security, Multilateralism: The ‘ASEAN
Way’ and Regional Order. In Culture and Security (pp. 55-84). Routledge.
Amer, R., (2016), The Conflict Management Framework of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 1. In Conflict
Management and Dispute Settlement in East Asia (pp. 39-62). Routledge.
Bhasin, M., (2006), South Asian cooperation: myths and realities.
India Quarterly, 62(1), 21-43.
Brown, M., & Zasloff, J.J., (2019), Cambodia confounds the
peacemakers, 1979-1998. Cornell University Press.
Caballero-Anthony, M. (Ed.). (2005), Regional security in Southeast
Asia: Beyond the ASEAN way. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Chua, D.W.B., & Lim, E.M.C., (2017), ASEAN 50: Regional Security
Cooperation through Selected Documents. World Scientific.
Daud, M.A., Hassan, M.S., & A’zmi, A.A., (2021), Tunku Abdul Rahman:
The Challenge of Establishing Malaysia. Jurnal’Ulwan, 6(1), 127-143.
Djalal, H., (2014), The joint development concept in the South China
Sea workshop process. In Recent Developments in the South China Sea
Dispute (pp. 151-159). Routledge.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

137

Djalante, R., Nurhidayah, L., Van Minh, H., Phuong, N.T.N.,
Mahendradhata, Y., Trias, A., ... & Miller, M.A., (2020), COVID-19 and
ASEAN responses: Comparative policy analysis. Progress in Disaster
Science, 8, 100129.
Emmers, R., & Tan, S.S., (2011), The ASEAN Regional Forum and
preventive diplomacy: built to fail?. Asian Security, 7(1), 44-60.
Franck, T.M., (2002), Recourse to force: state action against threats
and armed attacks (Vol. 15). Cambridge University Press.
Fry, J.A., (2006), Debating Vietnam: Fulbright, Stennis, and Their
Senate Hearings. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Glosny, M.A., (2015), Stabilizing the Backyard: Recent Developments
in China’s Policy Toward Southeast Asia. China and the Developing
World, 150-185.
Guan, A.C., (2013), Singapore, ASEAN and the Cambodian Conflict
1978-1991. NUS Press.
Halvorson, D., (2016), From Cold War Solidarity to Transactional
Engagement: Reinterpreting Australia’s Relations with East Asia, 1950–
1974. Journal of Cold War Studies, 18(2), 130-159.
Hau, C.S., (2014), The Chinese question: Ethnicity, nation, and region
in and beyond the Philippines. Nus Press.
Hong, Z., (2013), The South China sea dispute and China-ASEAN
relations. Asian Affairs, 44(1), 27-43.
Jones, D.M., & Jenne, N., (2016), Weak states’ regionalism: ASEAN
and the limits of security cooperation in Pacific Asia. International
Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 16(2), 209-240.
Jones, D.M., & Smith, M.L., (2001), The changing security agenda in
Southeast Asia: globalization, new terror, and the delusions of regionalism.
Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, 24(4), 271-288.
Jones, D.M., & Smith, M.L.R., (2006), ASEAN and East Asian
international relations: Regional delusion. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Joo, S.H., (1993), Gorbachev’s foreign policy toward the two Koreas,
1985-1991: Power and the new political thinking. The Pennsylvania State
University.
Jorgensen-Dahl, A., (2016), Regional organization and order in
South-East Asia. Springer.
Ju, W.J., (1967), The rise and fall of the Djakarta-Peking axis, 19491966. Mississippi State University.
Kadam-Kiai, S.B., & Dugun, D.L., (2020), Revisiting early Political
History of Modern Sarawak through the making of Stephen Kalong
Ningkan as Sarawak’s first Chief Minister. Journal of Borneo-Kalimantan,
6(1).

138

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Keling, M.F., Md Som, H., Saludin, M.N., Shuib, M., & Ajis, M.N.E.
(2011). The development of ASEAN from historical approach. Asian Social
Science, 7(7), 169-189.
Kib, M.Z.M., (2020), The Philippines’ claim over Sabah from the Cold
War perspective. In Malaysia and the Cold War Era (pp. 203-227).
Routledge.
Kiernan, B., (2002), The Pol Pot regime: Race, power, and genocide
in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge, 1975-79. Yale University Press.
Kneebone, S., (2016), ASEAN and the conceptualization of refugee
protection in Southeastern Asian states. In Regional Approaches to the
Protection of Asylum Seekers (pp. 295-323). Routledge.
Koga, K., (2021), ASPAC or ASEAN? Institutional Evolution and
Survival in Contemporary Maritime Asia. In Changing Dynamics and
Mechanisms of Maritime Asia in Comparative Perspectives (pp. 235258). Palgrave Macmillan, Singapore.
Laksmana, E.A., (2012), Regional order by other means? examining the
rise of defense diplomacy in southeast Asia. Asian Security, 8(3), 251-270.
Lampton, D.M., (2008), The three faces of Chinese power: Might,
money, and minds. Univ of California Press.
Lang, D.J., Wiek, A., Bergmann, M., Stauffacher, M., Martens, P.,
Moll, P., ... & Thomas, C.J., (2012), Transdisciplinary research in
sustainability science: practice, principles, and challenges. Sustainability
science, 7(1), 25-43.
Lim, H., (2008), Regional trade agreements and conflict. Regional
Trade Integration and Conflict Resolution, 15, 93.
Lim, L., (2012), 14 Standards of English in South-East Asia. Standards
of English: Codified varieties around the world, 274.
Lind, M., (2013), Vietnam: The necessary war. Simon and Schuster.
Mahbubani, K., & Sng, J., (2017), The ASEAN miracle: A catalyst for
peace. NUS Press.
Narine, S., (2002), Explaining ASEAN: Regionalism in Southeast
Asia. Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Natalegawa, M., (2018), Does ASEAN matter?. In Does ASEAN
Matter?. ISEAS Publishing.
Nesadurai, H.E., (2008), The association of Southeast Asian nations
(ASEAN). New political economy, 13(2), 225-239.
Nguyen, H.T., (2012), Vietnam’s Position on the Sovereignty over the
Paracels and the Spratlys: Its Maritime Claims. JE Asia & Int’l L., 5, 165.
Odey, S.A., & Bassey, S.A., (2022), Ukrainian Foreign Policy toward
Russia between 1991 and 2004: The Start of the Conflict. Journal of
Liberty and International Affairs, 8(2), 346–361.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

139

Poling, G.B., (2022), On Dangerous Ground: America’s Century in
the South China Sea. Oxford University Press.
Renshaw, C., (2018), Indonesia, Australia and ASEAN. Strangers Next
Door?: Indonesia and Australia in the Asian Century, 169.
Swee-Hock, S., Lijun, S., & Wah, C.K. (Eds.). (2005). ASEAN-China
relations: realities and prospects. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Taylor, A.M., (1964), Malaysia, Indonesia–and Maphilindo.
International Journal, 19(2), 155-171.
Thambipillai, P. & S. Jayaratnam (2013), ASEAN Negotiations.
Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Timothy, D.J., (2019). Tourism, border disputes and claims to
territorial sovereignty. In Tourism and hospitality in conflict-ridden
destinations (pp. 25-38). Routledge.
Tyner, J.A., (2017), From rice fields to killing fields: Nature, life, and
labor under the Khmer Rouge. Syracuse University Press.
Yukawa, T., (2018), The ASEAN way as a symbol: An analysis of
discourses on the ASEAN norms. The Pacific Review, 31(3), 298-314.

140

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

SOCIAL INSTABILITY AS A GLOBAL TREND OF THE
MODERN WORLD
Oleg Danilyan,
odana@i.ua
Oleksandr Dzeban**,
a_dzeban@ukr.net
Yurii Kalynovskyi***
kalina_uu@ukr.net
Abstract: The aim of the study is to determine the main indicators of social
instability and forms of its manifestation in the modern world. The elements of
scientific novelty of this work are that the article comprehensively analyzes the
main signs of social instability in global and regional contexts, shows their
essential relationship. The research methodology is based on a complex
combination of philosophical (dialectical, axiological) and general scientific
methods of studying the problem of social instability in the modern world,
including synergetic, comparative and concretization methods. Social turbulence
has resulted from intensifying geopolitical confrontations and “economic wars”
between the world’s leading countries, including the United States and China.
Keywords: social instability, socio-economic inequality, global inequality,
political conflicts, social policy, migration crisis, social security.

Introduction
The beginning of the XXI century is characterized by a number of
crisis phenomena both at the global and regional levels. Social instability
caused by the redistribution of spheres of influence in the world, economic
crises, political confrontation, pandemic has affected almost all countries,
regardless of their level of socio-economic development. It can be stated
that social instability and social turbulence have become trends of our

Doctor of Philosophical Sciences, Head of the Department of
Philosophy, Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
** Doctor of Philosophical Sciences, Professor of the Department of
Philosophy at Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
*** Doctor of Philosophical Sciences, Professor of the Department of
Philosophy at Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

141

time. In such circumstances, states pay special attention to strategic
planning, risk predicting, development of computer and mathematical
models for forecasting possible hazards and means of neutralizing them.
Obviously, countries are forced to develop new algorithms for sustainable
development, considering the ephemerality and riskiness of current
trends. The purpose of our study is to determine the basic characteristics
of social instability and forms of its manifestation in the modern world. To
achieve this goal, we plan to analyze the causes of social instability, the
peculiarities of the manifestation of social instability in the global and local
dimensions, to identify ways to overcome social contradictions and more.
Меthodology
The methodology of the study of social instability is based on a
complex combination of philosophical methods - dialectical, axiological
and general scientific methods - synergetic, comparative and
concretization method. The dialectical method made it possible to identify
the essential characteristics of social instability and to trace the genesis of
this phenomenon. The axiological method became the basis for the
analysis of social instability in the value context. Due to the application of
this method, it was concluded that one of the causes of social conflicts is
the lack of agreement in understanding of values between the ruling elite
and citizens, in particular the idea of justice. The comparative method was
used to compare the forms of social instability in the modern world. The
method of concretization became a continuation of the comparative
method as a basis for considering the features of social instability in
different countries. The epistemological potential of the synergetic method
has found its manifestation for understanding the transition of the social
system from a stable state to an unstable one.
Literature review
To analyze social instability, we relied on a number of scientific works
of general theoretical and applied nature.
In the theoretical and methodological context for the critical analysis
of social processes in the modern world, the ideas contained in the
following scientific works were used: “Crisis of political leadership or
leadership in crisis scenarios?”1 by J. Villasmil Espinoza, D. ArbelaesCampillo, M. Rojas-Bahamon, R. Parra Contreras; “Contributions of

J.J. Villasmil Espinoza, D.F. Arbeláez-Campillo, M.J. Rojas-Bahamón, & R. Parra
Contreras, Crisis del liderazgo político o liderazgo en escenarios de crisis? Revista Notas
Históricas y Geográficas 2021, 26, p. 269-292.
1

142

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

critical thinking as a form of participation and political deliberation”2 by D.
Arbelaes-Campillo,V. Tatsiy, M. Rojas-Bahamon, O. Danilyan; “Notes for
the discussion of the categories of universal citizenship, human rights and
globalization”3 by D. Arbelaes-Campillo, M. Rojas-Bahamon, T. ArbeláezEncarnación and others.
In turn, the scientific works of O. Rudenko 4, O. Litvinenko5 became
the basis for defining the concept of “social instability” and forms of its
manifestation, in particular “quasi-stability”. Based on the scientific
achievements of M. Shevchenko, O. Davydenko6, L. Klevchik7, we
identified the preconditions and main causes of social instability. In turn,
the research of E. Libanova8, V. Opalko9, A. Diton10; Y. Meliakova, I.
Kovalenko, E. Kalnytskyi, H. Kovalenko11 were the basis for considering
social inequality as one of the basic causes of social instability in the world.
For a comprehensive understanding of global inequality, the scientific
works of B. Milanovych12; A. Orsini, J.-F. Morin, O. Young13, as well as
2 D. Arbeláez-Campillo, V. Tatsiy, M. Rojas-Bahamón, & O. Danilyan, Contributions
of critical thinking as a form of participation and political deliberation. Amazonia
Investiga 2020, 9(27), p. 5-12.
3 D.F. Arbeláez-Campillo, M.J. Rojas-Bahamón, & T.F. Arbeláez-Encarnación,
Apuntes para el debate de las categorías ciudadanía universal, derechos humanos y
globalización. Notes for the debate of the categories universal citizenship, human rights
and globalization. Cuestiones Políticas 2019, 34(61), p. 139-161.
4 O. Rudenko, Models-approaches to the analysis of the concept of “social stability”.
Theory and practice of public administration 1, 2009, p. 1-16. URL:
http://www.dridu.dp.ua/vidavnictvo/2009/2009-01(1)/Rudenko.pdf
5 O.V. Lytvynenko, Special information operations and propaganda compaigns
Spetsialni informatsiini operatsii ta propahandystski kampanii (Kyiv: VKF “Satsanta”,
2000).
6 M.M. Shevchenko, O.H. Davydenko, Concept of “socialand political stability”:
semantic range of public management content. Investments: practice and experience
2016, 14, p. 49-54.
7 L. Klevchik, Social inequality as a basis of disproporation in society. Economy and
state 2019, 4, p. 48-51.
8 Inequality in Ukraine: scale and opportunities for influence, za red. E.M.
Libanovoi (Kyiv: Instytut demohrafii ta sotsialnykh doslidzhen imeni M.V. Ptukhy NAN
Ukrainy, 2012).
9 V.V. Opalko, Consequences of socio-economic inequality in terms of global
instability. Proceedings of Cherkasy State Technological University, Series: Economic
Sciences 2018, 51, p. 41-47.
10 A. Diton, The Great Escape. Health, Wealth and the Origin of Inequality. per. s
angl. A. Gus'kova (Moskva: Izd-vo Instituta Gajdara; Fond «Liberal'naja Missija», 2016).
11 Y. Meliakova, I. Kovalenko, E. Kalnytskyi, H. Kovalenko, Performativity and selfexploitation: body significance in late capitalist era. Cogito 2021, 13(4), р. 7-29.
12 B. Milanovich, Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization.
D. Shestakova (Moskva: Izd-vo Instituta Gajdara, 2017).
13 A. Orsini, J-F. Morin, О. Young, Regime Complexes: A Buzz, a Boom, or a Boost
for Global Governance? Global Governance 2013, 19, p. 27-39.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

143

statistics provided by the international organization “Oxfam” 14, which
presents the growth rate of inequality in the world were of particular
importance.
In scientific researches of N. Rimashevskaya, V. Galetskyi, A.
Ovsyannikov15; A. Geddes, E. Guild, J. Van Selm16; O. Malinovska17; D.
Beseda18 the views on the conflict-generating nature of modern migration
processes, which are one of the powerful factors of social instability are
presented.
The issue of political factors of social instability is represented in the
studies of M. Teleshun19, A. Lyasota20 and in a scientific work entitled
“Status and prospects of social security in Ukraine: expert assessements”21.
Also, in the works of domestic authors, the mental and cultural-historical
prerequisites of social instability on the territory of Ukraine are analyzed,
in particular in the study «Historical and cultural-mental origins of legal
consciousness of the Ukrainian people»22.
A separate block of scientific research is devoted to ways and methods
of overcoming social instability, in particular, these are the scientific works

Oxfam Briefing Paper. January, 2017, URL:
https://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/bp-economyfor-99-percent-160117-en.pdf
15 N.M. Rimashevskaja, V.F. Galeckij, A.A. Ovsjannikov.
Population and
globalization (Moskva: Nauka, 2004).
16 A. Geddes, E. Guild, J. Van Selm. Immigration and Welfare State. International
migration and security: opportunities and challenges (London and New York:
Routledge, 2005).
17 O.A. Malynovska, Migration policy: global context and Ukrainian realities,
monograph (Kyiv: NISD, 2018).
18 D. Beseda, Migration crisis in the EU and its impact on the security situation in
Ukraine. Entrepreneurship, economy and law 2018, 12, p. 299-303.
19 S.O. Teleshun, Human resourse management in an unstable institutional
environment. world trends and Ukrainian realities. Bulletin of the National Academy of
Public Administration under the President of Ukraine. Series: Public Administration
2019, 1, p. 60-66.
20 A. Liasota, Main factors of political instability of transition systems from the
position of comparative regionalism. Visnyk of the Lviv University. Series philosophical
and political studies 2018, 19, p. 145-152.
21 Status and prospects of social security in Ukraine: expert assessements,
monograph, O.F. Novikova, O.H. Sydorchuk, O.V. Pankova (Lvivskyi rehionalnyi instytut
derzhavnoho upravlinnia NADU; NAN Ukrainy, Instytut ekonomiky promyslovosti. Kyiv;
Lviv: LRIDU NADU, 2018).
22 O.G. Danilyan, O.P. Dzeban, Y.Y. Kalynovskyi, Y.A. Hetman, Historical and
cultural-mental origins of legal consciousness of the ukrainian people. Revista Notas
Históricas y Geográficas 2022, № 28, p. 346-360.
14

144

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

of N. Dobreeva, E. Borshchuk, T. Koretskaya23; V. Lagutin24; O. Rudenko25
and others.
In the same way, in the review of scientific articles a section for Latin
America is taken into account, in accordance with Rodríguez Pérez 26, et al,
objective is to understand how disinformation negatively affects the
intangible assets (legitimacy, reputation, and trust) of social & political
actors, and institutions. The results highlight that the disinformation
contents’ key drivers were the violence and punishable acts that affected
both social actors and the Public Force, particularly the Esmad and the
police. These contents delegitimized and discredited both the reasons for
the protest and the function of guaranteeing public order and security.
Regarding the disinformation linked to political actors, the leader of the
left-side was the most affected due to inaccurate content that polarized and
proclaimed extreme positions close to subversion. Finally, we discuss the
implications of disinformation and how it affects legitimacy, reputation,
and trust. Moreover, disinformation imitates media outlet aesthetics as a
necessity of a kind of legitimacy and credibility set of news practice in the
eye of the beholder. In the same way, in Chile Godinez & Binder 27, Social
protest takes on new characteristics today, mediated by the use and
appropriation of digital technologies. Citizens make use of devices as a
central part of the mechanics of the protest, incorporating digital strategies
into their repertoire of collective action. One of these uses highlights the
centrality of the new screens for the defense of Human Rights, through the
recording, publication and spreading the abuses of repressive forces and
the montage of fake news through social media. A citizen’s capacity to
watch over the watcher. Due to its duration and characteristics, the case of
the protests that began in October 2019 in Chile is a paradigmatic case
from which to study these transformations. In Brazil and Argentina, the

N.F. Dobrieva, Ye.M. Borshchuk, T.K. Koretska, Conceptual bases for social policy
formation under current conditions of functioning of the economic system of Ukraine.
Efficiency of public administration 2015, 44 (2), p. 73-79.
24 V.D. Lahutin, “Institutional nature of social stability in Ukraine”. Economic
theory and law 1 (32), 2018, p. 23-37.
25 O.M. Rudenko, General stability in the context of public administration. Global
world: scientific almanac 2015, 1 (1), p. 28-32.
26 C. Rodríguez Pérez, L.S. Ortiz Calderón, & J.P. Esquivel Coronado,
Disinformation in Contexts of Social Polarization: Colombia’s National Strike
(November 21st, 2019). Anagramas Rumbos Y Sentidos De La Comunicación 2021,
19(38), p. 129-156.
27 F. Godinez Galay, & I. Binder, Las cámaras que nos pusiste van a volver. Redes
sociales y denuncia de los abusos de las fuerzas de seguridad en las protestas de Chile
2019-2020. Revista De La Asociación Española De Investigación De La Comunicación
2021, 8(15), p. 357-387.
23

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

145

paper by Iglesias28 is located, where he states that he main aim of this
paper is to identify social protests that took place in Brazil and Argentina
during the first 100 days of the Pandemic known as COVID 19 determining
the symbols, slogans, and demands of those who lead the collective action.
The identity perspective of collective action and a collection of qualitative
information allowed to reconstruct its political trajectory and its dynamics.
The argument developed in this paper consists in understanding social
protest from the dynamic of social polarization. In fact, despite differences
in health strategy and presidential leadership styles, the dynamics of social
polarization characteristic of the pre-pandemic era, have persisted in
terms of collective actions.
Results
To fully disclose the problem of social instability, it should be noted
that the social subsystem is part of the social system. A social system is a
type of social system based on social connections and relationships. The
main components of the social system are the relevant areas of society or
administration - conscious, political, economic, social and cultural, which,
in turn, can be defined as social subsystems that constantly interact with
each other29.
Accordingly, social instability is not a separate phenomenon and is
usually caused by crises in economic, political, cultural and other
subsystems of society. That is why in our study the concept of “social
instability” will be understood in a broad sense and interpreted as
synonymous with the concept of “public instability”.
In our opinion, social (or public) instability should be understood as
the imbalance of the basic spheres of society, namely economic, political,
legal, spiritual. Such imbalance or conflict in these areas can be low
(uncritical for the social system), medium (exacerbation of social
contradictions with the possibility of resolving them by institutional and
legal methods) and high (when there is a danger of disintegration of the
social system).
Social instability of different levels can be a permanent state of those
social systems that have a transitive or transformational nature, the
existence of which is under the influence of powerful internal and external
negative factors.
28 E. Iglesias, Social Protest in Brazil and in Argentina during the First 100 days of
COVID 19: the persistence of polarization dynamics. Espacio Abierto: Cuaderno
Venezolano de Socilogia 2020, 29(4), p. 70-84.
29 O. Rudenko, Models-approaches to the analysis of the concept of “social
stability”. Theory and practice of public administration 1 (2009): 3, URL:
http://www.dridu.dp.ua/vidavnictvo/2009/2009-01(1)/Rudenko.pdf

146

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Describing the above-mentioned state of social formations of unstable
type, O. Lytvynenko emphasizes the important fact that under conditions of
prolongation of the state of instability in socio-political systems an
interesting regularity works. The system adapts to the constant change of
the rules of the game, begins to live virtually without rules, more precisely,
according to the rules of changing the rules. This state can be called quasistable. The phenomenon of quasi-stability is that under conditions of rapid
change of the rules of the game at any given time, these rules are stable, i.e.
there is an effect of local stability. Moreover, quasi-stability occurs only
when the rules of the game are stable at one of the possible levels. These
rules may not be universal, informal, unrecognized by the majority, but they
are agreed and followed by the main players. Thus, the basis of quasistability is a certain social consent (consensus), and because of this − a
certain stable base. One can imagine a system that does not have any
generally accepted rules of operation at all, but has a generally accepted
direction of development and a constant rate of change (a stable first
derivative over time). A transitional (post-socialist) society, by the definition
proposed above, is fundamentally unstable or, at best, quasi-stable30.
Continuing the logic of the above researcher, we note that transitional
societies, transformational societies, conflict-generating social systems are
in a state of finding the foundations of stable existence, they can “imitate”
stability or show it only on certain grounds and only for a short time. That
is why, we propose to use such concepts as “quasi-stability”, “sporadic
stability”, “short-term stability”, “relative stability”, “formal stability”,
“actual stability”, etc. to determine the form of social stability (instability).
In general, according to experts, the prerequisites for social instability
are: unstable economy; the split of the political elite in the matter of
establishing the rules of the game; imbalance between the functioning
power structures; lack of harmony in society; the spread of corruption and
other negative phenomena in public authorities31.
As a rule, social instability at the global and local levels is caused by
various manifestations of social inequality, which have deepened in recent
decades.
The basis of social inequality is socio-cultural and resource differences
of individuals (groups) − they structure social reality, forming a structural
matrix of societies and a certain social order. Inequality is a major factor in
30 O.V. Lytvynenko, Special information operations and propaganda compaigns
Spetsialni informatsiini operatsii ta propahandystski kampanii (Kyiv: VKF “Satsanta”,
2000), p. 75.
31 M.M. Shevchenko, O.H. Davydenko, Concept of “socialand political stability”:
semantic range of public management content. Investments: practice and experience
2016, 14, p. 52.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

147

social instability: the higher and more diverse the inequality, the higher
the risks of social tension and social conflict. The degree of inequality and
its social perception largely reflects the civilizational orientations of the
population32.
In a society that seeks to overcome instability, a formal and informal
consensus is gradually formed to agree with certain types of inequality, as
the complete overcoming of all types of inequality (absolute equality) is
impossible and contradicts the competitive nature of social relations. To
overcome social instability, it is important to reduce the social distance
between the “poles of inequality” (the gap between the poor and the rich,
to improve the access of all segments of the population to education,
medicine, social services, etc.).
Undoubtedly, the mentality, historical traditions, economic system,
legal and political culture of the social community become the basis for the
existence of various inequalities that determine social instability now or
may cause it in the future.
E. Libanova proposed a classification of forms of social inequality in
terms of solving problems of human development, which is as follows:
class (differentiation into classes, strata and groups depending on social
status, income level, education, etc.); political inequality (lack of equal
opportunity to influence political decisions at the level of direct
participants in the political process); economic inequality (different levels
of material security, income and their social distribution, meeting needs);
gender (inequality in guaranteeing and realizing fundamental human
rights and freedoms depending on gender); educational (strengthening the
social functions of the institute of education, lack of equal access to
education through its commercialization); environmental (lack of
guarantees of protection against threats of environmental pollution,
environmental disasters, etc.); inequality of health security (lack of
protection against the risks of disease, inequality in the availability of
effective medical care, etc.); cultural inequality (inequality of protection of
cultural development from destructive tendencies); information (media
involvement, lack of objective channels of information transmission,
inequality of access to information)33.
In our opinion, the above-mentioned types of inequality in a single
manifestation and especially in a complex are a specific background for the
formation of various forms of social instability in the modern world.
32 L. Klevchik, Social inequality as a basis of disproporation in society. Economy
and state 2019, 4, p. 49.
33 Inequality in Ukraine: scale and opportunities for influence, za red. E.M.
Libanovoi (Kyiv: Instytut demohrafii ta sotsialnykh doslidzhen imeni M.V. Ptukhy NAN
Ukrainy, 2012), p. 56.

148

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

At the same time, it should be noted that one of the significant causes
of social instability is economic inequality, which becomes the basis for the
emergence of other conflicting factors, including political and legal.
Inequality on the basis of property affects the inequality of living
standards and health, creates discrimination in education and health care,
and so on. It is known that the state of health largely depends on access to
quality food, that is, above all - on the level of income. In the international
context, A. Deaton points out that the redistribution of income from rich to
poor countries can improve the average health of the world’s population,
even if the average income remains unchanged. Inequality increases social
tensions, if the level of inequality is significant, excessive (it is clear that in
different countries the boundary between normal and excessive levels of
inequality is assessed differently), then such social factor as social mobility
helps to reduce income inequality. According to P. Sorokin, there is a socalled “saturation limit”, beyond which society can not move without the
risk of disaster. As society approaches this mark, reforms aimed at
redistributing national income through taxes, changes in the economic and
political spheres or other actions to curb the pernicious trend begin34.
Many socially responsible politicians, scientists, and public figures are
rightly sounding the alarm about the galloping growth of inequality and its
consequences. In 2015, the World Economic Forum’s annual report called
rising income inequality a major challenge for future global development,
a component of the broad, complex problem of inequality of opportunity
that affects an increasing proportion of the population. The dangers of
ignoring the problem of inequality are obvious, the report said. People,
especially young people, excluded from the mainstream, eventually feel
deprived of their civil rights and more prone to conflict. This, in turn,
reduces the sustainability of economic growth, weakens the cohesion and
security of society, produces unequal access to public goods, undermines
our democracies and destroys our hopes for sustainable development and
peaceful societies35.
Socio-economic and political-legal inequality becomes the basis for
social instability when citizens consider such inequality unfair. Conversely,
when certain forms of inequality are considered natural by ordinary
citizens, they will not be the cause of social instability − most citizens
consider such inequality fair and do not want to fight for a new legal order.

34 V.V. Opalko, Consequences of socio-economic inequality in terms of global
instability. Proceedings of Cherkasy State Technological University, Series: Economic
Sciences 2018, 51, p. 44.
35
Outlook on the Global Agenda, (2015, WEF), URL: http://www3.
weforum.org/docs/GAC14/WEF_GAC14_OutlookGlobalAgenda_Report.pdf

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

149

A. Deaton, analyzing the problem of income inequality and its impact
on the economic life of a particular country, notes that the inequality that
exists within the country is in some way related to justice: whether all
citizens receive an acceptable reward for compliance with their
responsibilities, whether they like them or not, pay taxes, obey the law and
follow the policies pursued in the country. Philosopher Ronald Dworkin, in
turn, wrote that the political community, which has taken control of its
citizens and requires them to be trustworthy and abide by the laws in
force, must ensure impartial and objective treatment of all citizens. Of
course, people may have different views on the fairness of income
distribution and the extent to which significant and growing inequality in
the United States is fair in itself. This is a key issue for discussing the
problem of income inequality and ways to solve it within the country36.
Thus, the recognition or non-recognition of various forms of
inequality as fair or unfair is related to the social values, traditions and
social practices of a particular society. Depending on this, social inequality
may or may not become a catalyst for social instability.
Nowadays, the issue of global inequality as an important factor of
social instability is widely presented in the scientific literature.
According to experts, global inequality is not only and not so much
supranational inequality as a symbiosis of asymmetries in the global
dimension that exist in the system of “equality/inequality”; it covers
inequality both between and within countries. In the near future, the
global world expects another large-scale change in income distribution
under the influence of the phenomenon of “dynamic Asia” and especially
economic growth in China, India and Southeast Asia. Modern global
inequality is characterized by a number of new features. We must
emphasize that, for the first time two centuries after the beginning of the
industrial revolution, global inequality is not only determined by growing
differences between countries. Thus, the trend of reducing the income gap
between European and most Asian countries is now clearly visible. At the
same time, the global trend is growing inequality within countries. If the
trend of economic convergence continues, - says Branko Milanovich, − it
will not only reduce global inequality, but also indirectly - it will also
consolidate inequality within the country. In the next 50 years, we may
find ourselves in a situation that existed in the early nineteenth century,
when the lion’s share of global inequality was due to differences in income
between rich and poor Britons, rich and poor Russians, rich and poor
Chinese, rather than the fact that average incomes in the West were higher
A. Diton, The Great Escape. Health, Wealth and the Origin of Inequality, per. s
angl. A. Gus'kova (Moskva: Izd-vo Instituta Gajdara; Fond «Liberal'naja Missija», 2016),
p. 292.
36

150

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

than average incomes in Asia. Such a world will be familiar to all who have
read Karl Marx, and in general to all who are familiar with the classical
European literature of the nineteenth century. But we have not yet
returned to this world. Our world today is a world in which the place of
birth is of great importance, determining, perhaps, up to two-thirds of
income for life. Branko Milanovych calls the advantage of those born in
rich countries the “rent for citizenship”37.
The disproportionate development of the world economy leads to
increased social instability in some regions and countries where the level
of income and social security of the population is extremely low.
According to the international organization “Oxfam” data, inequality
in the world has been growing rapidly in recent years. The 2017 Report
noted that 82% of the wealth created in 2017 was received by only 1% of
the world’s population. The world’s top 42 rich people own the same
wealth as the 3.7 billion poorest people. At the same time, the incomes of
the world’s poorest people have not increased. The billionaire boom is not
a sign of prosperity, but a symptom of the weakening of economic system,
says Oxfam International CEO Winnie Bianima. The available statistics
show a reduction in the number of super-rich billionaires in the world, an
increase in their wealth and a share of their income as a percentage of
GDP. For comparison, back in 2010, the wealth, which was owned by the
upper half of humanity, was concentrated in the hands of 388 people, and
in 2015 the same wealth was owned by 62 people, in 2017 by 42 people 38.
The next conflict-causing factor that causes social instability is the gap
between incomes and social prospects of agrarian and technologically
developed countries, between rural and urban residents, between certain
segments of the population.
In particular, in many countries of the world there is a gap in income
and quality of life between the rural and urban population, employed
mainly in industry (the so-called “dualism of the economy”). This
phenomenon is mainly characteristic of resource-intensive, rapidly
developing countries and transition economies. For example, China has
been actively supporting the development of industry for three decades,
while agriculture with its archaic means of production has lagged far
behind. J. Studwell notes that despite the reform of the agricultural sector,
including in terms of fiscal policy, the incomes of rural residents differ
from the incomes of citizens three times, although the growth rate of the
37 B. Milanovich, Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization,
per. s angl. D. Shestakova (Moskva: Izd-vo Instituta Gajdara, 2017), p. 18-19.
38 OXFAM BRIEFING PAPER. JANUARY, 2017, URL:
https://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/bp-economyfor-99-percent-160117-en.pdf

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

151

gap and was possible to restrain somehow. The main reason for this
situation is the lack of Chinese farmers’ right to land and the arbitrariness
of local authorities, which seize land plots for sale to foreign holdings. A
similar problem exists in Ukraine: large agricultural holdings are pushing
smaller farms out of the market, exacerbating poverty in villages. At the
same time, the number of so-called “personal peasant farms”, which are
deprived of state support, do not have sufficient working capital for
effective economic activity, do not receive those social benefits, including
educational, medical, household services that are available to urban
residents. Rural underdevelopment is a significant extractive institution of
economic development of the country, as it polarizes society in terms of
welfare and hinders the restructuring of the national economy in
accordance with the requirements of the information society39.
Obviously, the low socio-economic potential of certain segments of the
population and social groups is the cause of growing social turbulence in
the modern world. Dissatisfied with their socio-economic status and legal
status, citizens are prone to social protests, illegal actions, and, in extreme
cases, terrorist acts. At the same time, they are potential migrants to more
prosperous countries, which creates a number of problems with the
regulation of migration flows, the adaptation of migrants to new
conditions. Undoubtedly, the increase in the number of migrants in the
world in recent years is an influential factor in increasing social instability.
According to experts, the reasons for the increase in international
migration, as well as changes in their essential characteristics, are
primarily the result of globalization. Removing obstacles to free trade,
increasing political, economic and social interdependence between states,
manifested in the formation of transnational business and the
international labour market, internationalization of science, education,
information, unprecedented development of communications, were crucial
for the dynamics and volume of migration. In the context of globalization,
international migration acts both as a provocative moment and as a result
of global change40.
The intensification of migration processes in the context of our study
may be both a consequence of social instability and its cause. Illegal
migration is a particular threat to the social stability of states.
Researchers A. Geddes, E. Guild, J. van Selm emphasize the ambivalent
nature of migration: on the one hand, it carries an additional burden on all
39 V. Adamyk, Socio-economic inequality in the national and global spotlight: a
contemporary view on the issue. Bulletin of Ternopil National Economic University 2019,
1, p. 108.
40 N.M. Rimashevskaja, V.F. Galeckij, A.A. Ovsjannikov, Population and
globalization (Moskva: Nauka, 2004), p. 278.

152

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

subsystems of society, and on the other, it strengthens the human potential of
the country. In particular, they emphasize that the dangers of migration are
primarily recorded in host societies, which is generally paradoxical, because
immigrants replenish their human and intellectual resources, i.e. the main
factors of production, which enhance economic security. Nevertheless, the
population sometimes has a negative attitude towards migration because of
its cost, i.e. an additional burden on the social assistance system, which is
often used by migrants, increasing the burden on education, transport and
housing. However, as a result, migrants cover these costs and generate
additional income for the host country41.
In the context of the impact of migration on social security, the
associated criminal and terrorist threats are of particular concern. The first
concerns both the increase in street crime, especially in areas populated by
immigrants, and the large-scale phenomenon of transnational organized
crime involved in smuggling and trafficking in human beings. According to
a number of studies, the crime rate in cities correlates with the share of
foreigners living in them. As of September 2009, in Switzerland 69.7% of
prisoners were foreigners (4 thousand people), in Austria − 43.6% (3.6
thousand), in Italy − 37.1% (21.7 thousand), in Germany − 26.3% (19.3
thousand), in France − 19.2% (11.4 thousand), in Great Britain − 13.6%
(11.4 thousand). At the same time, it is worth paying attention to the
characteristics of crimes committed by foreigners. Mostly, these are
violations of migration laws that do not belong to serious crimes. On the
other hand, migrants more often than the local population appear in
criminal statistics not only as criminals but also as victims: up to six times
more often, but in fact even more, because due to the legal and social
situation and the attitude of law enforcement towards migrants the
significant part of crimes against migrants are not reported (according to
European researchers, from 57 to 74% of cases). High rates of crime
against migrants are partly due to their concentration in disadvantaged
areas. This is partly the result of negative phenomena that often
accompany modern migration, such as discrimination, human rights
violations, overexploitation, human trafficking42.
For comparison with previous data, we present statistics and expert
assessment of experts in recent years. As it is known, the peak of migration
flows to Europe, primarily related to the war in Syria, falls on the years
2015-2016. In this regard, experts say that the increase in migration flows
to EU countries in recent years has led to an increase in crime. Thus,
41 A. Geddes, E. Guild, J. Van Selm, Immigration and Welfare State. International
migration and security: opportunities and challenges (London and New York:
Routledge, 2005), p. 161.
42 Malynovska, O.A., Migration policy: global context and Ukrainian realities,
monograph (Kyiv: NISD, 2018), p. 58.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

153

according to the statistics of the Federal Republic of Germany, this growth
is 10.4% for the period from 2015 to 2016. In contrast to previous years, in
2017 the policy in this area became stricter: instead of silencing this
problem, law enforcement agencies are actively identifying and
prosecuting those involved, reports are published in the media indicating
the countries of origin of detainees43.
In addition to the above factors of social turbulence, a significant
factor causing social instability is political confrontation, especially with
the use of manipulative technologies that can incite the population to
destructive actions.
According to N. Teleshun, in any society there are conflicts of interest of
political actors, when each of them seeks to impose the own discourse, to
make it dominant in order to change the social, group and individual
consciousness. However, modern information and communication
technologies make it possible to transfer this confrontation to another level
of intensity, scale and efficiency. Constructing the meaning of information is
done by programming to support the position of the author. The
constructions and meanings that are laid down by the author in the text of
messages and allow to make it a mental technology of influencing the
human mind in order to program certain behaviour, they become the main.
Manipulation technology in itself is not “good” or “bad”. Determinant is the
hidden meaning that is embedded in the message and provokes real action.
When manipulating the mass consciousness, complex psychologicallinguistic, political, cybernetic and other mechanisms of multilevel influence
are usually used. The main task of these mechanisms is: to disable the
“ratio” (reduce critical thinking), to cause systemic fear and aggression
(create a threat), to mobilize citizens around someone or something to solve
the problem (offer a way out), to create an environment of circular
guarantee or social dependence (fear of public criticism) and use the state of
the “Stockholm syndrome” of the hostage as a means of mass support for
the implementation of a particular political course or action44.
It is obvious that the level of social instability can be provoked
artificially by individual political forces with the use of manipulative
technologies and to achieve their own interests, rather than public ones.
Also, the political aspects of social instability are manifested at the
international level.
43 D. Beseda, Migration crisis in the EU and its impact on the security situation in
Ukraine. Entrepreneurship, economy and law 2018, 12, p. 300.
44 S.O. Teleshun, Human resourse management in an unstable institutional
environment. world trends and Ukrainian realities. Bulletin of the National Academy of
Public Administration under the President of Ukraine. Series: Public Administration
2019, 1, p. 62.

154

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

In general, political and managerial crises, shaky positions of
democratic forces, low level of political and legal culture of citizens, etc.
have become the causes of social instability in different regions of the
world. Thus, political instability in the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin
America is explained by the expansion of formal political equality in the
absence of actual institutional mechanisms for their implementation.
Economic and social transformations (increasing literacy and education
levels, urbanization and industrialization, expanding the field of media)
contribute to social integration; raising socio-political consciousness;
increasing social, economic and political demands, which leads to the
expansion of participants in the political process. These transformational
processes weaken traditional social and political institutions. If the process
of democratic transition is not gradual, not evolutionary, but because of
revolutionary upheavals, then there is a short-term dismantling of
traditional institutions (in the absence of the prospect of constructing a
new effective institutional architecture). Increasing socio-political activity,
which is not congruent with the development of political organization,
leads to political instability. In the process of transformation of hybrid or
authoritarian political regimes, the implemented strategies of economic
development can in some way amortize the factors of instability of the
political regime. In other cases, economic programs that fundamentally
disrupt the economic life of the country (so-called “shock therapy”) can
lead to a socio-economic crisis and a crisis of political, social division,
polarization of society. In India in the 50s of the twentieth century there
was a very low rate of socio-economic development. However, the effective
operation of the Indian National Congress contributed to the achievement
of an optimal level of political stability. In Venezuela and Argentina, the
pace of socio-economic modernization rated higher than in India, but the
political leadership of these countries failed to achieve political stability in
their own countries. The political regimes of South Korea and Vietnam,
Argentina, Syria, and Indonesia were openly autocratic, so despite the
institution of elections, they failed to ensure political stability45.
Thus, the significant causes of social instability are socio-economic
and political crises, failed attempts to reform the political, legal and
economic systems, asynchrony of political and economic transformations,
destructive external influence on social processes in a certain state.
Considering Ukraine as an example, experts identified a number of
reasons that determine social instability and threaten the country’s social
security: indifference of government officials to the social needs of the
A. Liasota, Main factors of political instability of transition systems from the
position of comparative regionalism. Visnyk of the Lviv University. Series philosophical
and political studies 2018, 19, p. 146.
45

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

155

population, lack of balanced interests between government and society;
low level of economic development of the country; rising unemployment
and poverty in the country; growing level of distrust in society, low level of
tolerance and social responsibility; military action in eastern Ukraine,
annexation of Crimea; weakness of the national elite; weakness of civil
society; growth of social and property stratification; low legal literacy of
the population; outflow of human resources outside the country; high
conflict potential of society; loss of labour value and employee’s value;
uncertainty of social policy strategies in the conditions of decentralization;
non-regulation of duties and lack of responsibility of national security
entities; moral and spiritual degradation of society; underdeveloped social
partnership; inefficiency of the state demographic policy46.
An analysis of the scientific literature and empirical data has shown
that a number of the above causes of social instability are typical of
countries in a state of social transformation.
For the states trying to overcome social turbulence, the problem of
finding ways out of the crisis is extremely important.
From the point of view of Ukrainian researchers, the strategy of
economic development should create the necessary preconditions for
solving the most complex and pressing problems of social policy. The main
tasks of social policy in this context are: targeted support of socially
vulnerable groups; pension reform; ensuring advanced growth of labour
costs; orientation of the strategy of economic growth on the creation of
new jobs; accelerated development of housing construction, ensuring the
availability of housing for different segments of the population; improving
the health care system, active demographic policy; increasing the
intellectual potential of society, creating equal opportunities for young
people in obtaining quality education; strengthening the position of the
middle class; eradication of poverty and ensuring dynamic growth of living
standards; socialization of structural components of economic policy
(investment, price, budget, monetary, tax, etc.); ensuring the conditions
for the implementation of social rights and guarantees of the population,
as defined by constitutional norms; ensuring social stability and social
security in the country47.
To overcome the crisis in society, it is necessary to take care not only
of the socio-economic sphere, but also of the spiritual, which is based on a
46 Status and prospects of social security in Ukraine: expert assessements,
monograph, O.F. Novikova, O.H. Sydorchuk, O.V. Pankova (Lvivskyi rehionalnyi instytut
derzhavnoho upravlinnia Nadu; Nan Ukrainy, Instytut ekonomiky promyslovosti. Kyiv;
Lviv: Lridu Nadu, 2018), p. 32.
47 N.F. Dobrieva, Ye.M. Borshchuk, T.K. Koretska, Conceptual bases for social policy
formation under current conditions of functioning of the economic system of Ukraine.
Efficiency of public administration 2015, 44 (2), p. 78.

156

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

system of values. It is the dominant social values that determine the nature
of citizens’ behaviour, their attitude to certain social processes and
phenomena.
According to V. Lagutin, in modern Ukraine it is necessary to form
new values that can ensure social stability and development. So far,
European values (freedom, humanism, equality, solidarity, honesty,
dignity of all people, responsibility, fair justice) have not fully matured in
the Ukrainian public consciousness. The revolutionary-accelerated
transition to a new system of values in these conditions will not give the
necessary results, but will only increase resistance to any ethical
influences. The morality of society in these conditions can only decrease48.
It should be noted that in societies that are being transformed, values
can be understood hypertrophied, in particular, freedom to be perceived as
permissiveness, equality and solidarity as a remnant of totalitarianism. In
this case, value ambivalence or immaturity can be the cause of social
instability. Since a person making the choice seeks to fulfill the desires that
come into conflict, the inability to do so is subjectively felt by them as a
violation of his or her freedom, which can lead to social conflict 49.
An important component of overcoming social instability is effective
(professional) governance at all levels: from state to local government.
O. Rudenko quite rightly states that in the conditions of a transitive
society the importance of the correctly chosen model of management
especially increases. The basis of public administration should be
consensus (ensuring the sustainable development of all subsystems of
society on the basis of a common system of values for all subjects of social
governance while maintaining a level of sufficient diversity), reflexive
(influence on the system of goals, values and norms on the basis of
building the structure of management and creating an adequate object,
which provides for reflection of the system-forming mechanisms of the
management process) and synergetic (effective combination of selforganization mechanisms and mechanisms of public administration to
ensure social stability which contributes to intellectual and innovative selforganization of society) management. In fact, public administration
acquires the character of a guide, i.e. it supports effective directions of
development and directs its efforts to prevent instability and crises.
Management is not a way to achieve a certain goal, but determines the
mechanisms for implementing the selected scenario of society by
48 V.D. Lahutin, Institutional nature of social stability in Ukraine. Economic theory
and law 1 (32), 2018, p. 30.
49 O.G. Danilyan, A.P. Dzeban, Y.Y. Kalinovsky, E.A. Kalnytskyi, S.B. Zhdanenko,
Personal information rights and freedoms within the modern society. Informatologia
2018, 51 (1-2), p. 28.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

157

neutralizing the violation of resilience and, thus, is a way to direct the
processes of self-organization in the desired direction of development50.
In our opinion, in the conditions of social turbulence, the subjects of
public administration should strengthen cooperation with scientific
institutions, pay more attention to forecasting social processes to prevent
(minimize) various crises.
Conclusions
Social instability in modern conditions has both global and local
character. It is caused, first of all, by uneven economic development of
separate regions and countries, which creates a global imbalance in the
distribution of various resources. Conflicts determined by socio-economic
inequality of countries and regions provoke political, geopolitical and
financial crises in individual states. Globalization in its current form is in
favour of the so-called “golden billion” and creates a basis for social
protests, increased migration flows and intensification of the antiglobalization movement. The pandemic has had a negative impact on
social processes in recent years.
Social instability also arises as a result of political crises, ineffective
reforms and imbalances in the systems of government. Social turbulence
can be provoked artificially by separate political forces, which, using chaos
in society, try to come to power, to achieve their narrow party goals by
such provocative methods.
Thus, at the present stage of global intensification of social instability
there is an urgent need to review the foundations of social policy in
individual states, increase efficiency in public administration, create a
system for predicting social cataclysms at all levels of human existence.
References
Adamyk, V., (2019), Socio-economic inequality in the national and
global spotlight: a contemporary view on the issue. Bulletin of Ternopil
National Economic University 1, 102-116.
Arbeláez-Campillo, D., Tatsiy, V., Rojas-Bahamón, M., & Danilyan, O.,
(2020), Contributions of critical thinking as a form of participation
andpolitical deliberation. Amazonia Investiga 9(27), 5-12.
Arbeláez-Campillo, D.F., Rojas-Bahamón, M.J., & ArbeláezEncarnación, T.F., (2019), Apuntes para el debate de las categorías
ciudadanía universal, derechos humanos y globalización. Notes for the
O.M. Rudenko, General stability in the context of public administration. Global
world: scientific almanac 2015, 1 (1), p. 29-30.
50

158

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

debate of the categories universal citizenship, human rights and
globalization. Cuestiones Políticas 34(61), 139-161.
Beseda, D., (2018), Migration crisis in the EU and its impact on the
security situation in Ukraine Entrepreneurship, economy and law 12,
299-303.
Danilyan, O.G., Dzeban, A.P., Kalinovsky, Y.Y., Kalnytskyi, E.A.,
Zhdanenko, S.B., (2018), Personal information rights and freedoms
within the modern society. Informatologia 51 (1-2), 24-33.
Danilyan, O.G., Dzeban, O.P., Kalynovskyi, Y.Y., Hetman, Y.A.,
(2022), Historical and cultural-mental origins of legal consciousness of
the ukrainian people. Revista Notas Históricas y Geográficas 28, 346-360.
Diton, A., (2016), The Great Escape. Health, Wealth and the Origin of
Inequality. Per. s angl. A. Gus'kova. Moskva: Izd-vo Instituta Gajdara;
Fond «Liberal'naja Missija».
Dobrieva, N.F., Borshchuk, Ye.M., Koretska, T.K., (2015), Conceptual
bases for social policy formation under current conditions of functioning
of the economic system of Ukraine. Efficiency of public administration 44
(2), 73-79.
Geddes, A., Guild, E., Van Selm, J., (2005), Immigration and Welfare
State. International migration and security: opportunities and
challenges. London and New York: Routledge.
Godinez Galay, F., & Binder, I., (2021), Las cámaras que nos pusiste
van a volver. Redes sociales y denuncia de los abusos de las fuerzas de
seguridad en las protestas de Chile 2019-2020. Revista De La Asociación
Española De Investigación De La Comunicación 8(15), 357-387.
https://doi.org/10.24137/raeic.8.15.16
Iglesias, E., (2020), Social Protest in Brazil and in Argentina during
the First 100 days of COVID 19: the persistence of polarization dynamics.
Espacio Abierto: Cuaderno Venezolano de Socilogia 29(4), 70-84.
Inequality in Ukraine: scale and opportunities for influence. (2012),
Za red. E.M. Libanovoi. Kyiv: Instytut demohrafii ta sotsialnykh
doslidzhen imeni M.V. Ptukhy NAN Ukrainy.
Klevchik, L., (2019), Social inequality as a basis of disproporation in
society. Economy and state 4, 48-51.
Lahutin, V.D., (2018), Institutional nature of social stability in
Ukraine. Economic theory and law 1 (32), 23-37.
Liasota, A., (2018), Main factors of political instability of transition
systems from the position of comparative regionalism. Visnyk of the Lviv
University. Series philosophical and political studies 19, 145-152.
Lytvynenko, O.V., (2000), Special information operations and
propaganda compaigns Spetsialni informatsiini operatsii ta
propahandystski kampanii. Kyiv: VKF "Satsanta".

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

159

Malynovska, O.A., (2018), Migration policy: global context and
Ukrainian realities. monograph. Kyiv: NISD.
Meliakova, Y., Kovalenko, I., Kalnytskyi, E., Kovalenko, H., (2022),
Performativity and self-exploitation: body significance in late capitalist
era. Cogito 13(4), 7-29.
Milanovich, B., (2017), Global Inequality: A New Approach for the
Age of Globalization/ per. s angl. D. Shestakova. Moskva: Izd-vo Instituta
Gajdara.
Morin, J-F., Orsini, A., (2014), Policy coherency and regime
complexes: the case of genetic resources. Review of International Studies
40 (2), 303-324.
Opalko, V.V., (2018), Consequences of socio-economic inequality in
terms of global instability. Proceedings of Cherkasy State Technological
University. Series: Economic Sciences 51, 41-47.
Orsini, A., Morin, J-F., Young, О., (2013), Regime Complexes: A
Buzz, a Boom, or a Boost for Global Governance? Global Governance 19,
27-39.
Outlook on the Global Agenda, (2015), WEF. URL: http://www3.
weforum.org/docs/GAC14/WEF_GAC14_OutlookGlobalAgenda_Report.p
df
Oxfam Briefing Paper. January, (2017), URL:
https://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/
bp-economy-for-99-percent-160117-en.pdf
Rimashevskaja, N.M., Galeckij, V.F., Ovsjannikov, A.A., (2004),
Population and globalization. Moskva: Nauka.
Rodríguez Pérez, C., Ortiz Calderón, L.S., & Esquivel Coronado, J.P.,
(2021), Disinformation in Contexts of Social Polarization: Colombia’s
National Strike (November 21st, 2019). Anagramas Rumbos Y Sentidos
De La Comunicación 19(38), 129-156. URL:
https://doi.org/10.22395/angr.v19n38a7
Rudenko, O., (2009), Models-approaches to the analysis of the concept
of “social stability”. Theory and practice of public administration 1, 1-16.
URL: http://www.dridu.dp.ua/vidavnictvo/2009/2009-01(1)/Rudenko.pdf
Rudenko, O.M., (2015), General stability in the context of public
administration. Global world: scientific almanac 1 (1), 28-32.
Shevchenko, M.M., Davydenko, O.H., (2016), Concept of “socialand
political stability”: semantic range of public management content.
Investments: practice and experience 14, 49-54.
Status and prospects of social security in Ukraine: expert
assessements. Monograph, (2018), O.F. Novikova, O.H. Sydorchuk, O.V.
Pankova [ta in.] / Lvivskyi rehionalnyi instytut derzhavnoho upravlinnia

160

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

NADU; NAN Ukrainy, Instytut ekonomiky promyslovosti. Kyiv; Lviv:
LRIDU NADU.
Teleshun, S.O., (2019), Human resourse management in an unstable
institutional environment. world trends and Ukrainian realities. Bulletin
of the National Academy of Public Administration under the President of
Ukraine. Series: Public Administration 1, 60-66.
Villasmil Espinoza, J.J., Arbeláez-Campillo, D.F., Rojas-Bahamón,
M.J. & Parra Contreras, R., (2021), Crisis del liderazgo político o liderazgo
en escenarios de crisis? Revista Notas Históricas y Geográficas 26, 269292.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

161

FACTORS DETERMINING THE WILLINGNESS TO
PAY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY OF
SONE BEEL, ASSAM, INDIA
Kanchan Baran Singha,
bmssak@gmail.com
N.B. Singh,
nbsingh.597@gmail.com
K. Gyanendra Singh
gyanendra.hss@nitmz.ac.in
Abstract: The objectives of this study are to estimate the willingness to
pay (WTP) for the conservation of biodiversity of Sone Beel, the largest wetland
of Assam in India and to determine the factors affecting respondents WTP for
conservation. A binary logistic regression model is used to determine the factors
affecting respondents WTP. The model is well specified with a Likelihood Ratio
Chi-square of 187.50 with a p-value of 0.0000 and McFadden's pseudo-Rsquared is 0.3850 which indicates that the model is a very good model. The
study findings indicate that more than half (70.25%) of the respondents were
WTP for the conservation of Sone Beel. In this study, although biodiversity
threat is strongly significantly affecting respondent’s WTP for conservation
biodiversity of Sone Beel, other factors such as distance, marital status,
educational level, religion, household size, monthly household income, and
father’s occupation are also significant. The most significant conclusion of the
study is that it establishes that people are actually willing to pay an amount,
however small, to assist the conservation of Sone Beel. Further, in this study, it
is observed that those people who use the wetland are more willing to
participate.
Keywords: Sone Beel, Biodiversity, Contingent Valuation method,
Willingness to pay, Binary logistic regression model.



Research Scholar, Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
National Institute of Technology Silchar, Assam, India.

Associate Professor, Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
National Institute of Technology Silchar, Assam, India.

Associate Professor (Economics), National Institute of Technology
Mizoram, Mizoram, India.

162

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Introduction
Wetlands are considered as one of the richest and most productive
ecosystems on earth1. Wetlands provide economically valuable products
and services to the people living in and around it2. Regardless of these
significant contributions, wetlands are threatened globally with worldwide
declines in their area by 64% from 1978 to 20113. This trend influences the
biodiversity of wetlands and it has been observed with grave concern that
the rate of biodiversity loss is more significant4. So, wetlands are
considered as one of the maximum unexpectedly degrading ecosystems on
earth5. Even though the surrounding peoples get benefits from the
ecosystem services of wetlands for their sustainable livelihood, they use
them in such a way that wetlands are wastelands. The prime fact is that the
ignorance and misunderstanding of the importance of the values of
wetlands often end in the degradation and loss of wetlands6. Wetland loss
refers to the physical loss in the spatial extent or the loss within the
wetland functions. If the biodiversity of wetlands is going to be successfully
conserved for the benefit of people, then its values must be incorporated
into the decision-making7. Important for the conservation of wetlands is an

E.B. Barbier, M.C. Acreman, & D. Knowler, Economic valuation of wetlands: A
guide for policymakers and planners, 1997, Ramsar Convention Bureau, Gland,
Switzerland, p. 3.
2 K., Schuyt, & L. Brander, Living Waters Conserving the source of life, The
economic values of the world’s wetlands, Prepared with support from Swiss Agency for
the Environment, Forest and Landscape (SAEFL), 2004, World Wide Fund for Nature
(WWF), Gland, Switzerland. 10p.
3 R.J. Scholes, L. Montanarella, E. Brainich, E. Brainich, N. Barger, B. Ten Brink, M.
Cantele, B. Erasmus, J. Fisher, T. Gardner, T. G. Holland, F. Kohler, S. Kotiaho, G. Von
Maltitz, G. Nangendo, R. Pandit, J. Parrotta, M. D. Potts, S. Prince, ... L., (eds.), (2018),
IPBES (2018): Summary for policymakers of the assessment report on land degradation
and restoration of the Intergovernmental Science- Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services, Bonn, Germany, 82p.
4 T.P. Moorhouse, & D.W. Macdonald, Are invasives worse in freshwater than
terrestrial ecosystems? WIREs Water, 2014, Vol.2, No. 1, pp.1–8.
5 Nick C. Davidson, How much wetland has the world lost? Long-term and recent
trends in global wetland area, Marine and Freshwater Research, 2014, Vol. 65, No. 10,
pp. 934–941.
6 E.B. Barbier, M.C. Acreman, & D. Knowler, Economic valuation of wetlands: A
guide for policymakers and planners, 1997, Ramsar Convention Bureau, Gland,
Switzerland, p. 4.
7 S. Díaz, J. Settele, E.S. Brondízio E.S., H.T. Ngo, M. Guèze, J. Agard, A. Arneth, P.
Balvanera, K.A. Brauman, S.H.M. Butchart, K.M.A. Chan, L.A. Garibaldi, K. Ichii, J. Liu,
S.M. Subramanian, G.F. Midgley, P. Miloslavich, Z. Molnár, D. Obura, A. Pfaff, S. Polasky,
A. Purvis, J. Razzaque, B. Reyers, R. Roy Chowdhury, Y.J. Shin, I.J. Visseren-Hamakers,
K.J. Willis, and C.N. Zayas (eds.),(2018), IPBES (2019): Summary for policymakers of the
global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental
1

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

163

appreciation by the population of the social value of wetlands. This social
valuation is normally conducted by non-market valuation techniques
major among them being contingent valuation8.
According to the Directory of Asian Wetlands (1989), in India,
wetlands occupy 18.4% of the country’s area (excluding rivers), of which
70% are under paddy cultivation9. Wetlands in India, as somewhere else
are in increasing number facing several anthropogenic pressures. Hence,
the rapidly expanding human population, large-scale changes in land use
or land cover, burgeoning development projects, and improper use of
watersheds have all brought about a large decline in wetland resources in
the country. The current rate of loss of wetlands in India can lead to
serious consequences where 74% of the human population is rural 10 and a
lot of these people are natural resource-dependent. Most problems bearing
on Indian wetlands are related to the human population11. The loss of one
km2 of wetlands in India may have a far extra impact than the loss of one
km2 of wetlands in low population areas of considerable wetlands 12. The
loss of wetlands is an economic problem because, with the loss or damage
of this, the important values of wetlands are also lost. In this regard, it has
been noted that a significant step in determining what has to be done to
the environmental damage is to value it (in economic terms), and compare
it with the cost of preventing the damage and conserving it13.
In India, only 25 wetlands have been designated as Ramsar Sites.
However, many other wetlands, which perform potentially valuable
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem ServicesIPBES secretariat, Bonn,
Germany.
8 C.A. Pemberton, & K. Mader-Charles, Factors Determining Willingness to Pay for
Wetland Conservation: The Case of the Nariva Swamp in Trinidad and Tobago, 25th
Conference Proceedings—Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environmental Challenges
under Emerging Trading Regimes, 2004, Caribbean Agro-Economic Society (CAES),
Suriname, pp. 111-121.
9 Task Force on Islands, Coral Reefs, Mangroves & wetlands in Environment &
Forests, India. Report of the Task Force on Islands, Coral Reefs, Mangroves & wetlands
in Environment & Forests for the Eleventh Five Year Plan 2007-2012, 2007, Government
of India Planning Commission, New Delhi.
10 World Bank, World Development Report, Infrastructure for Development.1994,
Oxford University Press, New York.
11 S.N. Prasad, T.V. Ramacandara, N. Aalya, T. Senupta, A. Kumar, A.K. Tiwari, V.S.
Vijayan, & L. Vijayan, Wetland conservation in India: A review, Tropical Ecology, 2002,
Vol. 43, No. 1, pp.173-186.
12 A. Lee Foote, Sanjeeva Pandey, & N. T. Krogman, Processes of wetland loss in India,
Environmental Conservation, 1996, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 45-54.
13 A.S. Binilkumar, & A. Ramanathan, Valuing stakeholder preferences on improved
conservation and management of Kol wetland: A contingent valuation study, 11th
BIOECON Conference on Economic Instruments to Enhance the Conservation and
Sustainable Use of Biodiversity, 2009, Venice, Italy, 27 p.

164

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

functions are continued to be ignored in the policy process. As a result,
many freshwater wetland ecosystems are threatened and many are already
degraded and lost because of urbanization, population growth, and
increased economic activities14. In India, many researchers had worked on
the economic valuation of wetlands and estimated both the non-use and use
values of the wetlands. Verma (2001) calculated the economic values of the
Bhoj wetland only for direct uses. Mamatha (2009) studied Kollure Lake in
Andhra Pradesh for its valuation of ecosystem services. The choice of the
type of economic valuation process varies depending on the kinds of
services, availability of resources, location of interest, time, objectives of the
study, and methods of collecting data15. In Assam, Dutta & Sharma (2020)
have conducted a study on the valuation of fishing activity of Deepor Beel
wetland, a Ramsar site, and concluded that the wetland is under continual
deterioration because of the negligence of its conservation and maintenance.
In most cases, the direct uses of marketed products of ecosystems are less
complicated to quantify since market products exist and their costs can be
adjusted for distortions. The motive of economic valuation is to elicit the
actual prices of the usage of scarce environmental assets16.
The north-eastern region (NER) of India is distinctly concentrated
with the natural inland wetlands with significant economic value in
providing sustainable livelihood for the surrounding people. There are
altogether 18875 numbers of wetlands in NER of India occupying
1,066,777 hectares of land17. Of these, three wetlands, namely, Deepor Beel
of Assam, Loktak Lake of Manipur, and Rudra Sagar of Tripura, are
designated as Ramsar sites. In NER, Assam has the highest number of
wetlands (11178) occupying 764,372 hectares of land.
The earlier studies are conducted on the most significant wetlands in
India as well as in Assam which is enlisted in the Ramsar site. But many
equally important wetlands have remained out of the study. The National
Wetlands Conservation Programme enlists 115 wetlands as having critical
importance. Sone Beel is one of these. In Assam, Sone Beel is considered as
the lifeline of the people of South Assam. It is the largest freshwater wetland
14 N. Bassi, M.D. Kumar, A. Sharma, & P. Parth-Saradhi, Status of wetlands in India:
A review of extent, ecosystem benefits, threats, and management strategies, Journal of
Hydrology: Regional Studies, 2014, Vol. 2, pp.1-19.
15 Research Program on Water, Land, and Ecosystems, (2016), Nile Ecosystems
Valuation for Wise Use, Working Paper No. 6: Application of the economic methods and
tools for ecosystems valuation on the selected case studies ad developing tradeoff
scenarios, NBCBN-RE, Cairo, Egypt, 23 p.
16. V. Ramachandra, R. Rajinikanth, & V.G. Ranjini, Economic valuation of wetlands,
Journal of Environmental Biology, 2005, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp.439-447.
17 National Wetland Atlas, (2011), SAC/EPSA/ABHG/NWIA/ATLAS/34/2011, Space
Applications Centre (ISRO), Ahmedabad, India, p.52.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

165

in Assam18. Fishing, agriculture, water transportation, and tourism are
considered economically important resources as the people surrounding the
wetland directly or indirectly depend upon the wetland for their livelihood.
But the recent condition of the Sone Beel is not in good shape. The entire area
has been silted up and reclaimed to a great extent. Winter paddy is widely
grown, and that again has threatened the wetland by accelerating reclamation
and siltation. Excessive fishing activities disturb the wetland biodiversity19.
Being the second-largest freshwater wetland in Asia, Sone Beel is attracting
attention from stakeholders and policymakers for the conservation and
sustainable use of the wetland for continuous benefits. But negligence has
resulted in continuous degradation of it.
Few studies have been undertaken in India as well as in the world
using Contingent Valuation Method (CVM) to determine the factors
affecting WTP for the conservation of the wetlands. The factors affecting
WTP differ from country to country, region to region, and wetland to
wetland based on the socio-economic status of the stakeholders and the
level of environmental awareness. The factors affecting WTP for
conservation of Sone Beel in North East of India are not yet seriously
addressed. Further there is no evidence of previous studies which have
determined the factors affecting WTP for the conservation of Sone Beel.
Thus, there exists a research gap for the evaluation of Son Beel using CVM
and to determine the factors that affect WTP and their impacts. This study
is important in view of the fact that the identification of expertise of the
elements in figuring out WTP can be used to correctly layout surveys to
achieve unbiased estimates of the WTP20.
With the above background, the present paper makes a maiden
attempt to determine the factors affecting an individual’s WTP for the
conservation of Sone Beel using CVM.
Study Area
Sone Beel is in the Karimganj district of Assam in India. It is the
largest freshwater wetland in Assam and is located between 24 040′00″
National Wetland Atlas: Assam, (2010),
SAC/RESA/AFEG/NWIA/ATLAS/18/2010, Space Applications Centre, (ISRO),
Ahmedabad, India, p. 142.
19 National Wetland Atlas: Assam, (2010),
SAC/RESA/AFEG/NWIA/ATLAS/18/2010, Space Applications Centre, (ISRO),
Ahmedabad, India, p. 142.
20 C.A. Pemberton, & K. Mader-Charles, Factors Determining Willingness to Pay for
Wetland Conservation: The Case of the Nariva Swamp in Trinidad and Tobago, 25th
Conference Proceedings—Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environmental Challenges
under Emerging Trading Regimes, 2004, Caribbean Agro-Economic Society (CAES),
Suriname, pp. 114-118.
18

166

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

north latitude and 92026′10″ east longitude. The maximum length and
breadth of Sone Beel were surveyed as 12.5 km and 3.9 km respectively at
its live storage level (LSL) and it reduces to 4.07 km to 2.22 km
respectively at its dead storage level (DSL). The total area is 3458.12 ha at
LSL and 409.37 ha at DSL. The shoreline length is 35.4 km. A major inlet
and outlet of this wetland is the Singla River21.
Sone Beel is famous for its fish and aquatic resources. It is the natural
fish breeding and nursery ground for fish. Sone Beel, is a reservoir of 70
species of fish belonging to 49 genera under 24 families that have been
recorded. The wetland and its resources offer different economic benefits
to the surrounding local people. It is considered as the second wetland in
Assam that got the status of a national wetland after Deepor Beel. The
Govt. of Assam proposed to announce this rural wetland as a Ramsar site
and recognize its national and international importance22 because of its
significant role in the entire social, economic, cultural, and ecological lives
of the entire region.

21 . Kar, A. H. Barbhuiya, & V. Saha, Wetland diversity of Assam: their present status,
Proceedings of taal 2007: the 12th world lake conference, M. Sengupta, & R. Dalwani,
(eds.), 2008, pp. 1844-1857.
22 National Wetland Atlas: Assam, (2010),
SAC/RESA/AFEG/NWIA/ATLAS/18/2010, Space Applications Centre, (ISRO),
Ahmedabad, India, p. 142.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

167

Figure 1: Sone Beel, Karimganj district, Assam,India Source: National wetland Atlas: Assam

Sone Beel is used for fishing, agriculture, rearing duck, water
transport, recreation, etc. The Sone Beel based activity is generally
practiced considering the whole year but divided into two seasons, viz.,
summer and winter. Though fishing and tourism are done throughout the
year, most often it is practiced during the summer season. During the
summer season, the Sone Beel becomes a huge water body and is used as a
168

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

common property of people. In this season, anyone can use Sone Beel for
fishing. In the winter season, the water level of wetland decreases,
consisting of parts of cultivable land, fisheries, and wetland fisheries. In
this season the drying Sone Beel is considered as the private property of
some selected stakeholders. In this stipulated period, they claim their
rights on them23. There are eight deeper fishing centers locally called
Bhund’s in Sone Beel24. From a report of Karimganj Zilla Parishad's office,
it was seen that about 35,000 families of Sone Beel are engaged in fishing
for their livelihood. About 500 families are engaged in the net-making and
fish marketing network. About 50 traditional boats ply every day regularly.
About 300 households are fully dependent on the income from the boat
services for six months.
Materials and methods
Contingent Valuation Method
The non-use values of wetlands are not traded in the market. Due to the
absence of an efficient market for the resources, many economic valuation
techniques were developed for the valuation of non-marketed goods.
Prominent and most widely used among these techniques is the Contingent
Valuation Method25. The CVM is a straightforward, simple to understand,
and very flexible technique. It is a questionnaire-based approach that
directly ask people questions about their choice, rather than observing their
actual behavior in the market. In other words, individuals are asked to state
their maximum willingness to pay or minimum willingness to accept under
a hypothetical market scenario in the changes in environmental quality.
Nowadays, this approach is commonly used as one of the standards and
flexible approaches in measuring economic values26.
The advantage of CVM is that it not only captures use-value but also it
elicits existence values and bequests values. It is also able to overcome the
weakness of the Travel Cost Method in valuing trips with multiple
purposes or multi-site. Further, the National Oceanic Atmospheric
23 S. Das, & J. Bhattacharjee, Climate change and livelihood problems of fishing
communities who are living in the largest wetland of Assam, European scientific journal,
June, 2015, Vol. 1, pp.27-36.
24 D. Kar, Application of GIS for the fish diversity and habitat parameters in the
wetland of Barak valley with special emphasis on Sone Beel, the biggest wetland of Assam,
Proceedings of Lake 2014: Conference on conservation and sustainable management of
wetland ecosystems in the Western Ghats, 2014, Sirsi, Karnataka, pp. 60-82.
25 W.M. Hanemann, J. Loomis, & B. Kanninen, Statistical efficiency of doublebounded dichotomous choice contingent valuation, American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 1991, Vol.73, No. 4, pp.1255-1263.
26 W.M. Hanemann, Valuing the Environment through Contingent Valuation,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994, Vol.8, No. 4, pp.19–43.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

169

Administration (NOAA) panel suggested that a dichotomous choice format
(DC) and face-to-face interviews should be used in CV studies. DC format
is known to reduce strategic bias, design bias, and interview bias.
Meanwhile, face-to-face interviews can obtain a large quantity of data in
which quality is guaranteed. However, CVM is a widely applicable and
widely applied monetary evaluation method.
Data collection and study methods
The questionnaire survey was conducted in the adjacent area of Sone
Beel. Sone Beel is comprised of 38 villages with a total of about 4920
households. After consulting and discussing with the stakeholders of the
wetland, we made eight number of clusters. According to the Village
Panchayet official report (2021), the total number of households in these
eight villages is 1964. From each cluster area, one village has been selected
randomly for the sample study. From each village 50 households have
selected by using systematic random sampling. The total sample
household size is 400.
A CVM was employed following NOAA guidelines along with standard
CV format i.e. including a well-constructed questionnaire, hypothetical
market scenario, and a face-to-face interview. Before finalizing the design
of the CV questionnaire focus group discussions were conducted. A pilot
survey was also conducted comprising 50 respondents and four focus
group discussions for pre-testing the questionnaire and designing bid
prices. Thereafter, modifying the questionnaire, the final survey was
carried out27 between April 2021 to February 2022.
The CV questionnaire was comprised of three sections. The first
section included questions related to the respondent’s environmental
awareness, attitudes, and knowledge about Sone Beel. The second section
dealt with CV questions. In this section, a hypothetical market scenario
was developed and proposed a fund for the conservation of Sone Beel,
namely, Sone Beel Development fund (SBDF), with a focus on
conservation instead of infrastructural development. The proposed fund
will be controlled by the local stakeholders and representatives of the State
govt. To estimate the respondent’s WTP, we used dichotomous choice
questions followed by an open-ended question for estimating the
respondent’s maximum WTP28. For doing this, six bid prices were offered
27 K.J. Arrow, R. Solow, P.R. Portney, E.E. Leamer, R. Radner, & H. Schuman,
Report on the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) panel on
contingent valuation, 1993, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Washington DC, pp.29-35.
28 H. Amirnejad, S. Khalilian, M.H. Assareh, & M. Ahmadian, Estimating the
existence value of north forests of Iran by using a contingent valuation method,
Ecological Economics, 2006, Vol. 58, No. 4, pp. 665-675.

170

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

to the respondents, and were asked to state their WTP in INR. ‘X’ (X=50,
100, 200, 400, 800, 1600). This method was used to minimize the nonresponses29.
Finally, they were also asked to specify exactly how much they would
be WTP in order to reveal the true value. Reasons for not WTP offered bid
prices were asked for the respondent to understand the reasons behind it.
The third section of the questionnaire was about the socio-economic
characteristics of the respondents which include; age, gender, marital
status, household size, family status, educational level, occupation,
income, and other variables that may have influenced their WTP response.
Estimation of WTP
In the DC format of CVM, the WTP value is in the form of binary
choice dependent variable, either 1 for a ‘Yes’ response or 0 for a ‘No’
response. Also, the bid amount is varied across respondents and the only
information obtained from each individual is that what his /her maximum
WTP is.
In order to find the various determinants of WTP, for the conservation
of Sone Beel, we have employed a binary logistic regression model. The
model is used when the dependent variable is binary in nature i.e. 0 and 1.
Following Hanemann (1984), the logistic regression model is used to
estimate WTP. Considering the WTP estimation in the logistic distribution
function, the probability of accepting the offered bid is estimated as:
P= (1-e-z)-1 …………………………………………. (1)
Z=b0+b1X1+b2X2 +…. +biXi+ ei
Where P is the probability of accepting the price, Z is a vector of
explanatory variables, Xi includes bid offered, socio-economic variables,
and potential motivation variables, bi is the intercept, b0 is the coefficient
of the estimated parameters and ei is the random error.
The list of the independent variables and also the descriptions of the
variables are presented in Table 1. The parameters of the logit model were
estimated, by the ‘maximum likelihood estimation method’ using the
STATA-13 version.
Econometric specification
We have investigated the various determinants of WTP for the
conservation of Sone Beel on the basis of the various variables presented in
Table 1.
K.J. Arrow, R. Solow, P.R. Portney, E.E. Leamer, R. Radner, & H. Schuman,
Report on the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) panel on
contingent valuation, 1993, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Washington DC.
29

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

171

Table 1: Description of variables of the binomial logistic model
of WTP for biodiversity conservation of Sone Beel, Assam
Variable
WTP

Distance
Age
Sex

Marital Status

Variable description
Dependent Variables
Refers to the respondent's
WTP for the conservation of
the biodiversity of Sone Beel
i.e. how much they WTP for
the
conservation
of
biodiversity of Sone Beel.
Independent Variables
Shows the distance of the
household of the respondents
from Sone Beel in km.
Shows the age of the
respondents
Refers to the gender of the
respondents

Modalities

Shows the marital status of the
respondents, whether he/she
is married, unmarried, or
widows.

0=Unmarried

1=Yes

0=No

Numeric
Quantitative
1=Male
0=Female

1= Married

2=Widow
Educational level

Shows
the
qualification
respondents

Religion

Shows the religion of the
respondent

Caste

Shows the
respondents

Household size

Shows the number of members
of the household of the
respondent

Family Status

Shows the status of the
household of the respondents
whether
the
household

172

educational
of
the

caste

of

the

0=Illiterate
1=LP
2=UP
3=High School
4=Higher Secondary
5=Graduation
6=PG
7=Others
1=Hindu
0=Muslim
0=General
1=MOBC/OBC
2=SC
3=ST
Numeric

1=APL

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Household landholding
size
Living Period
Main Occupation

Monthly
income

household

Father’s occupation
Relation to the Head

Biodiversity under threat

Social participation

economic status belongs to
APL or BPL.
Shows the landholding area of
the household in the wetland
area in acres.

0=BPL

Shows the living period of the
household of the respondent in
that area.
Shows the main occupation of
the
household
of
the
respondent

1=45 years above
0=45 years below

Shows the overall monthly
income of the household
including
wetland-based
income also.
Shows the occupation of the
father of the respondent.
Shows the relationship of the
respondents with the head of
the household.
Shows the opinion of the
respondents
about
the
biodiversity condition of the
wetland.
Shows the participation of the
respondent
in
social
organizations, NGOs, or any
social club which is working in
that wetland area.

Numeric

1=Govt. Job
2=Private Job
3=Remittance (including
Pension)
4=Fishing
5=Fish Trading
6=Business (Tea stall,
Hotel, and others)
7=Boatman
(including
Boat owner)
8=Day labour (including
driver and others)
9=Paddy Cultivator
10=Duck Rearer
Numeric

1=Fishing
0=Non fishing
1=Self
0=Other
member
1=Yes

household

0=No
1=Yes
0=No

Source: Author’s own specification based on primary data
Results and discussion
Demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of Households
In order to find out the factors affecting the WTP for conservation of
Sone Beel, we have considered a binary logistic regression model. The

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

173

detailed discussion of the binary dependent variable and the list of the
independent variables used for regression are presented in the earlier part
of this paper. Table 2 represents the descriptive statistics of the variables
used in the study.
Table 2: Descriptive statistics
Variables

Mean

Minimum

Maximum

Observation

2.75
46.18

Standard
Deviation
1.48
14.42

Distance
Age

1
17

5
81

400
400

monthly
household Income
Household size
Landholding size

15197

11346.68

500

60000

400

7.12
0.71

2.76
1.05

1
0

16
6.61

400
400

WTP

Willingness to pay= 70.25%
Not willingness to pay= 29.75%
Head of the household= 79.25%
Others=20.75% (Other household members of the head)
Male= 88.75%
Female=11.25%
Unmarried= 15.75%
Married=79.75%
Widowed=4.5%
Illiterate= 3.5%
LP=6.5%
UP=28.25%
HS=30%
HSS=19.75%
Graduation=9.75%
PG=1.75%
Others=0.5%
Hindu= 86%
Muslim=14%
APL=43%
BPL=57%
General=3.5%
MOBC/OBC=17.75%
SC=78.75%
ST=0%
Living in the area more than 45 years=85%
Living in the area less than 45 years=15%
Govt. Job=8%
Private Job=3.75%
Remittance (including pension)=10.5%
Fishing=17.25%
Fish Trading=11.25%

Relationship
the head
Sex
Marital Status
Education

Religion
Family Status
Caste

Living period
Occupation

174

to

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Father’s
occupation
Biodiversity under
threat
Social
participation

Business (including tea stalls, hotels and others)=13%
Boatman=8%
Day labour (including driver and others)=13.5%
Paddy cultivator=12.25%
Duck rearer=2.25%
Fishing=75.25%
Non-fishing=24.75%
Yes= 87.5%
No=12.5%
Member of an organization related to Sone Beel=72.5%
No any membership=27.5%

Source: Author’s own calculation based on primary data
For this study, primary data were collected from 400 randomly
sampled household heads. About 85% of the sampled household heads
were living more than 45 years and 15% were living less than 45 years in
the area. In addition, 88.75% of the sample respondents were male and
11.25% were female respondents. Besides, 70.25% were willing to pay and
29.75% were not willing to pay for the conservation of Sone Beel.
Regarding continuous variables, the result indicated that the mean age of
the household respondents was 46.18 years, with a maximum of 81 and a
minimum of 17 years, respectively. In addition, the household size ranges
from 1 to 16 members with a mean household size of 7.12. Furthermore,
the findings of the study pointed out that the monthly household income
was INR 15197 which ranges from INR 500 to INR 60000. Moreover, the
mean landholding size of the households in terms of acres was 0.71, with
the maximum and minimum being 0 acres to 6.61 acres respectively.
Besides the result reveals that the mean distance of the household from
Sone Beel was about 2.75 km, with the minimum and maximum distance
being 1 km and 5km, respectively (Table 2).
Estimating the willingness to pay
In this section, we have made an attempt to understand the
willingness to pay of the respondents for the conservation of Sone Beel.
For this purpose, respondents were presented with a hypothetical scenario
and asked to them if they were willing to pay an annual voluntary
contribution to the fund. The following table 3 shows the rate of the
respondent’s WTP.
Table 3: Distribution of Sex-wise respondents for WTP in
percentage
WTP

Male
Female
Number Percentage Number Percentage
of total
of total

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

Total
Number Percentage
of total
175

Yes
No
Total

256
99
355

64
24.75
88.75

25
20
45

6.25
5
11.25

281
119
400

70.25
29.75
100

Source: Author’s own calculation
In this study, out of 400 sample respondents, 281 respondents were
WTP for the conservation of Sone Beel, and the rest 119 sample
respondents were not WTP. It is also calculated that 70.25% of the
households were found to be WTP and the rest (29.75%) of the households
were not WTP. It indicates that more than half of the households were
WTP, and it was attributed to the fact that, the households were ready to
participate in the conservation program. After understanding the overall
willingness to pay for the conservation of Sone Beel, further, we have
calculated the offered bid prices for the respondents. Here we have
considered six bid prices such as INR 50, INR 100, INR 200,
INR 400, INR 800, and INR 1600. The willingness to pay for different bid
prices is shown in the following pie diagram.

Figure 2
Source: Author’s own calculation based on primary data
Figure 2 showed that 59.07% of respondents were willing to pay the
bid amount of INR 50, which got the highest ‘yes’ responses among the bid
prices presented for the conservation of Sone Beel. Accordingly, 23.49%,
11.03%, 3.56%, and 2.14% of respondents were willing to pay the bid
amount of INR 100. INR 200, INR 400, and INR 800, respectively. From
the study, it is revealed that most of the respondents who express their
WTP had given the ‘yes’ response to the initial bid amount and no single
176

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

respondent had given ‘yes’ for the highest bid amount. The reason behind
this may be because of the lower income of the respondent’s household,
lower education level, and lack of knowledge about biodiversity loss.
Determinants of WTP for the conservation of Sone Beel
The data collected through the Contingent Valuation (CV) survey has
been analyzed to determine the factors influencing an individual's WTP.
The sample data were analyzed using the statistical package Stata 13. The
estimated result of the present study is shown in Table 4 which documents
the parameter of the variables expected to affect WTP. Nine out of sixteen
variables were found significantly associated with WTP. Table 4 presents
the variables of the best-fit model, in which WTP is the dependent
variable, and the Socio-economic characteristics of the respondents as
independent variables, and then uses the binary logistic regression model
to test the relationship between them. We first investigate whether there is
a relationship between willingness to pay and various socio-economic
characteristics.
The result of the binary logistic regression model is presented in Table
4. The top part of the table presents the iteration log. The model is said to
have “converged” when the difference among successive iterations
becomes very small and accordingly iteration stops. The model is well
specified with a Likelihood Ratio Chi-square of 187.50 with a p-value of
0.0000 and McFadden's pseudo-R-squared is 0.3850 which indicates that
it is considered a very good model fit. Next, we consider the analysis of the
estimated parameters.
Table 4: Results of binomial logit model for conservation of
biodiversity of Sone Beel, Assam.

Iteration
Log

Model
Summery

Willing
pay

to

Iteration 0: log likelihood=-243.49246
Iteration 1: log likelihood=-159.72155
Iteration 2: log likelihood=-150.73526
Iteration 3: log likelihood=-149.74697
Iteration 4: log likelihood=-149.74099
Iteration 5: log likelihood=-149.74099
Number of observations=400
Logistic
regression LR chi2(16)=187.50
Log
likelihood=- Prob.>chi2=0.0000
149.74099
Pseudo R2=0.3850
Parameter Estimates
Independent variables Coefficient
S.E
Distance from Sone -0.4059962**
0.2116416
Beel
Age
0.0140245
0.0174142
Sex
-0.289364
0.4483467

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

z
-1.92

P>|z|
0.055

0.81
-0.65

0.421
0.519

177

Marital status
Educational level
Religion
Caste
Household size
Family Status
Landholding size in
Sone Beel
Living Period
Occupation
Monthly
household
income
Father’s occupation
Biodiversity threat
Social participation
Constant

-1.292316***
0.3014215*
-1.402303***
-0.2719401
0.0887901*
0.3786725
0.6250752**

0.4920541
0.1846976
0.6586006
0.6586006
0.05162
0.3981204
0.3495915

-2.63
1.63
-2.13
-0.42
1.72
0.95
1.79

0.009
0.103
0.033
0.677
0.101
0.342
0.074

-0.0532483
0.0003073
0.0000937***

0.4020307
0.0448062
0.0000294

-0.13
0.01
3.19

0.895
0.995
0.001

0.9449671***
1.867896
-0.1134428
-1.517351

0.4546622
0.4799716
0.2160549
2.234491

2.08
3.89
-0.53
-0.68

0.038
0
0.6
0.497

Source: Author’s own calculation based on primary data
Note: ***, **, and * represents 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance
respectively.
The binary logit regression model shows that the coefficient of the
distance from Sone Beel has a negative sign upon WTP and is statistically
significant at a 5% level. This can be interpreted as the distance increases
the respondents are less likely willing to pay. Numerous studies by other
researchers who have used CV have found similar results. For example, the
distance of the house of the respondent from the wetland was significant in
Siew et al. (2015) study conducted by Binilkumar & Ramanathan (2009).
The coefficient of marital status has a negative influence according to
the result. This result is not supported by the study taken by Rodgers
Makurija (2022).
Educational level is significant at a 10% confidence level and positive
coefficient sign. It implies that respondents with higher education are
more likely to WTP for conservation than the less educated respondents.
This finding is the same as the studies by Boxall (2012), Sara Kaffash
(2011), Abdullahi Adamu (2015), and M. Younis Bhat (2021).
The sign of religion is negative but significant at a 1% level. This
implies that religion has an inverse relationship with WTP i.e., we find that
the respondents who belongs to Hindu religion are more likely WTP for
conservation than the respondents who belongs to Muslim religion.
However, the study did not find any evidence about the effect of this
variable in previous literature.
The coefficient of household size has also a positive relationship with
WTP. The willingness to pay increases with the increase in household size.
It implies that a higher number of members of the respondent household
178

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

are more likely WTP than a less number of members of the respondent
household. The result is supported by previous studies such as M. Younis
Bhat (2021).
The coefficient of land holding size in Sone Beel is positively related to
the WTP. The households with the increase in land holding size are more
likely WTP than the households with less land holding size and the
coefficient is statistically significant.
The coefficient of monthly household income has a positive relation
with WTP as the sign is positive. It interprets as the respondent with
higher monthly household income is likely WTP than the respondent with
less monthly household income. This finding is similar to the studies such
as Zambrano-Monserrate (2020), Bhat & Sofi. (2021), Kontogiannai
(2012), Siew et al. (2015), and Boxall (2012).
Furthermore, the father’s occupation and biodiversity under threat
have also a positive relationship with WTP. It implies that the respondent
whose father’s occupation is fishing is likely more WTP than the
respondents whose father’s occupation is not fishing. Additionally, the
other variable biodiversity under threat is strongly significant and has a
direct relation with the response WTP. It implies that the respondent who
opined wetland biodiversity is under threat are likely WTP more for its
improvement.
Meanwhile, this model appears good with variables; distance, marital
status, educational level, religion, household size, landholding size in Sone
Beel, monthly household income, father’s occupation, and biodiversity
under threat as predictors, it significantly improves the fit of the model. It
is noted that although the coefficient values of Age, Sex, Caste, Family
Status, and Occupation have the expected signs, they are not significant.
Therefore, this indicates that these variables have no influence in
determining WTP.
Estimating the reason for not willingness to pay
Table 5: Distribution of percentage of the respondent against
reason for not WTP
Reason for not WTP
Don’t think that the wetlands are to be conserved
It is the government’s responsibility to conserve the
wetland
Not interest
Those who are using the wetland should pay
Cannot afford/Limited income restricts my ability
to pay
I don’t believe that my payment will help in

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

Number
1
61

Percentage
0.84
51.26

7
5
3

5.88
4.20
2.52

4

3.36
179

stopping the degradation of the wetland
No trust on such fund

38

31.93

Source: Author’s own calculation based on primary data
Out of 29.75% of respondents who expressed their not WTP towards
the proposed Sone Beel Development Fund (SBDF) to be created for
conserving the biodiversity of Sone Beel is shown in table 5. Here, 51.26%
of the respondents opines the most important reason for not WTP is that it
is the sole responsibility of the government to conserve the Sone Beel.
Furthermore, 32.77% of the respondents opines that they have no trust in
such a fund. 6.72% of respondents opines that they have no interest in
conserving the wetland. 5.04% opines that the individuals who are using
the wetland should pay. 3.36% of respondents opines that they no longer
trust that their payment will help in preventing the degradation of the
wetland. Only 2.52% of respondents opine that they cannot afford the
money for the fund because of their limited income. And finally, 0.84 % of
the respondents believe that the wetlands are not to be conserved. From
the study, it is revealed that half of the sample respondents are aware of
the conservation programs of wetlands and the present status of the
management of the wetland. The above discussion demonstrates that
people still keep in mind biodiversity as a government’s responsibility, at
the same time a negligible portion of people don’t think much about the
need for conservation of Sone Beel. The reason behind the nonresponsive
mindset of people could be lack of awareness and education about the
need for biodiversity attributes and because of their low income. Thus, it
may be suggested that more awareness programs need to be prolonged for
people to know about the benefit of biodiversity to peoples. This could help
in sustaining the wetland resources. The following figure 3 shows the
percentage of the respondents who expressed their reason for not WTP.

Figure 3
180

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Conclusion
Conservation of biodiversity of wetlands has been a chronic and
challenging problem while dealing with the majority of the Indian wetland
ecosystems. Conservation is threatened all over the world. To reverse the
situation, various studies recommended that conservation strategies that
need to be put into effect can play a key role. This paper has made a
maiden attempt to analyze the socio-economic factors affecting the
respondent’s WTP under CVM for the conservation of biodiversity of Sone
Beel. Accordingly, the study findings indicate that more than half (70.25%)
of the respondents were WTP for the conservation of Sone Beel. This
implies that the biodiversity under threat is a major threat in the area.
Furthermore, the majority of the households in the study area belonged to
the scheduled caste fisherman community. In this study, although
biodiversity threat is strongly significant in affecting the respondent’s WTP
for conservation biodiversity of Sone Beel, other factors such as distance,
marital status, educational level, religion, household size, monthly
household income, and father’s occupation are also significant.
Unfortunately, age, caste, sex, family status, living period, and occupation
are found to be not significant. The best-fit model indicates that WTP
depends upon the first and most important of the different socioeconomic
factors. The results obtained in this study are in agreement with economic
theory, in that social, demographic, economic characteristics and social
values influence people’s decision to pay or not, and if ‘yes’, it means the
specific amount they are willing to pay. For example, it is quite a logical
fact that WTP decreases as the distance increases. The most important
conclusion of the study is that it establishes that people are actually willing
to pay an amount, however small, to assist the conservation of Sone Beel.
Further, in this study, it is observed that those people who use the
wetland are more willing to participate. They are aware of the main
problems and quite concerned about them, especially because of the major
problems like decrease of fish species, shortage of aquatic food, paddy
cultivation in the Beel area, encroachment activity in the adjacent area of
the Beel, access use of pesticides in and around the wetland, pollution of
water, heavy siltation, etc. Moreover, respondents’ lack of knowledge and
education about biodiversity conservation policies, environmental
awareness programs, etc., become the main obstacles that further affect
the understanding of the value of conservation.
It is noteworthy that even a small country like UK could designate 161
wetlands as Ramsar sites, India being a mega-diversity country, so far
managed to delineate a mere six sites to date. There is obviously a lot of
ground to be included in our conservation efforts of wetlands. Sone Beel is
designated as an important national wetland, according to the National

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

181

wetland Atlas. However, there is a proposal by the Government of Assam
to declare this wetland as a Ramsar Site. Therefore, urgent actions aim at
eliminating the incidence of WTP in the individuals in the study area
should focus on:
1. More and more awareness programs need to be prolonged for
people to increase their knowledge about the benefit of conservation to
people.
2. More and more effective monitoring of the conditions of Sone Beel
and the practices being followed under different schemes and their
periodic evaluation.
3. Coordination among the stakeholders and integration of grassroot
workers and consumers for effective evaluation of the schemes in practice.
References
Amirnejad, H., Khalilian, S., Assareh, M.H., & Ahmadian, M., (2006),
‘Estimating the existence value of north forests of Iran by using a
contingent valuation method.’Ecological Economics, Vol. 58, No. 4, pp.
665-675.
Arrow, K.J., Solow, R., Portney, P.R., Leamer, E.E., Radner, R., &
Schuman, H., (1993), Report on the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) panel on contingent valuation. Washington, D.C.:
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Barbier, E.B., Acreman, M.C., & Knowler, D., (1997), Economic
valuation of wetlands: A guide for policymakers and planners. Gland,
Switzerland: Ramsar Convention Bureau.
Bassi, N., Kumar, M.D., Sharma, A. & Parth-Saradhi, P., (2014),
‘Status of wetlands in India: A review of extent, ecosystem benefits,
threats, and management strategies.’ Journal of Hydrology: Regional
Studies, Vol. 2, pp. 1-19.
Bhatt, M.S., Shah, S.A., & Abdullah, A., (2014), ‘Willingness to pay for
preserving wetland biodiversity: A case study.’ International Journal of
Ecological Economics and Statistics, Vol. 35, No. 4.
Bhat, M.Y., & Sofi, A.A., (2021), ‘Willingness to pay for biodiversity
conservation in Dachigam National Park, India.’ Journal for Nature
Conservation, Vol. 62, 12602.
Binilkumar, A.S., & Ramanathan, A., (2009), Valuing stakeholder
preferences on improved conservation and management of Kol wetland:
A contingent valuation study. 11th BIOECON Conference on Economic
Instruments to Enhance the Conservation and Sustainable Use of
Biodiversity, Venice, Italy.

182

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Boxall, P.C., Adamowicz, W.L., Olar, M., West, G.E., & Cantin, G.,
(2012), ‘Analysis of the economic benefits associated with the recovery of
threatened marine mammal species in the Canadian St. Lawrence Estuary.’
Marine Policy, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 189–197.
Cooper, J.C., (1993), ‘Optimal Bid Selection for Dichotomous Choice
Contingent Valuation Surveys.’ Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, Vol. 24, No.1, pp.25–40.
Das, S., & Bhattacharjee, J., (2015), ‘Climate change and livelihood
problems of fishing communities who are living in the largest wetland of
Assam.’ European scientific journal, June, Vol. 1, pp.27-36.
Davidson, Nick C., (2014). ‘How much wetland has the world lost?
Long-term and recent trends in global wetland area.’ Marine and
Freshwater Research, Vol.65, No. 10, pp. 934–941.
Díaz, S., Settele, J., Brondízio, E.S., Ngo, H.T., Guèze, M., Agard, J.,
Arneth, A., Balvanera, P., Brauman, K. A., Butchart, S.H.M., Chan, K. M.
A., Garibaldi, L. A., Ichii, K., Liu, J., Subramanian, S. M., Midgley, G.F.,
Miloslavich, P., Molnár, Z., Obura, D., Pfaff, A., Polasky, S., Purvis, A.,
Razzaque, J., Reyers, B., Roy Chowdhury, R., Shin, Y.J., VisserenHamakers, I.J., Willis, K.J., & Zayas, C.N., Eds., (2019), Summery for the
global assessment report on Biodiversity and ecosystem services of the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services (IPBES). IBPES secretariat, Bonn, Germany. 56 p.
Dutta, J., & Sharma, A., (2020), ‘Valuing fishing activity of the Deeper
Beel.’ Space and Culture, India. Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 122-132.
Dutta, J., (2016), Economic Valuation of Deepor Beel, Assam.
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis. Guwahati: Gauhati University.
Foote, A. Lee., Pandey, Sanjeeva & Krogman, N.T., (1996), ‘Processes of
wetland loss in India.’ Environmental Conservation, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 45-54.
Hanemann, W.M., (1984), ‘Welfare Evaluations in Contingent
Valuation Experiments with Discrete Responses.’ American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, Vol. 66, No. 3, pp. 332-341.
Hanemann, M., Loomis, J., & Kanninen, B., (1991), ‘Statistical efficiency
of double-bounded dichotomous choice contingent valuation.’ American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 73, No. 4, pp. 1255-1263.
Hanemann, W.M., (1994), ‘Valuing the Environment through
Contingent Valuation.’ Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 8, No. 4,
pp. 19–43.
Kaffashi, S., Shamsudin, M.N., Radam, A., Yacob, M.R., Rahim, K.A.,
& Yazid, M., (2012), ‘Economic valuation and conservation: Do people vote
for better preservation of Shadegan International Wetland?’ Biological
Conservation, Vol. 150, No.1, pp. 150–158.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

183

Kar, D., Barbhuiya, A.H., & Saha, V., (2008), Wetland diversity of
Assam: their present status. Proceedings of taal 2007: the 12th world lake
conference. Sengupta, M., & Dalwani, R., (eds). pp. 1844-1857.
Kar, D., (2014), Application of GIS for the fish diversity and habitat
parameters in the wetland of Barak valley with special emphasis on Sone
Beel, the biggest wetland of Assam. Proceedings of Lake 2014: Conference
on conservation and sustainable management of wetland ecosystems in
the Western Ghats, Sirsi, Karnataka, pp. 60-82.
Kontogianni, A., Tourkolias, C., Machleras, A., & Skourtos, M., (2012),
‘Service providing units, existence values and the valuation of endangered
species: A methodological test.’ Ecological Economics, Vol. 79, pp. 97–
104.
Makwinja, R., Mengistou, S., Kaunda, E., & Alamirew, T., (2022),
‘Willingness to pay for the ecological restoration of an inland freshwater
shallow lake: case of Lake Malombe, Malawi.’ Heliyon, Vol. 8, No.1,
e08676.
Mamatha, E., (2009), Valuation of ecosystem services: A case study
of Kolleru Lake in Andhra Pradesh. Unpublished MSc thesis. Kerala:
Kerala Agricultural University.
Moorhouse, T.P., & Macdonald, D.W., (2014), ‘Are invasives worse in
freshwater than terrestrial ecosystems?’ WIREs Water, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 1–
8.
National Wetland Atlas: Assam, (2010),
SAC/RESA/AFEG/NWIA/ATLAS/18/2010, Ahmedabad, India: Space
Applications Centre, (ISRO), 174 p.
National Wetland Atlas, (2011),
SAC/EPSA/ABHG/NWIA/ATLAS/34/2011, Ahmedabad, India: Space
Applications Centre (ISRO), 310p.
Pemberton, C.A., & Mader-Charles, K., (2004), Factors Determining
Willingness to Pay for Wetland Conservation: The Case of the Nariva
Swamp in Trinidad and Tobago. 25th Conference Proceedings—
Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environmental Challenges under
Emerging Trading Regimes. Suriname: Caribbean Agro-Economic Society
(CAES), pp. 111-121.
Prasad, S.N., Ramacandara, T.V., Aalya, N., Senupta, T., Kumar, A.,
Tiwari, A.K., Vijayan, V. S., & Vijayan, L., (2002), ‘Wetland conservation in
India: A review.’ Tropical Ecology Vol. 43, No.1, pp.173-186.
Ramachandra, T.V., Rajinikanth, R., & Ranjini, V.G., (2005),
‘Economic valuation of wetlands.’ Journal of Environmental Biology, Vol.
26, No. 2, pp. 439-447.
Research Program on Water, Land, and Ecosystems, (2016), Nile
Ecosystems Valuation for Wise Use. Working Paper No. 6: Application of
184

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

the economic methods and tools for ecosystems valuation on the selected
case studies ad developing tradeoff scenarios. NBCBN-RE. Cairo, Egypt.
Scholes, R.J., Montanarella, L., Brainich, E., Brainich, E., Barger, N.,
ten Brink, B., Cantele, M., Erasmus, B., Fisher, J., Gardner, T., Holland, T.
G., Kohler, F., Kotiaho, S., von Maltitz, G., Nangendo, G., Pandit, R.,
Parrotta, J., Potts, M. D., Prince, S., ... Willemen, L., Eds., (2018),
Summary for policymakers of the assessment report on land degradation
and restoration of the Intergovernmental Science- Policy Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES). IBPES secretariat, Bonn,
Germany. 44 p.
Schuyt, K., & Brander, L., (2004), The economic values of the world’s
wetlands. Gland, Switzerland: World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), pp.410.
Siew, M.K., Yacob, M.R., Radam, A., Adamu, A., & Alias, E.F., (2015),
‘Estimating Willingness to Pay for Wetland Conservation: A Contingent
Valuation Study of Paya Indah Wetland, Selangor Malaysia.’ Procedia
Environmental Sciences, Vol. 30, pp. 268–272.
Task Force on Islands, Coral Reefs, Mangroves & wetlands in
Environment & Forests, India, (2007). Report of the Task Force on
Islands, Coral Reefs, Mangroves & wetlands in Environment & Forests
for the Eleventh Five Year Plan 2007-2012, New Delhi: Government of
India Planning Commission.
Verma, M., Bakshi, N., & Nair, R.P., (2001), Economic Valuation of
Bhoj Wetland for Sustainable Use, EERC Working Paper Series: WB-9,
Bhopal: Indian Institute of Forest Management.
World Bank, (1994), World Development Report, Infrastructure for
Development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Zambrano-Monserrate, M.A., (2020), ‘The economic value of the
Andean Condor: The national symbol of South America.’ Journal for
Nature Conservation, Vol. 54, 125796.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

185

THE PROSPECTS, CHALLENGES, AND LEGAL ISSUES
OF DIGITAL BANKING IN NIGERIA
Paul Atagamen Aidonojie,
aidonojie.paul@edouniversity.edu.ng
Oluwaseye Oluwayomi Ikubanni,
ooikubanni@jabu.edu.ng
Nosakhare Okuonghae
nosakhareokuons@gmail.com
Abstract: Digital banking is one of the numerous impacts of globalization
and technological advancement on Nigeria's economy. It allows for smooth
delivery of banking services, giving its numerous benefits. However, despite the
numerous benefit of digital banking, it suffices to state that there are several
challenges and also, a legal uncertainty as to whether there is sufficient
legislation that regulates digital banking in Nigeria. It is concerning this that
this study employs a hybrid method of research in ascertaining the prospect,
challenges, and legal issues concerning digital banking in Nigeria. Online
survey questionnaires were sent to 306 respondents (randomly selected)
residing in Nigeria. Descriptive and analytical statistics were adopted in
analyzing the responses to the questionnaire. The study found that the key
challenges to digital banking in Nigeria are the lack of specific legislation
regulating digital banking, poor internet infrastructures, and increased cyber
fraud, amongst others. It was therefore concluded and recommended that, for a
continuous advancement in technologically enable banking system, there is need
for Nigeria government and stakeholders to ensure that there is a practical legal
framework concerning digital banking. Furthermore, there is need for an
intensify efforts in creating a conducive atmosphere for digital banking to thrive
in Nigeria.
Keywords: Legal, Digital, banking, Globalization, Technology Nigeria



PhD. Inview, Department of Public and International Law, Edo State
University Uzairue, Nigeria.

PhD. Inview, Department of Jurisprudence and Public Law, Joseph
Ayo Babalola University, Ikeji-Arakeji, Osun State, Nigeria.

LLM Inview, Faculty of Law, Samuel Adegboyega University.

186

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Introduction
Digitization is one phenomenon that has disrupted human activities,
and transformed society as well as businesses1. Digital technology and
electronic networks present fascinating opportunities to promote
commercial transactions across the globe. The ongoing revolution has
helped reshape the various traditional systems in the country2. One area of
the economy that has been significantly affected by the intrusion of digital
technology is the banking sector3. Digital banking or e-banking is a
trending banking system that leverages digital technology to provide
financial services to customers over the digital space. This banking system
enables operators to move traditional banking activities from the
traditional face-to-face service delivery mode to a digital environment,
where human contact is minimal4.
Generally speaking, digital banks are fast-growing fintech companies
hosted online to provide customers seamless banking and other financial
services. Although the digital banking systems in Nigeria is not new, they
have evolved over the years to win the heart of its customers due to the
customer-centric, convenient and cheaper mode of services they offer5. In
addition, researchers have observed that the recent growth of digital banks
in Nigeria is attributed to its attractive services over traditional banks. For
one, they allow customers to conduct their financial activities with ease
and without delay, thus eliminating the problem of the long queues being a
witness in our banking halls and at the ATM stands 6, prompt response to
customers' queries7. Indeed, financial technology (fintech) has enabled
digital banking operators to provide a wide range of financial services.
Most often than not, they make it easy for the customer to access loan
facilities via the internet, thus removing the need for paperwork, a
common attribute of the traditional banks. Other factors cited for the
P. Parvianinen; M. Tiihinen; J. Kaariainen, and S. Teppola, “Tackling the
Digitalization Challenge: How to Benefit from Digitalization in Practice”, International
Journal of Information Systems and Project Management, (2017), Vol. 5(1), 63-77.
2 M.K. Brunnermeier; H. James, and J.P. Landau, National Bureau of Economic
Research, (2019) Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w26300. Doi10.3386/w26300.
3 O.T. Nguyen, “Factors Affecting the Intention to Use Digital Banking in Vietnam”
Journal of Asia Finance, Economics and Business (2020). Vol. (7)(3), 303-310.
4 Ibid
5 L. Wewege, J. Lee, and M. C. Thomsett, “Disruptions and Digital Banking” Journal
of Applied Finance and Banking, (2020), Vol. 10(6), 15-56.
6 O.O., Olumayowa, “Effect of Digital Banking on Customer Satisfaction Within the
Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria” Accountability, Transparency and Nation-Building,
(2020), 1412-1418.
7 B. Narteh, “Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction in Ghanaian Retail Banks:
The Moderating Role of Price” International Journal of Bank Marketing, (2020), Vol. 36
(1), 68-88.
1

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

187

increasing usage of digital banks in Nigeria in recent times has been its
ability to enhance customer satisfaction. Similarly, it provides an
alternative to traditional banking service delivery during the period of
restriction of movement as well as the need to limit the numbers of
customers in the banking halls per time, which have been occasioned by
the global pandemic (COVID19)8.
Example of these institutions in Nigeria is; Kuda bank, Rubies, ALAT,
Vbank, Mint App, one bank, sparkle9, etc. It should be added that while
some of these new generation fintech entrants are affiliated with some of
the traditional banks, others are not. For instance, ALAT, which is
commonly regarded as the first digital bank in Nigeria, is the digital arm of
Wema Bank Plc, a commercial bank in Nigeria.10
The innovation and adoption of digital banking in Nigeria, no doubt,
has improved the quality of products and services being offered by the
entrant financial institutions. It has also improved the scale of profitability
of banks in the country11 and customer satisfaction. However, like other
innovations in the past, the digital banking system is fraught with some
peculiar challenges which may inhibit its growth and lofty aspirations.
Given the following, this study is set out to systematically examine the
prospect, challenges, and legal issues of digital banking in Nigeria.
Furthermore, the study will also proffer possible solutions in savaging
some of the identified challenges concerning digital banking in Nigeria.
Methodology
The study employ the use of an hybrid method of research. The
essence of the doctrinal method of research to critically evaluate some
relevant literature and laws as it concern the theoretical and legal
framework of digital banking in Nigeria.
Furthermore, the non-doctrinal research method is aimed at
ascertaining the prospect, challenges and legal issues concerning digital
8 O., Ajayi, “Digital Banking in Nigeria: The State of Play and Legal Framework”,
2021 Available at https://www.olaniwunajayi.net/blog/digital-banking-in-nigeria-thestate-of-play-and-legal-framework.
9 S. Timi-koleolu, and E. Aroh, “Establishing a Digital Bank in Nigeria- Legal
Requirements” 2021 Available at https://pavestoneslegal,com/establishing-a-digitalbank-in-nigeria-legalrequirements/?utm_source=Mondaq&utm_medium=syndication&utm_campaign=Link
edIn-integration accessed 20th May, 2022.
10 I.A. Ogbuji, M.M. Ologundudu, and O.O. Oluyomi, “Comparative Analysis of
Financial Technology and Traditional Bank Performance in Nigeria: The Camel
Approach” UNILAG Journal of Business, (2021) Vol. 6(1), 145-168
11 B.E. Akhigbe, P.I. Udobi-Owoloja, A.E. Ubi, M.A. Gbajumo-Sheriff, and B. Umoru,
“Digital Banking and Bank Profitability in Nigeria” Nigerian Journal of Management
Studies, (2020), Vol. 20(2), 24-34.

188

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

banking in Nigeria. Also it is aimed at proposing possible remedy that
could aid savaging the challenges concerning digital banking in Nigeria.
Operation of digital banking in Nigeria
As already noted above, digital banking is gaining widespread
popularity from members of the public, especially among the millennials,
however, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) is yet to fully recognize digital
banks as it should be by way of regulations, policies, or guidelines.
Consequently, to circumvent this irregularity/lacuna, operators of digital
banks in Nigeria have found a lee way to operate and conduct their
business by registering the digital banks as Microfinance banks according
to the relevant category of microfinance license. Indeed, this innovation is
an expression of ingenuity on the fintech operators.
A microfinance bank (MFB) license enables the holder to receive
deposits and grant loans. However, according to the Revised Regulatory
and Supervisory Guidelines for Microfinance Banks in Nigeria 2012 (MBF
Guidelines), there are limits to activities which microfinance banks can
undertake. The right holders are prohibited from engaging in foreign
exchange transactions, and they are limited to a certain amount of loan
given to customer per time (i.e., N500,000 for tier 2 Unit MFBs and
N1,000,000 for other categories). Bearing in mind the possibility of
contravening these guidelines by overzealous digital banks operating
under the microfinance license, CBN issued a circular in 2021 reiterating
the provisions of the guidelines.
Ajayi Olaniwun12 while commenting on the ingenuity of the digital
banks to operate under the license of microfinance banks, noted that there
is a risk that the CBN might proscribe the use of MFB license by digital
banks. This is because, in practice, they do not align with the intent and
objectives for the establishment of MFB. That is, providing financial
services13such as saving, deposits, loans, domestic fund transfer to target
clients such as the un-banked, low-income earners, vulnerable groups,
micro-entrepreneur etc.14 In Nigeria, the operation of a microfinance bank
depends mainly on the license obtained by the operator.
There are three types of licenses available;

Ibid note 10.
Rule 1.0 & 1.2.1 Revised Regulatory and Supervisory Guidelines for Microfinance
Banks (MFBs) in Nigeria 2012.
14 Rule 1.2.2 of Revised Regulatory and Supervisory Guidelines for Microfinance
Banks (MFBs) in Nigeria 2012.
12
13

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

189

Category 1: Unit Microfinance Bank
There are two Tiers of Unit MFBs- Tier 1 (urban authorization) and
Tier 2 (rural authorization). Tier 1 permits the holder to operate at most
four branches, excluding its headquarters within five adjoining Local
Government Areas, and Tier 2 Unit permits the holder to operate one
branch outside the headquarters within the same local Government Areas
subject to the approval of the CBN. The minimum capital requirement for
Unit MFB is as follows: N200, 000,000 (Two hundred million naira for
Tier 1 and N50 000 000 (Fifty million naira) for Tier 2.
Category 2: State Microfinance Bank
A State Microfinance Bank is authorized to operate within a specific
State or the Federal Capital Territory (FCT), having a minimum capital of
N100 million (one hundred million Naira). In addition, they are allowed to
open branches in the approved State or the FCT. However, the approval of
the CBN must be sought and obtained before the new branch or cash
Centre is established15.
Category 3: National Microfinance Bank
A National Microfinance Bank license authorized the MFB to operate
in more than one State of the Federation, including the FCT. The
minimum capital requirement is N 2 billion (Two Billion Naira). In
addition, it is permitted to open branches in all states of the Federation
and FCT. Subject to a prior request and approval by the CBN for each new
branch or cash centre16.
The implication for digital banks operating as microfinance banks is
that those with State licenses are restricted to the approved State and
cannot operate outside the said State. Whereas those with National
licenses are authorized to operate in all states of the Federation subject to
the necessary approval. In reality, digital banks do not need branches to
operate, hence they are called a branchless banks. Again, this situation
indicates the inadequacy of conducting digital baking with MFB.
An Examination of the current Legal framework for Digital
banking in Nigeria
It has earlier been discussed in this paper that there is no specific
legislation that regulates the operations of digital banking in Nigeria. This
has been the chief challenge to the acceptance and wide usage of digital
banking by consumers in Nigeria. However, some legislation play

15
16

190

3.2 of the Guidelines.
Ibid.

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

significant roles in the operation of digital banking in Nigeria. These
legislations will be examined briefly as follows:
1. Central Bank of Nigeria Act17
This is one of the legislation responsible for regulating of banks and
banks' service delivery in Nigeria. The National Assembly validly made the
Act and it established the Central Bank of Nigeria in order to facilitate and
ensure the realization of the purport of both the Act and BOFIA (Banks
and Other Financial Institutions Act), which includes promoting stability
and financial management18. The bank has the power to promote a sound
financial system in Nigeria19. The CBN, through the Banker’s Committee
and collaboration with all banks in Nigeria, introduced the Bank
Verification Number (BVN) in order to ensure more significant security for
accessing the personal information and data of customers in the Banking
system. The governor of CBN, in a bid to ensure the security of the
electronic payments system in Nigeria, also released the regulatory
framework for Bank Verification Number (BVN)20 according to the power
conferred on it by the Act and BOFIA. There may not be any specific
legislation on digital banking yet in Nigeria. However, the CBN has been
very proactive in ensuring that there is compliance with best practices in
the banking sector.
2. Cyber Crimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act, 2015
The Cyber Crime Act is an Act of the National Assembly that promotes
cyber security and protects electronic communications, networks, data,
and computer programs. The Act is the regulatory and institutional
framework for the protection, protection, prohibition, prosecution, and
punishment of cyber crimes in Nigeria21. The Act penalizes the fraudulent
use of internet to perpetrate fraud such as;
i. Intentionally accessing a computer system or network for
fraudulent purposes;
ii. Obtaining data that are vital to national security;
iii. Securing access to any program, commercial or industrial secrets or
classified with intent to commit fraud;
iv. Perpetration of any form of online or electronic fraud, etc22.
The Act equally imposes on financial institutions carrying on
electronic financial transaction to verify the identity of a customer, by
Central Bank of Nigeria (Establishment Act) CAP. C4., 2007.
Section 1(3).
19 Section 2.
20 CBN Regulatory Framework For Bank Verification Number (BVN) Operations and
Watch-List For The Nigerian Banking Industry, 2017.
21 See Sections 1 & 2.
22 See Section 5 to 36.
17

18

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

191

requiring such customer to provide documents bearing the following
information;
Customer’s name
Addresses
Other relevant information
If the above information have been verified, customer can be issued an
Automated Teller Machine card, debit card, credit card or any other
electronic devices23. Interestingly, the Act also imposes an obligation on
service providers such as telecommunication companies to ensure the
protection of consumers' data according to the right to privacy provided in
the Constitution24. The Act equally makes provisions for the circumstances
under which the service providers may release consumer’s data or electronic
communication or activities to a law enforcement agencies25. The Cyber
Crimes Act is a significant legislation that recognizes and regulates the use
of the internet for electronic transactions in Nigeria. Though the Act does
not explicitly mention digital banking, however, it covers all forms of the
electronic transactions including online or digital banking.
3. National Information Technology Development Agency
(NITDA) Act, 2007
The National Information Technology Development Agency (NITDA)
Act, 2007 is an enactment of the National Assembly that established the
National Information Technology Development Agency (NITDA). The
agency is responsible for the monitoring, evaluation, coordination, and
regulation of Information Technology practices in Nigeria26. The NITDA,
by Section 6, further has the responsibility to develop guidelines for
electronic governance and monitor electronic data interchange in
government, private sectors (for example, banks), public sectors, etc. The
NITDA issued the Nigerian Data Protection Regulations, 2019, aiming to
safeguard the rights of natural persons to data privacy and foster safe
control. The NITDA act and Nigerian Data Protection Regulations are both
viable legislations that regulate the operation of digital transactions in
Nigeria, particularly as regards data protection. Though neither of these
two legislations referred emphatically to digital banking, however, a
proper interpretation of Section 6 of the NITDA Act shows that data
protection in digital banking or transaction is regulated under this Act
through the agency the Act established.
See Section 37
Section 38
25 Section 39
26 Section 6 of the Act
23

24

192

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

4. Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act
This is one of the primary legislation regulating the activities of banks
and other financial institutions in Nigeria. Though BOFIA 27does not have
any provision which regulates the operation of digital banking in Nigeria 28,
however, the Act empowers the Central Bank of Nigeria to control the
activities of banks and other financial institutions through regulations
made by the governor of the bank. By section 58 of the Act, the governor of
CBN has the power to make rules and regulations for the operation and
control of all institutions under the supervision of CBN. It is interesting to
note that the requirement of license is a condition precedent to the
operation of any form of banking in Nigeria, as an unlicensed financial
institution is prohibited under the Act29
5. The Nigerian Communications Act, 2003
The Nigerian Communications Act is a regulatory framework for the
use and operation of telecommunications in Nigeria30. Digital banking is
impossible unless there are telecommunication platforms which enhance
the use of the internet. In Nigeria, there are telecommunication companies
such as Globacom Ltd, MTN, Airtel, and 9mobile, which provide a network
for internet access. The Nigerian Communications Act established the
Nigerian Communications Commission31 (NCC), which is an agency that
regulates the operation of this telecommunication company in Nigeria and
ensures the strict compliance with the provisions of the Act.
The operation of a telecommunication Companies in Nigeria requires
the issuance of a license by the Commission 32, which the license may be
suspended or revoked by the Commission where the operation of the
company violates the provision of the Act, its subsidiary regulation, or any
other written law relevant to the telecommunications industry 33.This
provision implies that where a telecommunication company regulates and
protects the use and right to privacy of the data of any individual and a
violation of this right may necessitate the suspension or revocation of the
license with which such company operates its business.
Therefore, while this Act may not have made an express provision for
the regulation of digital banking in Nigeria, it imposes an obligation on
Bank and Other Financial Institutions Act, Cap. B3. Laws of Federation, 2004.
O.O. Aguda, “An Appraisal of the Legal Framework for Online Banking in Nigeria
and South Africa” Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu University Journal of Commercial
and Property Law, (2021) Vol. 3(1), 11-17.
29 See Sections 58, 59 and 60 of BOFIA.
30 See Section 1.
31 Section 3.
32 Sections 31-52.
33 Section 44 Sub-Section 1.
27

28

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

193

telecommunication companies to corporate with other institutions, bodies,
and agencies to fight any violation of the digital rights of any individual.
6. Economic
and
Financial
Crimes
Commission
(Establishment, Etc) Act, 2004
The Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (Establishment, Etc)
Act is an enactment of the National Assembly that is operative in the whole
country. The Act established the Economic and Financial Crimes
Commission34 as an agency that shall ensure strict compliance with the
provisions of the Act. One of the powers of the Act among other things is to
investigate all financial crimes, including Advanced Fee Fraud, computer
credit card fraud, etc, and to adopt measures to trace, freeze or seize
proceeds of such crimes35.
The cursory examination of Section 6 of the Act shows that the Act
empowers the Commission to investigate any fraud occasioned through
digital banking. Furthermore, the Act empowers the Commission to direct
a bank or any other financial institution to supply information about a
customer, produce books and documents relating to such account, and
freeze such account36.
Though on the Commission's power to unilaterally freeze or stop
outward payment or operation of the account, the court has variously held
that such power is not exercisable without the Order of the court. One such
instance was in the case of Guaranty Trust Bank V Akinsiku Ademola
(2019)5 NWLR (PT. 1664) AT P. 30 (particularly at p. 43), Paras. E-H)
where the court held that “Before freezing customer’s account or placing any
form of restrain on any Bank account, a bank must be satisfied that there is
an order of a court. By the provisions of Section 34(1) of the Economic and
Financial Crime Commission Act, 2004, the Economic and Financial Crime
Commission has no power to give direct instructions to Banks to freeze the
account of a customer without an order of a court, so doing constitutes
flagrant disregard and violation of the right of a customer.

Section 1.
Section 6.
36 Section 34 provides that “The Chairman of the Commission, or any officer
authorized by an order issued under subsection (1) of this Section, or by any subsequent
order, direct, the bank or other financial institution to supply any information and
produce books and documents relating to the account and to stop all outward payments,
operation or transactions (including any bill of exchange) in respect of the account of the
arrested person”.
34
35

194

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Challenges of Digital Banking in Nigeria
1. High cost, poor or lack of internet services
This is one of the significant challenges of digital banking in Nigeria 37.
Digital banking entails the delivery of banking services or transactions
such as cash deposit, withdrawal, transfer, the opening of an account,
payment of utility bills, obtaining of a statement of account, etc. over the
internet, thereby dispensing with the necessity for a physical visit to a
bank38. Digital banking is only digital because of the use of the internet for
the delivery of these services39. Unfortunately, in Nigeria, the cost of
accessing the internet is high. Therefore, not many persons can afford it 40.
It is, however a shared experience that often these internet services are
very poor or even unavailable, thereby making it impossible to either start
a transaction or to complete it, which occasions serious loss41 or setback to
customers and ultimately impacting on the economy of the nation42.
2. Internet banking fraud
Internet banking fraud is one of the barriers to the wide acceptance
and usage of digital banking in Nigeria. The rate of the internet or cyber
fraud has increased in Nigeria since the introduction of digital banking 43.
Internet fraud occurs when a third party accesses the digital account of a
customer with the customer’s secret codes without the consent of such
customer and steals money from the account. Several people cannot
guarantee the ability of financial institutions to maintain the safety and
protection of their data; hence, they prefer to decline usage of digital

37 A. Adepetun, ‘Network Hitches Linger as Slow Internet Impacts Banking,
Businesses’ Available at http://www.guardian.ng/business-services/network-hitcheslinger-as-slow-internet-impacts-banking-businesses Accessed 9th April, 2022.
38 S.C. Chimeke, A.E. Ewiekpaefe, and F.O. Chete, “The Adoption of Internet
Banking in Nigeria: An Empirical Investigation’ Journal of Internet Banking and
Commerce, 2006, Vol. 11(3), 48-58.
39 O. Babatunde and O. Sunday, “E-Banking in Nigeria: Issues and Challenges”
Research Journal of Finance and Accounting, (2017), Vol. 8(6), 18-23.
40 E.I. Henry, “Factors that Influence Customers’ Attitude Toward Electronic
Banking in Nigeria’ Journal of Internet Commerce, (2018), Vol. 17(3), 325-328
41 R. Achwald, ‘Is Banking Online Safer than Banking on the Corner’ Computer
Fraud and Security, 2008(3) P. 11-12
www.researchgate.net/publication/250726752_Is_banking_online_safer_than_b
anking_on_the_corner Accessed 9th April, 2022
42 A. Tarhini, C. Mgbemena and R. Mosa’deh, ‘User Adoption of Online Banking in
Nigeria: A Qualitative Study’ Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, (2015), Vol.
20, 132-146.
43 A.O. Aegwali, “Customers Perception of Security Indicators in Online Banking
Sites in Nigeria” Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, (1970), Vol. 13(3), 1-14.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

195

banking platforms to avoid cyber fraud on their, which often lead to severe
financial loss to customers44.
3. Lack of specific regulation
In Nigeria, though there is the existence of the Bank and Other
Financial Institution Act (BOFIA)45, the Central Bank of Nigeria Act is the
regulatory legislation on financial institutions which empowers the
Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) to make rules, regulations or
guidelines to control the activities of financial institutions in Nigeria.
However, there is no single legislation or guidelines that regulate digital
banking in Nigeria46. The operators of digital banking in Nigeria have been
condemned to operating their business with a Microfinance banking license
or finance company license, which has the potential risk of being proscribed
by CBN. The absence of regulatory guidelines for digital banking operation
in Nigeria hinders its general acceptance of its operation, especially as
investors are unwilling to take the risk of investing in it47.
4. Poor power supply
Power is one of the basic amenities or infrastructural facilities that
enhances the growth and development of the economy of a nation. It
increases productivity in businesses. Poor power supply affects virtually
every sector of Nigeria, including banking, and this often affects the
integrity and quality of services that banks offer. Digital banking requires
the use of computers that cannot function without a power supply48. Poor
power supply often delays banking transactions as it sometimes causes
incomplete transaction, which sometimes occasions financial loss to either
the bank or its customers.

Z. Karim, K.M. Rezaul, and A. Hossain, “Towards Securing Information System in
Online Banking”, International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured
Transactions, 2009, http://www.doi.org/10. 1109/ICITST.2009.5402619. Accessed 9th
April, 2022.
45 CAP. B3, Laws of Federation of Nigeria, 2004.
46 O.O. Aguda, “An Appraisal of the Legal Framework for Online Banking in Nigeria
and South Africa” Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu University Journal of Commercial
and Property Law, (2021), Vol. 3(1), 11-17.
47 A.B., Zarma, “Electronic Banking: Practices from other Countries, Associated
Risks and Implications” Nigerian Deposit Insurance Corporation Quarterly, (2009), Vol.
11(3&4), 61-102 cited in I.A. Acha, “Electronic Banking in Nigeria: Concept, Challenges
and Prospects” International Journal of Development and Management Review, (2008),
Vol. 3(1), 23-45.
48 I.A. Acha, “Electronic Banking in Nigeria: Concept, Challenges and Prospects”
International Journal of Development and Management Review, (2008), Vol. 3(1), 6789.
44

196

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

5. Inadequate or poor ICT knowledge on the use of internet
banking
Digital banking requires the use of sophisticated technology for service
delivery and service enjoyment49. Unfortunately, while most banks or
financial institutions lack sufficiently knowledgeable and skilled experts in
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)50, several customers
do not also have enough skill to carry out banking transactions digitally51.
In the same breath, many banks are not even willing to incur considerable
expenses to secure the services of skilled ICT personnel. This challenge is
one of the major setbacks to the wide acceptance of digital banking in
Nigeria, which is a clog in the wheel of banking services delivery to
consumers.
Presentation and Analysis of Data
The study used a questionnaire distributed to respondents residing in
Nigeria, in this regard, the data obtained from the questionnaire is
therefore analysed below:
Sample Size and Techniques
The study adopted an online survey questionnaire to enable the
researcher to reach out to the respondents residing in various states in
Nigeria. However, in selecting the respondents to respond to the
questions, the study uses simple random sampling techniques. The essence
of adopting or using a simple random sampling technique is concerning
the fact that in several studies by Aidonojie et al.52, it has been argued that
it is seemly suitable in selecting or choosing respondents from a
heterogeneous population. In this regard, this study tends to focus on
Nigeria which is said to be heterogeneous. Furthermore, it suffices to state
E.I. Stella, “Strategic Impact of ICT on Modern Day Banking in Nigeria”,
International Journal of Strategic Information Technology and Applications, (2014),
Vol. 5(4), 56-74.
50 B.E. Ahigbe, P.I. Udobi-Owoloja, Ubi, A.E., Gbajumo-Sheriff, M.A., & Umoru, B.,
“Digital Banking and Bank Profitability in Nigeria”, Nigerian Journal of Management
Studies, (2020), Vol. 20(2), 24-34.
51 C. Jayshree, “Internet Banking-Benefits and Challenges in an Emerging Economy”
International Journal of Research in Business Management, (2013), Vol. 1(2), 19-26.
52 P.A. Aidonojie, I.E. Oaihimire, and OP. Agbale, “The Legal and Ethical Issues
concerning Diagnosing and Treatment of Patients by Pharmacists in Nigeria”,
Euromentor Journal, (2022), Vol. 13(2), 113-138; P.A. Aidonojie, T.A. Majekodunmi,
O.O. Ikubanni, and N. Ibrahim, “The causes of the Rising incidence of domestic violence
in Nigeria: Proposing Judicial Separation as a Panacea”, Jurnal Hukum UNISSULA,
(2022), 38(2), 61-80; Aidonojie P.A, Odojor A.O., and Agbale O.P., (2021), The Legal
Impact of Plea Bargain in Settlement of High Profile Financial Criminal Cases in Nigeria,
Sriwijaya Law Review, Vol. 5(2), PP. 161-174.
49

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

197

that in several studies by Aidonojie et al.53, Majekudumi et al.54, and
Oladele et al.55 It has been also stated that a simple random method of
sampling method is hassle-free in selecting or sampling a population and it
is devoid of any form bias.
However, 306 respondents residing in Nigeria were selected randomly
to respond or give an informed answer concerning the prospect,
challenges, and legal issues concerning digital banking in Nigeria.
Data Analysis
The data derived or generated through the use of an online survey
questionnaire is hereby analysed below:
Research Question One

Figure 1: Identification of the various states residing in Nigeria
by the respondents

53 P.A. Aidonojie, “The Societal and Legal Missing Link in Protecting a Girl Child
against abuse before and Amidst the Covid-19 Pandemic in Nigeria” Jurnal Hukum
UNISSULA, (2022), 38(1), 61-80; Aidonojie, P.A., Nwazi, J. and Ugiomo E., (2022), The
Legality, Prospect, and Challenges of adopting Automated Personal Income Tax by States
in Nigeria: A Facile Study of Edo State, Cogito Multidisciplinary Journal, Vol. 14(2), PP.
149 – 170; Aidonojie, P.A., Okuoghae N., Agbale, O.P., Idahosa, M. E., (2022), Supervisor
and Supervisee Relationship: The Legal and Ethical Issues Concerning Academic Theft in
Nigeria Tertiary Institution, Euromentor Journal, Vol. 13(1), PP. 113-138.
54 Majekodunmi, T.A., Oluwaseun, J.A., Idahosa, M.E., Ikubbanni, O.O. and Aidonojie,
P.A., (2022), The causes of the Rising incidence of Terrorism occasioning Deprivation of the
Right to Life in Nigeria, KIU Journal of Humanities, Vol. 7(2), PP. 5-19.
55 O.O. Oladele, P.A. Aidonojie, J.E. Uzualu, O.O. Ikubanni and A.I. Oyedeji, “An
Empirical Study of Criminalizing Minor Infractions of Tax Laws in Nigeria: The Need for
Negotiated Punishments”, KIU Journal of Humanities, (2022), 7(2), 23-35.

198

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

S/N

States
Nigeria

in

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

Abia
Adamawa
Akwa Ibom
Anambra
Bauchi
Bayelsa
Benue
Borno
Cross River
Delta
Ebonyi
Edo
Ekiti
Enugu
(FCT) Abuja
Gombe
Imo
Jigawa
Kaduna
Kano
Katsina
Kebbi
Kogi
Kwara
Lagos
Nassarawa
Niger
Ogun
Ondo
Osun
Oyo
Plateau
Rivers
Sokoto
Taraba
Yobe
Zamfara
Total

Responses
of
Respondents
19
11
10
10
7
13
9
7
14
17
6
24
16
9
8
Nil
14
Nil
8
2
4
Nil
8
17
13
Nil
4
11
5
9
8
2
10
4
Nil
4
3
306

Percent
6.2%
3.6%
3.3%
3.3%
2.3%
4.3%
2.9%
2.3%
4.6%
5.6%
2%
7.8%
5.2%
2.9%
2.6%
Nil
4.6%
Nil
2.6%
0.7%
1.3%
Nil
2.6%
5.6%
4.2%
Nil
1.3
3.6%
1.6%
2.9%
2.6%
0.7%
3.3%
1.3%
Nil
1.3%
1%
100%

Table 1: Valid Identification of the various states residing in
Nigeria by the respondents

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

199

Figure 1 and Table 1 above are valid data presentations reflecting
the valid responses of the respondents identifying the places or states they
reside in Nigeria.
Research Question Two

Figure 2: Respondents' identification of the usage of the digital
banking system in Nigeria
Valid Yes
Valid No
Total

Response
248
50
298

Percent
83.2%
16.8%
100%

Table 2: Valid responses of respondents' identification of the
usage of the digital banking system in Nigeria
Figure 2 and Table 2 above represent the respondents' responses
identifying that Nigeria is one of those countries that has adopted a digital
bank system as against the manual banking system.
Research Question Three

Figure 3: Cluster respondents’ responses identifying the
prospect of digital banking in Nigeria
200

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Prospect of Digital Banking
System
Digital banking provides a better and
more convenient avenue for
transferring and receiving monetary
funds among individuals across the
globe
Elimination of barrier of location in
rendering banking services
The use of digital banking is timesaving
It eliminates the long queue at the
usual traditional banking that
requires physical contact
The adoption of digital banking
complies with the Covid19 social
distancing
The use of digital banking has
resulted in an efficient and easier
international transaction system
Digital banking is more economical
and a prudent means of money
transaction

Cluster of
Response
139

Percentage

124

47.9%

116

44.8%

115

44.4%

114

44%

111

42.9%

96

37.1%

53.7%

Table 3: Valid Cluster of respondents’ responses identifying the
prospect of digital banking in Nigeria
Figure 3 and Table 3 are respondents’ clusters of valid responses
identifying the various prospect of the digital banking system in Nigeria.
Research Question Four

Figure 4: Respondents identify that there are challenges in
using digital banking in Nigeria

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

201

Valid Yes
Valid No
Total

Response
247
49
296

Percent
83.4%
16.6%
100%

Table 4: Valid Respondents' identification of the fact that there
are challenges using digital banking in Nigeria
Figure 4 and Table 4 are valid cluster responses of respondents
identifying that there are several challenges concerning the use of digital
banking in Nigeria.
Research Question Five

Figure 5: Respondents' identification of some of the challenges
often encountered in using the digital banking system in Nigeria
Challenges
of
Digital
Banking System in Nigeria
Inadequate primary Legal framework
that comprehensively regulates digital
banking in Nigeria
Incidence of an internet fraudster
Inadequate or poor ICT knowledge
concerning the use of digital banking
by most individual
Incidence of loss of vital data or
information derives and store in using
digital banking
Irregular power supply
Poor internet services

Cluster of
Responses
129

Percentage

114
131

44.2
50.8

94

36.4

131
142

50.8
55

50

Table 5: Valid cluster of respondents identifying the challenges
often encountered in using the digital banking system in Nigeria

202

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Figure 5 and Table 5 are valid cluster respondents' responses
identifying some of the challenges often encounter in using the digital
banking system in Nigeria.
Research Question Six

Figure 6: Respondent identification of remedies that could
aid in salvaging digital banking system challenges in Nigeria
Remedies concerning digital
banking system challenges in
Nigeria
Enactment of a primary legal
framework that will extensively
regulate digital banking in Nigeria
Sensitisation and training of the
general public concerning the use
and how to utilize digital banking
Adequate power supply
Enactment of policies that will
require the provision of wellenhanced internet services by the
network provider
Prosecution and conviction of
anyone involved in internet fraudrelated issues
Provision of a backup storage
device

Cluster of
Responses

Percentage

115

44.6

128

49.6

112
117

43.4
45.3

150

58.1

88

34.1

Table 6: Valid cluster of respondents identifying remedies
that could salvage digital banking system challenges in Nigeria
Figure 6 and Table 6 are a cluster of respondents' valid responses
identifying some of the possible remedies that could aid in salvaging the
identified challenges concerning the digital banking system in Nigeria.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

203

Discussion of Findings
Given the above data presentation obtained and collated from the
questionnaire sent to the respondents, figure 1 and table 1, are to the effect
that the respondents (306 respondents) are individuals who reside in
Nigeria. In this regard, it suffices to state that the essence of figure 1 and
table 1 is aimed at ensuring that the respondents are well informed and
knowledgeable to respond to the questions as they relate to the prospect,
challenges, and legal issues of digital banking in Nigeria. However, in
figure 2 and table 2 above 83.2% of the respondents were able to identify
the fact that Nigeria is one of those countries that have adopted or
developed from the manual banking system to a digitalised banking
system. In this regard, in figure 3 and table 3, the respondents identify
some of the prospects of digital banking system tends to offer and some of
these prospects identified by the respondents are as follows;
i. 53.7% of the respondents stated that digital banking provides a
better and more convenient avenue for transferring and receiving
monetary funds among individuals across the globe
ii. 47.9% of the respondents stated that it eliminate the barrier of
location in rendering banking services
iii. 44.8% identify that the use of digital banking is time-saving
iv. 44% of the respondents further stated that the adoption of digital
banking complies with the Covid19 social distancing
v. 42.9% also stated that the use of digital banking has resulted in an
efficient and easier international transaction system
vi. 37.1% of the respondents were also of the opinion that digital
banking is more economical and a prudent means of money transaction
However, despite the beautiful and fanciful prospect digital banking
tends to offer, in figure 4 and table 4, 83.4% representing majority of the
respondents agreed that there are several challenges concerning the use of
digital banking in Nigeria. Furthermore, figure 5 and table 5 represent the
respondents' identification of some of the challenges concerning digital
banking in Nigeria as follows;
i. 50% of the respondents stated that there is an inadequate primary
Legal framework that comprehensively regulates digital banking in
Nigeria;
ii. 44.2% stated that the incidence of internet fraudsters is a challenge
to digital banking in Nigeria;
iii. 50.8% stated that there is inadequate or poor ICT knowledge
concerning the use of digital banking by most individual;
iv. 36.4% stated that there is the challenge of incidence of loss of vital
data or information derives and store in using the digital banking system;

204

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

v. Furthermore, 50.8% and 55% also stated that Irregular power
supply and Poor internet services are major challenges of a digital banking
system.
However, the above challenges identified by the respondents are not
peculiar. This is concerning the fact that some of these challenges are most
of the challenges that often affect Nigerians in the productive use of
technological means in Various endeavors. Furthermore, the above
challenges were also captured by Aidonjie et al in several of their studies
concerning the use of technology in e-contract of agreement56,
administration of justice, and human security57. Also, the use of technology
in the advancement of legal education58 and legal education amidst the
Covid1959.
Given the above challenges identified in figure 5 and table 5, the
respondents further identify possible remedies to salvage the challenges
and this is as presented in figure 6 and table 6 as follows;
i. 44.6% of the respondents stated that there should be an enactment
of a primary legal framework that will extensively regulate digital banking
in Nigeria;
ii. 49.6% stated that sensitisation and training of the general public
concerning the use and how to utilize digital banking is very important;
iii. 43.4% also stated that there is a need for an adequate power supply;
iv. 45.3% of the respondents believes that enactment of policies that
will require the provision of well-enhanced internet services by network
provider will aid in correcting network challenge;
v. Also, 58.1% of the respondents stated that there is a need for
prompt prosecution and conviction of anyone involved in internet fraudrelated issues;
vi. Furthermore, 34.1% of the respondents stated that provision of a
backup storage device will aid in salvaging the incidence of loss of vital
information stored digitally.
56 P.A. Aidonojie, A.O. Odojor, and K.O. Oladele, “An Empirical Study of the
Relevance and Legal Challenges of an E-contract of Agreement in Nigeria” Cogito
Multidisciplinary Research Journal, (2020) 12(3), 170-190.
57 P. A. Aidonojie, O.O. Ikubanni, N. Okoughae, A.O. Ayoedeji, “The challenges and
relevance of technology in administration of justice and human security in Nigeria:
Amidst the Covid-19 pandemic”, Cogito Multidisciplinary Journal, (2021), Vol. 13(3), p.
149-170.
58 P.A. Aidonojie, O.A. Odojor, O.O. Ikubanni, A.A. Oyebade, A.I. Oyedeji and N.
Okuoghae, “‘The Challenges and Impact of Technological Advancement to the Legal
Profession in Nigeria given the Covid-19 Pandemic”, KIU Journal of Humanities (2020),
6 (4), 5-19.
59 P.A. Aidonojie & A.O. Odojor, “Impact and Relevance of Modern Technological
Legal Education Facilities amidst the Covid-19 Pandemic: A Case Study of Law Students
of Edo University Iyamho”, KIU Journal of Humanities, (2020) 5(4), 7-19.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

205

Conclusion/Recommendation
The researcher has been able to examine the impact of technology
advancement in the Nigerian banking sector. The study was able to identify
that there is numerous benefit to digital banking in Nigeria. Some of these
benefits include the convenience of receiving and transferring legal tender,
elimination of distance barriers involved in the traditional banking system,
and aid in the flexibility of international trade. However, irrespective of the
fanciful advantage of digital banking in Nigeria, a cursory review of the
available legal framework reflects that it does not provide for and regulate
digital banking in Nigeria. Furthermore, the study also identifies several
challenges concerning the digital banking system in Nigeria.
Concerning the above, it suffices to state that despite the challenges
concerning digital banking in Nigeria, the prospect of digital banking
outweighs the challenges. In this regard, for a better and more effective
operation of digital banking in Nigeria, the study, therefore, recommend as
follows;
i. A review of the current legal framework in Nigeria concerning the
banking sector to adequately provide for and regulate digital banking in
Nigeria;
ii. Training and sensitization of the general public on the use of digital
banking;
iii. Provision of a stable power supply and internet services;
iv. Strict and swift prosecution of internet fraudster involve digital
banking scam-related crime.
References
Acha, I.A., (2008), Electronic Banking in Nigeria: Concept, Challenges
and Prospects, International Journal of Development and Management
Review, Vol. 3(1), pp. 23-45.
Achwald R., ‘Is Banking Online Safer than Banking on the Corner’
Computer Fraud and Security,
www.researchgate.net/publication/250726752_Is_banking_online_
safer_than_banking_on_the_corner Accessed 9th April, 2022
Adepetun, A., ‘Network Hitches Linger as Slow Internet Impacts
Banking, Businesses’ http://www.guardian.ng/business-services/networkhitches-linger-as-slow-internet-impacts-banking-businesses Accessed 9th
April, 2022.
Aegwali, A.O., (1970), Customers Perception of Security Indicators in
Online Banking Sites in Nigeria, Journal of Internet Banking and
Commerce, Vol. 13(3), pp. 1-14.

206

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Aguda, O.O., (2021), An Appraisal of the Legal Framework for Online
Banking in Nigeria and South Africa, Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu
University Journal of Commercial and Property Law, Vol. 3(1), pp. 11-17.
Aguda, O.O., (2021), An Appraisal of the Legal Framework for Online
Banking in Nigeria and South Africa, Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu
University Journal of Commercial and Property Law, Vol. 3(1), pp. 11-17.
Ahigbe, B.E., Udobi-Owoloja P.I., Ubi A.E., Gbajumo-Sheriff M.A., &
Umoru B., (2020), Digital Banking and Bank Profitability in Nigeria,
Nigerian Journal of Management Studies, Vol. 20(2), pp. 24-34.
Aidonojie, P.A, Odojor A.O., and Agbale O.P., (2021), The Legal
Impact of Plea Bargain in Settlement of High Profile Financial Criminal
Cases in Nigeria, Sriwijaya Law Review, Vol. 5(2), pp. 161-174.
Aidonojie, P.A., (2022), The Societal and Legal Missing Link in
Protecting a Girl Child against abuse before and Amidst the Covid-19
Pandemic in Nigeria” Jurnal Hukum UNISSULA, Vol. 38(1), pp. 61-80.
Aidonojie, P.A., Anne O.O., and Oladele O.O., (2020), An Empirical
Study of the Relevance and Legal Challenges of an E-contract of
Agreement in Nigeria” Cogito Multidisciplinary Research Journal, Vol.
12(3), p. 181
Aidonojie, P.A., Ikubanni O.O., Okoughae N. and Ayoedeji A.O.,
(2021), The challenges and relevance of technology in administration of
justice and human security in Nigeria: Amidst the Covid-19 pandemic,
Cogito Multidisciplinary Journal, Vol. 13(3), pp. 149-170.
Aidonojie, P.A., Majekodunmi, T.A., Ikubanni, O. O. and Ibrahim N.,
(2022), The causes of the Rising incidence of domestic violence in Nigeria:
Proposing Judicial Separation as a Panacea, Jurnal Hukum UNISSULA,
Vol. 38(2), pp. 61-80
Aidonojie, P.A. and Odojor, A.O., (2021), Impact and Relevance of
Modern Technological Legal Education Facilities amidst the Covid-19
Pandemic: A Case Study of Law Students of Edo University Iyamho, KIU
Journal of Humanities, Vol. 5(4), PP 7-19
Aidonojie, P.A., Nwazi, J. and Ugiomo E., (2022), The Legality,
Prospect, and Challenges of adopting Automated Personal Income Tax by
States in Nigeria: A Facile Study of Edo State, Cogito Multidisciplinary
Journal, Vol. 14(2), pp. 149 – 170
Aidonojie, P.A., Oaihimire, I.E. and Agbale, O.P., (2022), The Legal
and Ethical Issues concerning Diagnosing and Treatment of Patients by
Pharmacists in Nigeria, Euromentor Journal, Vol. 13(2), pp. 113-138.
Aidonojie, P.A., Odojor, A.O., Ikubanni, O.O., Oyebade, A.A., Oyedeji,
A.I. and Okuoghae, N., (2022), The Challenges and Impact of
Technological Advancement to the Legal Profession in Nigeria given the
Covid-19 Pandemic, KIU Journal of Humanities, Vol. 6(4), pp. 5-19.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

207

Aidonojie, P.A., Okuoghae N., Agbale, O.P., Idahosa, M. E., (2022),
Supervisor and Supervisee Relationship: The Legal and Ethical Issues
Concerning Academic Theft in Nigeria Tertiary Institution, Euromentor
Journal, Vol. 13(1), PP. 113-138
Ajayi, O., “Digital Banking in Nigeria: The State of Play and Legal
Framework”,
https://www.olaniwunajayi.net/blog/digital-banking-innigeria-the-state-of-play-and-legal-framework Accessed 20th June, 2022.
Babatunde, O. and Sunday, O., (2017), E-Banking in Nigeria: Issues
and Challenges, Research Journal of Finance and Accounting, Vol. 8(6),
pp. 18-23.
Brunnermeier, M.K., James H. and Landau J.P., National Bureau of
Economic Research, https://www.nber.org/papers/w26300 accessed May
28th, 2022
Chimeke, S.C., Ewiekpaefe A.E., and Chete F.O., (2006), The Adoption
of Internet Banking in Nigeria: An Empirical Investigation, Journal of
Internet Banking and Commerce, Vol. 11(3), PP. 48-58
Henry E.I., (2018), Factors that Influence Customers’ Attitude Toward
Electronic Banking in Nigeria, Journal of Internet Commerce, Vol. 17(3),
PP. 325-328
Jayshree C., (2013), Internet Banking-Benefits and Challenges in an
Emerging Economy, International Journal of Research in Business
Management, Vol. 1(2), PP. 19-26
Karim Z., Rezaul K.M., and Hossain A., “Towards Securing
Information System in Online Banking”, International Conference for
Internet Technology and Secured Transactions, http://www.doi.org/10.
1109/ICITST.2009.5402619. Accessed 9th April, 2022.
Majekodunmi, T.A., Oluwaseun, J. A., Idahosa, M. E., Ikubbanni, O.O.
and Aidonojie, P.A., (2022), The causes of the Rising incidence of
Terrorism occasioning Deprivation of the Right to Life in Nigeria, KIU
Journal of Humanities, Vol. 7(2), pp. 5-19.
Narteh, B., (2020), Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction in
Ghanaian Retail Banks: The Moderating Role of Price, International
Journal of Bank Marketing, Vol. 36 (1), pp. 68-88.
Nguyen O.T., (2020), Factors Affecting the Intention to Use Digital
Banking in Vietnam, Journal of Asia Finance, Economics and Business,
Vol. (7)(3), pp. 303-310.
Ogbuji, I.A., Ologundudu M.M., and Oluyomi O.O., (2021),
Comparative Analysis of Financial Technology and Traditional Bank
Performance in Nigeria: The Camel Approach, UNILAG Journal of
Business, Vol. 6(1), pp. 145-168.
Oladele, O.O., Aidonojie, P.A., Uzualu, J.E., Ikubanni, O.O. and
Oyedeji, A.I., (2022), An Empirical Study of Criminalizing Minor
208

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Infractions of Tax Laws in Nigeria: The Need for Negotiated Punishments,
KIU Journal of Humanities, Vol. 7(2), pp. 23-35.
Olumayowa, O.O., (2020), Effect of Digital Banking on Customer
Satisfaction Within the Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria, Accountability,
Transparency and Nation-Building, Vol. 5(2), pp. 1412-1418.
Parvianinen, P., Tiihinen M., Kaariainen J., and Teppola S., (2017),
Tackling the Digitalization Challenge: How to Benefit from Digitalization
in Practice, International Journal of Information Systems and Project
Management, Vol. 5(1), pp. 63-77.
Stella, E.I., (2014), Strategic Impact of ICT on Modern Day Banking in
Nigeria, International Journal of Strategic Information Technology and
Applications, Vol. 5(4), pp. 56-74.
Tarhini, A., Mgbemena C. and Mosa’deh R., (2015), ‘User Adoption of
Online Banking in Nigeria: A Qualitative Study’ Journal of Internet
Banking and Commerce, Vol. 20, pp. 132-146.
Wewege, L., Lee J., and Thomsett M.C., (2020), Disruptions and
Digital Banking, Journal of Applied Finance and Banking, (2020), Vol.
10(6), 15-56.
Zarma, A.B., (2009), Electronic Banking: Practices from other
Countries, Associated Risks and Implications, Nigerian Deposit Insurance
Corporation Quarterly, Vol. 11(3&4), 61-102.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

209

THE MOMENT OF CONSUMMATION OF AN OFFENCE
RELATING TO THE MANIPULATION OF AN EVENT:
UNDER THE CRIMINAL CODE OF THE REPUBLIC OF
MOLDOVA
Gheorghe Reniță,
gheorghe.renita@usm.md
Sergiu Brînza
decan.dreptusm@yahoo.com
Abstract: An offence is consummated when the committed act falls within
a criminal rule. Fixing the starting point of the offence consummation has legal
relevance for, a number of reasons: on the one hand, it marks the time when
there is corpus delicti of crime in place; on the other hand, it defines the date of
the offence, which has practical interest for addressing some issues, e.g.,
determining the applicable criminal law, calculating the limitation period for
criminal liability, the incidence of an amnesty law, etc. Hence, this article
identifies the peculiarities of the moment of consummation of an offence relating
to the manipulation of an event. For this purpose, account was taken of legal
provisions, judicial practice, and doctrinal approaches.
Keywords: match-fixing, bet-fixing, sports event, bet, offence, criminal
law, Republic of Moldova.

Introduction
Under Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova
titled “Manipulation of an event”, encouraging, influencing or advising a
participant in a sporting/betting event to undertake actions, which would
produce a manipulated effect on the event concerned, with a view to
obtaining undue goods, services, privileges or advantages of any kind for
oneself or for others represents an offence. The latter is punishable by a
fine varying in the range of 2,350 to 4,350 conventional units
(approximately EUR 6,000 to EUR 11,300) or by a term of imprisonment
of one to three years, in both cases depriving the person of the right to hold


Doctor of Law, lecturer in the Department of Criminal Law, Faculty of
Law, Moldova State University.

Habilitated Doctor of Law, Professor in the Department of Criminal
Law, Dean of the Faculty of Law at Moldova State University.

210

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

certain positions or exercise a certain type of activity for a period of up to
three years; while the legal person is punishable by a fine varying in the
range of 6,000 to 9,000 conventional units (approximately EUR 15,550 to
EUR 23,350), depriving that person of the right to exercise a certain type
of activity.
The criminal liability is aggravated as per Article 2421 (2) of the
Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova, if the same actions (i) are
committed by a trainer, an athlete’s agent, a member of the jury, an owner
of the sports club or by a person who is a member of the sports
organisation leadership. In this case, the natural person is punishable by a
fine varying in the range of 3,350 to 5,350 conventional units
(approximately EUR 8,700 to EUR 13,880) or by a term of imprisonment
of two to six years, in both cases depriving the person of the right to hold
certain positions or exercise a certain type of activity for a period varying
from four to seven years.
The Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova establishes also the
liability for (bet-fixing) betting on a manipulated sports event, as well as
for informing other people about an existing agreement to manipulate
sporting or other events with the purpose to persuade those people to bet.
In this Article, however, we will focus on the moment of
consummation of an offence related to the manipulation of an event, an
offence commonly referred to as “match-fixing”1.
I. Preston & S. Szymanski, Cheating in Contests, in Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, 2003, vol. 19, iss. 4, p. 613; Andreff W. Different Types of Manipulation in Sport.
In: Breuer M. & Forrest D. (eds.). The Palgrave Handbook on the Economics of
Manipulation in Sport. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, Springer, 2018, p. 13; Andreff W. An
Economic Roadmap to the Dark Side of Sport. Vol. I. Sport Manipulations. Cham:
Palgrave Macmillan, Springer, 2019, p. 10; 7 Carpenter K. Match-Fixing – The Biggest
Threat to Sport in the 21st Century?, in The International Sports Law Review, 2012, iss.
2, p. 13; Carpenter K., Global Match-Fixing and the United States’ Role in Upholding
Sporting Integrity, in Berkeley Journal of Entertainment and Sports Law, 2013, no. 2(1),
pp. 214-229; Harvey A. & Levi H. Match fxing in international sport, in Byers T. (ed.).
Contemporary Issues in Sport Management: A Critical Introduction. Los Angeles: Sage,
2016, p. 296-314; Maennig W. Corruption in International Sports and Sport
Management: Forms, Tendencies, Extent and Countermeasures, in European Sport
Management Quarterly, 2005, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 187-225; Feltes T. Match Fixing in Western
Europe, in Haberfeld M.R. & Sheehan D. (eds.). Match-Fixing in International Sports.
Existing Processes, Law Enforcement, and Prevention Strategies. Cham: Springer, 2013,
pp. 15-30; Forrest D. Match Fixing: An Economics Perspective. In: Haberfeld M.R. &
Sheehan D. (eds.). Match-Fixing in International Sports: Existing Processes, Law
Enforcement, and Prevention Strategies. Cham: Springer, 2013, pp. 177-197; Serby T., The
Council of Europe Convention on Manipulation of Sports Competitions: the best bet for
the global fight against match-fixing?, in The International Sports Law Journal, 2015,
no. 15(1), pp. 83-100; Spapens A., and Olfers M. Match-fixing: The current discussion in
Europe and the case of the Netherlands, in European Journal of Crime, Criminal Law
1

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

211

Synthesis of legislation, judicial practice and the literature
As can be seen, Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of
Moldova only describes the act (actus reus) without defining its harmful
consequences. It results that the event manipulation offence is a formal
one2. It shall be considered as consummated at the time of commission of
one of the actions listed in Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of the
Republic of Moldova, i.e.: encouraging, influencing or advising a
participant in a sporting/betting event to undertake actions, which would
produce a manipulated effect on the event concerned. In other words, the
corpus delicti of offence referred to in Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of
the Republic of Moldova will be acknowledged at the moment of
committing the harmful act, without the need for consequences to be
produced.
Pursuant to Article 30 (1) of the Criminal Code of the Republic of
Moldova, “a prolonged offence is an act committed with a sole intention
characterised by two or more identical criminal actions, committed with a
single purpose and representing one crime in their entirety”.
Paragraph (2) of the same Article provides that “a prolonged offence
shall be consummated at the moment when the last criminal action or
inaction was committed”.
Based on the aforementioned provisions we identify the following
conditions for a sole prolonged offence to occur, features that allow to
delimit it both from other forms of legal or natural unit of crime and from
the concurrence of identical crimes, which ultimately allows to qualify the
committed acts either under one or multiple rules of incrimination:
(i) the presence of at least two acts of crime;
(ii) the acts of crime must be identical;
(iii) the committed acts of crime in their entirety form one crime;
(iv) the intention unit;
(v) the sole purpose;
(vi) the acts of crime are committed by the same person3.
and Criminal Justice, 2015, no. 23, pp. 333-358; UNODC IOC (2016), Booklet for
legislators. Model Criminal Law provisions for the prosecution of competition
manipulationю [accessed 01.09.2022], Available at: https://bit.ly/2z2Ze0C.
2 S. Brînza, and Stati V., Tratat de drept penal. Partea speciala [Criminal law
treaty. Special Part], Vol. II. Chisinau: Central Printing House, 2015, p. 110; Stati V.,
Infracțiunea de manipulaare a unui eveniment (art. 242 1 CP RM) Partea II [The crime of
manipulating an event (Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova):
study of criminal law. Part II], National Law Review, 2013, no. 12, p. 8; Stati, V.,
Infracțiuni economice: Note de curs [Economic offenses: Course notes]. Chisinau: CEP
USM, 2014, p. 180.
3 St. Copețchi, Delimitarea infracţiunii unice prelungite de concursul de infracţiuni,
precum şi de unele forme ale unităţii infracţionale [Delimitation of the single crime

212

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

In light of those conditions, we deduce that the event manipulation
offence can be, under certain circumstances, a prolonged (continued)
offence. This conclusion is confirmed by the case-law. Hence, in the Kmit
case, the Prosecutor held that the alleged manipulation of three football
matches played on 4 July 2013 in Tirana and, respectively, on 11 July 2013
and 29 August 2014 in Chisinau would form one offence4.
Instead, in the Gluhoi and others case, both the First Court and the
Appeal Court considered that influencing three athletes to undertake
actions, which would produce a manipulated effect on the sporting event
in which they participated, the acts committed on 9 February 2017, 20
March 2017 and, respectively, on 22 March 2017, represented multiple
offences5.
Such an approach would confuse an independent observer. Thus,
according to V. Berliba and R. Cojocaru, “by repeating the
actions/inactions the prolonged crime looks like multiple crime, the
difference being related to a subjective matter, namely there is a sole
purpose in the prolonged crime, while multiple crime involves as many
intentions as the number of crimes”6.
Concurrently, St. Copetchi claims that, “in the assumption of certain
actions/inactions of identical crimes, in the presence of a sole intention
relative to the actions/inactions concerned, regardless of their number, the
committed acts shall be qualified pursuant to the rules of sole prolonged
offence, while in the presence of multiple intentions towards them, the
committed crimes shall be qualified pursuant to the rules of multiple
crime”7.
We affiliate ourselves with these opinions. Therefore, although “in
case of a sole prolonged crime, any crime episode may represent itself an
offence”8, the key matter that determined the legislator to consider it was a
sole crime was the unity of criminal intention. To apply Article 30 of the
Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova it has to be ascertained that the
perpetrator was “driven” by the same criminal decision to attain a single
goal. The sole intention could be deduced from certain objective
circumstances. To this end, a relevant factor is the time between the
actions/inactions. The briefer the time between the actions/inactions, the
extended by the competition of crimes, as well as by some forms of the criminal unit],
Studia Universitatis Moldaviae, Series “Social Sciences”, 2016, no. 8(98), pp. 138-139.
4 Buiucani District Court, Decision from 26 January 2016, Case No. 10-731/2015.
5 Chisinau Court of Appeal, Judgment form 3 June 2019, Case No. 1a-463/19.
6 V. Berliba, and R. Cojocaru, Controverse referitoare la interpretarea şi incriminarea
infracțiunii unice prelungite [Controversy over the interpretation and incrimination of the
prolonged single offense], in Ombudsman, 2004, no. 12, pp. 13-15.
7 St. Copețchi, Op. cit., p. 145.
8 Ibidem.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

213

more convincing is the statement that the perpetrator committed one
offence. And vice-versa: the longer the time between the actions/inactions,
the less likely is the statement that the perpetrator committed one offence.
In the first case (Kmit), the one-year timeframe between the actions
(the second and the third match) did not raise any issue to ascertain that
the perpetrator was guided by a single criminal decision. In the second
case (Gluhoi and others), the timeframe of several days did not have any
weight to consider that just one crime was committed. Furthermore, in the
second case, although the lawyer of the accused person argued to apply
Article 30 (1) of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova, the courts
rejected that request, considering it as a “method of defence”, and stated
that the perpetrator’s actions should be qualified as per the rules of
multiple crimes.
A weird approach, is not it? In fact, the Prosecutor must demonstrate
in each individual case if the perpetrator had just one or multiple criminal
intentions. These matters were not commented in the considered cases.
The courts accepted the position of the state accuser without arguing,
based on case evidence, why the Prosecutor was right, and not the Lawyer.
Concerning the Republic of Moldova, the European Commission for
Democracy through Law of the Council of Europe (hereinafter referred to
as the Venice Commission) indicated, inter alia, that pretty frequently the
judges would not dare casting doubt on the indictments submitted by the
Prosecutor, and such a fact leads to a large number of convictions. Due to
this reason, the Venice Commission warns that the judges have to
overcome such “sympathy for prosecutors”9. Some judges are afraid to
“anger” the prosecutors, as the General Prosecutor could take actions
against them for certain sentences, decisions, ruling or judgements, which,
in the opinion of General Prosecutor were contrary to the law (Article 307
of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova).
Let us admit that even when there is one year between the
actions/inactions the perpetrator could be guided by a sole criminal
decision. In this situation there must be plausible arguments and evidence
to persuade an independent observer. For example, during a
championship or tournament, the perpetrator could have decided from the
start to encourage, influence or advise the participants in different
matches/events or phases, so that ultimately his favoured person/team
wins. In this case the perpetrator pursued a sole purpose.
In case of Kmit it is difficult to believe that the perpetrator took the
decision on 4 July 2013 in Tirana to manipulate also the match played on
Venice Commission, Amicus curiae brief on the immunity of judges for the
Constitutional Court of Moldova, 2013, Opinion no. 698/2012 [accessed 01.09.2022],
Available at: https://bit.ly/3sEhnKM.
9

214

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

29 August 2014 in Chisinau under the aegis of another sports organisation.
Those matches were played with different adversary teams under different
competitions: one match was played during the preliminary phases of 2013
UEFA Europe League, while the other – in the course of the 2014 national
football championship of the Republic of Moldova. When the first match
was played, the second one was not even scheduled yet. These
circumstances enable us to draw the conclusion that the acts of this case
should have been classified pursuant to the rules of multiple offences. The
actions, which took place on 4 July 2013 and, respectively, on 11 July 2013,
when the same sports teams played during the same football
championship constituted just one offence, while the actions which took
place on 29 August 2014 – the second offence.
On the contrary, in case of Gluhoi and others, having regard to the
relatively short timeframe between the actions, when lacking evidence to
prove that there were multiple criminal intentions and by virtue of the in
dubio pro reo principle, the actions should have been considered as a sole
prolonged (continued) offence.
Controversy may occur related to the moment of consummation of the
event manipulation offence when the perpetrator would act through IT
systems or electronic communications networks.
As per modus operandi, the event manipulation offence could be
committed in the cyberspace both off-line and on-line. The cyberspace
where the virtual existence increasingly has become a second human
nature, represents a conducive environment (or a “wild west”, as per the
words of B. Sandywell10) to commit certain offences.
Hence, the perpetrator could choose to convey messages or make calls
using a device connected to the Internet, which entail encouraging,
influencing (save the facts expressed by physical violence) or advising a
participant in a sports event (which, at the same time, could be a betting
event) to undertake actions which would produce a manipulated effect on
the event concerned, with a view to obtaining undue goods, services,
privileges or advantages of any kind for oneself or for others. In this
situation, Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova is
applicable11.
By the way, this has been the case of Gluhoi and others, where the
perpetrator, a professional tennis player from the Republic of Moldova,
10 B. Sandywell, On the globalisation of crime: the Internet and new criminality, in:
Y. Jewkes, and M. Yar, (eds.), Handbook of Internet Crime, London and New York:
Routlege, 2011, p. 39.
11 Gh. Reniță, Controverse legate de răspunderea penală pentru manipularea unui
eveniment și pariurile aranjate săvârșite în cyberspațiu [Controversy over criminal
liability for handling an event and arranged bets made in cyberspace], in Studia
Universitatis Moldaviae, “Social Sciences”, 2017, no. 8(108), p. 234.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

215

sent messages from his Facebook account to T.I. (a participant in “ITF
Woman” tennis competition held in Hammamet, Tunisia), G.B. (a
participant in “ITF Men’s F2 Futures” tennis competition held in Ramat
Hasharon, Israel) and to M.K. (a participant in “ITF F11 Futures” tennis
competition held in Hammamet, Tunisia) on 9 February 2017, 20 March
2017 and 22 March 2017 aiming to influence them to undertake actions,
which would produce a manipulated effect on the sports event they were
part of, for consideration in the amount of $500, EUR 700 and EUR 600.
In this context, we identify the moment of sending, receiving or
getting acquainted with the information about encouraging, influencing or
advising a participant in a sports/betting event to undertake actions which
would produce a manipulated effect on the event concerned. The
constitutive elements of the investigated offence would be gathered when
the message/phone call was received and, correspondingly, its content
became known. As a rule, there is some concurrency between these
moments. However, the prominent moment is when the content becomes
known. In the process of basing this option we shall stress that
encouraging, influencing or advising are to be transposed on a participant
in a sports event, who perceives the criminal feature of the action. The
offence referred to in Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of
Moldova cannot get its final countenance unless the information is
brought to the attention of the recipient.
If the message fails to get to the person concerned due to reasons
beyond the perpetrator’s will (e.g., due to a technical fault or due to an
error of the IT system or of the electronic communications network), the
committed actions would qualify as an attempt to commit an offence, as
there would be no perfect match between the specific act committed by the
author and the pattern described by the incrimination rule.
Furthermore, there would be an attempt to commit an offence if the
recipient (i.e. the participant in the sporting/betting event) received the
message in question on a technical device, but was not able to read it due
to a technical fault, etc. or got acquainted with its content when the
sporting/betting event concerned was completed. In this assumption, the
perpetrator’s endeavours to manipulate an event were unsuccessful.
Following those remarks, special literature claim, ultimately, that
“when qualifying the action as per Article 2421 of the Criminal Code of the
Republic of Moldova, it does not matter whether the participant in a
sporting/betting event would undertake or not the actions, which would
produce a manipulated effect on the event concerned, nor does it whether
the perpetrator would obtain or not undue goods, services, privileges or

216

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

advantages of any kind for oneself or for others. Such circumstances may
be taken into account when individualizing the punishment”12.
We agree with this opinion. Indeed, these matters have no impact on
the scope of offence aiming to manipulate an event.
A possible discrimination?
A person who encourages, advises or influences a participant in a
sporting/betting event to behave in a way that would produce a
manipulated effect on the event concerned, with a view to obtain undue
goods, services, privileges or advantages of any kind for oneself or for
others, shall be imposed criminal liability in compliance with Article 242 1
of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova.
In its turn, the participant in a sporting/betting event should not be
“obedient” and follow the instructions to manipulate (rig) the
sporting/betting event he was part of.
The participant has to report any inappropriate influence to relevant
Federations/Associations or to other entities under which aegis the event
is carried out. This approach was followed by the athletes contacted by the
perpetrator in Gluhoi and others case, who notified shortly the “Tennis
Integrity Unit” of the International Tennis Federation after they received
messages from G.N. on their Facebook account with the proposal to
manipulate the sports event they were part of.
In the Republic of Moldova, if a participant in a sporting/betting event
fails to fulfil his aforementioned obligation and adopts the behaviour
requested by the offender referred to in Article 2421 of the Moldovan
Criminal Code, then the former may be held to disciplinary/contractual
liability both for the failure to report and for his behaviour against the
principle of fair-play during the event, and no criminal liability shall be
imposed on him. For example, in compliance with Article 59 of the
Disciplinary Code of the Football Association of Moldova titled
“Manipulation of a match outcomes (match-fixing)” (edition of 2020),
manipulation of a match outcome shall be treated as a misconduct; i.e. the
intentional arrangement, act or omission aimed at an improper alteration
of the outcome or the course of a sports competition in order to remove all
or part of the unpredictable nature of the aforementioned sports
competition with a view to obtain an undue advantage for oneself or for
others. To a great extent, this definition is taken from Article 3 (4) of the
Council of Europe Convention on the Manipulation of Sports Competitions
(the Macolin Convention). The difference is that the aforementioned
Convention operates with the notion “manipulation of sports
competitions”, which is more appropriate than “manipulation of a match
12

S. Brînza, and V. Stati, op. cit., p. 110.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

217

outcome” referred to in Article 59 of the Disciplinary Code of the Football
Association of Moldova. There is some incoherence between the title of
Article 59 of the Disciplinary Code of the Football Association of Moldova
and its content. Although the Article title implies it is possible to hold
somebody liable for the manipulation of match outcomes, its content
stipulates that prejudicing the course of sports competitions is also
penalised. Hence, the words “outcomes” and “outcome” from the title and,
respectively, from the first indent of the aforementioned Article shall be
excluded. They are redundant and generate confusion.
Article 59 (1) of the Disciplinary Code of the Football Association of
Moldova provides for several scenarios of match manipulation, namely:
a) actions taken outside the field of play: any agreement or conspiracy
between a match-fixer and any other person who intends to influence or
alter a match outcome; accepting, providing, offering, promising, receiving
or requesting any advantage of monetary value or of other kind relating to
the manipulation of matches;
b) actions inside the field of play: deliberate loss of a match or of a
match phase (e.g., providing for goals, issuing yellow and red cards,
imposing penalties, etc.); intentionally wick performance of a football
player during the match (e.g., wick defence or attack); wrong application of
game rules by the referee and/or by another official person of the match
(e.g., issuing erroneously yellow and red cards, imposing penalties);
intervention on the field of play during the game or to any equipment (e.g.,
cutting the power supply of a football stadium); agreement to receive
compensation from a third person in exchange of obtaining a positive
outcome in a match or competition (e.g., acceptance of a bonus from a
third party who is willing to offer a certain “additional motivation” to a
player or referee);
c) omissions: inactions in the field of play, even if this thing is
necessary on the basis of the rules of the game (e.g., failure to issue yellow
and red cards, to impose penalties); failure to comply with the obligation
to report without delay an approach, incident or suspicion aiming to
manipulate the match outcomes; failure to denunciate immediately any
conduct falling under the provisions of this Article to the Football
Association of Moldova.
This is an exemplificative list rather than an exhaustive one. But it
contains several conceptual inadequacies. In particular, accepting,
providing, offering, promising, receiving or requesting any advantage of
monetary or other value or relating to the manipulation of matches is
susceptible to sanctioning pursuant to two rules of the Disciplinary Code of
the Football Association of Moldova, namely Article 58 and Article 59.
However, during the law-making process, it is prohibited to lay down the
218

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

same rules in several articles or paragraphs of the same regulatory act or in
two or more regulatory acts. To avoid legal parallelism, it would be
appropriate to exclude the wording about accepting, providing, offering,
promising, receiving or requesting any advantage of monetary value or of
other kind relating to the manipulation of matches from Article 59 of the
Disciplinary Code of the Football Association of Moldova. Furthermore,
failure to report an approach, incident or suspicion aiming to manipulate
the match outcomes to the Football Association of Moldova shall not be
considered as manipulation of the match itself, as well as failure to
denounce any conduct falling under the incidence of provisions referred to
in Article 59 of the Disciplinary Code of the Football Association of
Moldova to the Football Association of Moldova. Such inactions should
form a different misconduct to be sanctioned under a separate article. By
definition, the article must have a unitary character and contain one or
several interrelated rules subordinated to the same idea.
In brief, Article 59 of the Disciplinary Code of the Football Association
of Moldova should be applicable to any committed actions/inactions,
which affect the course or outcome of sports competitions. In practice,
there
should
be
regulations/codes
in
place
to
penalise
contractually/disciplinary any misconduct of a participant relative to all
sporting/betting events, which contravene the principle of fair-play. The
applied sanctions include fines and bans to practice sports-related activity.
A lifetime ban may be applied in serious cases.
The relevant literature states that “Although it may look paradoxical,
sports laws constitute a driving tool for developing an efficient system to
fight corruption in the sports industry. This is true not just from the
perspective of its capacity to rapidly do justice compared with the slow
ordinary justice, but also for its capacity to regulate a general interest. The
suspension of sporting activities, which generate success, money and glory,
has a strong discouraging effect, which is more sensible than criminal
sanctions, which ultimately could be mitigated” 13. Furthermore, it was
stated that “domestic investigations of sports associations to penalise the
people responsible for match-fixing would have a more significant impact
than criminal proceedings due to rapidity and avoidance of formality
brought by criminal proceedings. Sports (i.e. disciplinary) sanctions may
be more effective than criminal sanctions (such as depriving of the right to
carry out any football-related activities, as for the majority it would
represent a loss of livelihood and imply changing the occupation)” 14.
E. Musco, El fraude en la actividad deportiva [Sports fraud], in Revista Penal,
2001, no. 1, p. 76.
14 М.А. Prokopets, and D.М. Zhubrin, Борьба с договорными матчами (на
примере практики УЕФА и Спортивного арбитражного суда в г. Лозанна) [Fight
13

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

219

Nevertheless, in relation to this finding, we shall bring into discussion
the alleged discrimination between the enforcement actions applicable to
the offender for the manipulation of an event and to the participant in a
sporting/betting event.
Thus, in particular, under the conditions where the act of encouraging
a participant in a sporting/betting event represents, in fact, an instigation,
for the purpose of Article 42 (4) of the Criminal Code of the Republic of
Moldova (according to which “a person shall be treated as an instigator
when the latter, by all available methods, persuades another person to
commit an offence”), while the advising act, in its turn, is a way of
complicity pursuant to paragraph (5) of the same Article (which stipulates
that “a person shall be treated as an accomplice if he contributed to the
commission of an offence by means of advice, guidelines, supply of
information, provision of means/instruments or removal of barriers, as
well as the person who promised beforehand that he will favour the
offender, hide the means or instruments used to commit the offence, its
trace or items gained illegally, or the person who promised beforehand to
purchase or to sell such items”).
It means that the offender referred to in Article 2421 of the Criminal
Code of the Republic of Moldova may be subject to criminal liability for
instigating a participant in a sporting/betting event to commit a
disciplinary/contractual infringement, as well as for complicity in
committing the infringement in question. Hence, the instigator or
accomplice will be subject to criminal liability, while the author who
manipulated (rigged) the sporting/betting event in which he participated –
will be subject to disciplinary/contractual liability. Is this concept
compliant with the principle of equality before the law?
The principle of equality is violated when a differentiated treatment is
applied in similar situations without having objective and reasonable
justification.
To this end, the offender of the manipulation of an event and the
participant in a sporting/betting event find themselves in distinct
situations and, therefore, may not pretend to be subject to an identical
treatment. Equality among people implies equal treatment in equal or
similar situations. Different situations must be treated differently.
In particular, the offender referred to in Article 2421 of the Criminal
Code of the Republic of Moldova and, respectively, the participant in the
sporting/betting event committed different acts. The former inoculates a
decision to the latter aiming to rig the event he is part of. The offender
against fixed matches (on the example of the practice of UEFA and the Court of
Arbitration for Sport in Lausanne)], in Sports: economics, law, management, 2012, no. 2,
pp. 23-25.

220

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

could use the participant in the sporting/betting event as an “object” or
“means” to obtain undue goods, services, privileges or advantages of any
kind for oneself or for others, i.e. to achieve a criminal purpose. But people
shall be treated as subjects not as objects.
Certainly, it is possible that there is an accepted and well-defined “cooperation” between the offender who manipulated an event and the athlete
or the person who participated in a betting event. Furthermore, it is
possible that the initiative to rig a sporting/betting event comes from the
person who participated in such events, while the offender referred to in
2421 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova just supported the
proposal by encouraging that person or by giving guidelines to
subsequently obtain proceeds from betting shops.
Therefore, in perspective, we shall think over the possibility to define
criminal liability in the Republic of Moldova for the participant in a
sporting/betting event who would undertake actions/inactions susceptible
to manipulate (rig) the event he is part of.
Conclusions
According to Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova, the corpus
delicti of match-fixing offence will be acknowledged at the moment of
committing the harmful act (actus reus), without the need for
consequences to be produced.
Controversy may occur related to the moment of consummation of the
event manipulation offence when the perpetrator would act through IT
systems or electronic communications networks. In this context, we
identify the moment of sending, receiving or getting acquainted with the
information about encouraging, influencing or advising a participant in a
sports/betting event to undertake actions which would produce a
manipulated effect on the event concerned. The constitutive elements of
the investigated offence would be gathered when the message/phone call
was received and, correspondingly, its content became known.
A person who encourages, advises or influences a participant in a
sporting/betting event to behave in a way that would produce a
manipulated effect on the event concerned, with a view to obtain undue
goods, services, privileges or advantages of any kind for oneself or for
others, shall be imposed criminal liability in compliance with Article 242 1
of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova.
In contrast, if a participant in a sporting/betting event fails to fulfil his
obligation and adopts the behaviour requested by the offender referred to
in 2421 of the Moldovan Criminal Code, then the former may be held to
disciplinary/contractual liability both for the failure to report and for his

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

221

behaviour against the principle of fair-play during the event, and no
criminal liability shall be imposed on him.
Therefore, in perspective, we shall think over the possibility to define
criminal liability in the Republic of Moldova for the participant in a
sporting/betting event who would undertake actions/inactions susceptible
to manipulate (rig) the event he is part of.
References
Andreff, W., (2018), Different Types of Manipulation in Sport. In:
Breuer M. & Forrest D. (eds.). The Palgrave Handbook on the Economics
of Manipulation in Sport. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, Springer, pp. 13-35.
Andreff, W., (2019), An Economic Roadmap to the Dark Side of Sport.
Vol. I. Sport Manipulations. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, Springer, 2019.
Brînza, S., & Stati, V., (2015) Tratat de drept penal. Partea special
[Criminal law treaty. Special Part], Vol. II. Chisinau: Central Printing
House.
Berliba, V., & Cojocaru, R., Controverse referitoare la interpretarea şi
incriminarea infracțiunii unice prelungite [Controversy over the
interpretation and incrimination of the prolonged single offense], in
Ombudsman, 2004, no. 12, pp. 13-15.
Carpenter, K., (2012) Match-Fixing – The Biggest Threat to Sport in
the 21st Century?, in The International Sports Law Review, iss. 2, pp. 13-24.
Carpenter, K., (2013), Global Match-Fixing and the United States’
Role in Upholding Sporting Integrity, in Berkeley Journal of
Entertainment and Sports Law, no. 2(1), pp. 214-229.
Copețchi, St., (2016), Delimitarea infracţiunii unice prelungite de
concursul de infracţiuni, precum şi de unele forme ale unităţii
infracţionale [Delimitation of the single crime extended by the
competition of crimes, as well as by some forms of the criminal unit], in
Studia Universitatis Moldaviae, Series “Social Sciences”, no. 8(98), pp.
138-139.
Feltes, T., (2013), Match Fixing in Western Europe, in Haberfeld,
M.R., & Sheehan, D., (eds.), Match-Fixing in International Sports.
Existing Processes, Law Enforcement, and Prevention Strategies. Cham:
Springer, pp. 15-30.
Forrest, D., (2013), Match Fixing: An Economics Perspective, in
Haberfeld, M.R., & Sheehan, D., (eds.), Match-Fixing in International
Sports: Existing Processes, Law Enforcement, and Prevention Strategies.
Cham: Springer, pp. 177-197.

222

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Harvey, A. & Levi, H., (2016), Match fxing in international sport, in
Byers, T. (ed.). Contemporary Issues in Sport Management: A Critical
Introduction. Los Angeles: Sage, 2016, pp. 296-314.
Maennig, W., (2005), Corruption in International Sports and Sport
Management: Forms, Tendencies, Extent and Countermeasures, in
European Sport Management Quarterly, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 187-225.
Musco, E., (2001), El fraude en la actividad deportiva [Sports fraud],
in Revista Penal, no. 1, pp. 76-89.
Preston, I., & Szymanski, S., (2003), Cheating in Contests, in Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, vol. 19, iss. 4, p. 612-624.
Prokopets, М.А., & Zhubrin, D.М., (2012), Борьба с договорными
матчами (на примере практики УЕФА и Спортивного
арбитражного суда в г. Лозанна) [Fight against fixed matches (on the
example of the practice of UEFA and the Court of Arbitration for Sport in
Lausanne)], in Sports: economics, law, management, no. 2, pp. 23-25.
Reniță, Gh., (2017), Controverse legate de răspunderea penală
pentru manipularea unui eveniment și pariurile aranjate săvârșite în
cyberspațiu [Controversy over criminal liability for handling an event
and arranged bets made in cyberspace], in Studia Universitatis
Moldaviae, “Social Sciences”, no. 8(108), pp. 223-245.
Sandywell, B., (2011), On the globalisation of crime: the Internet and
new criminality, in: Jewkes, Y. and Yar, M. (eds.), Handbook of Internet
Crime, London and New York: Routlege, pp. 38-66.
Serby, T., (2015), The Council of Europe Convention on Manipulation
of Sports Competitions: the best bet for the global fight against matchfixing?, in The International Sports Law Journal, no. 15(1), pp. 83-100.
Spapens, A., & Olfers, M., (2015), Match-fixing: The current
discussion in Europe and the case of the Netherlands, in European
Journal of Crime, Criminal Law and Criminal Justice, no. 23, pp. 333-358.
Stati, V., (2013), Infracțiunea de manipulaare a unui eveniment (art.
2421 CP RM) Partea II [The crime of manipulating an event (Article 2421
of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova): study of criminal law.
Part II], National Law Review, no. 12, pp. 7-12.
Stati, V., (2014), Infracțiuni economice: Note de curs [Economic
offenses: Course notes]. Chisinau: CEP USM.
UNODC IOC (2016), Booklet for legislators. Model Criminal Law
provisions for the prosecution of competition manipulation. [accessed
01.09.2022], Available at: https://bit.ly/2z2Ze0C.
Venice Commission, Amicus curiae brief on the immunity of judges
for the Constitutional Court of Moldova, 2013, Opinion no. 698/2012.
CDL-AD(2013)008-e.
[accessed
01.09.2022],
Available
at:
https://bit.ly/3sEhnKM.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

223

MANIPULATIVE ARGUMENTATION IN ANTIUKRAINIAN DISCOURSE OF RUSSIAN POLITICIANS:
INTEGRATION OF DISCOURSE-ANALYTICAL AND
CLASSICAL RHETORICAL APPROACHES
Nataliia Kravchenko
nkravchenko@outlook.com
Abstract: Anti-Ukrainian discourse of the Russian politicians is based on
delegitimization of the images of Ukraine and the Western world while
constructing a positive image of Russia in the narratives of Self-Defense,
Liberation of Ukraine, and Liberation of the World, with roles of a Villain, a
Hero-Liberator, a Victim-Hostage and Villain's accomplice in different
configurations. These models of argumentation rely on specific topoi of Threat,
Protection and Strength and their revealing subtopoi, underpinning the
discourse-forming concepts of Empire of evil, Empire of good and Ukronazis.
Delegitimizing strategies of transfer and over-generalization are based on
metaphors, metonymy, and lexical semantic means to denote the recurrence,
systematicity and regularity of negatively connotated actions of the “alien”
group. At the pragmatic level "We"-"They" dichotomy is based on ideologemesbased intertextuality, as well as the flouting of the cooperative maxims
triggering the discursive implicatures. Maxims violation is marked by such
manipulative techniques as the role reversal, ambivalent interpretation of the
same concept, words with diffuse semantics, "complexity reduction", the
construction of presupposition and the use of contrasting evaluative names to
designate the forces of evil and good. Manipulative devices correlate with
general rhetorical topoi of peristalsis, Genus and Species, Subject – Adjuncts,
Past Fact / Future Fact, Testimony, antitheton and truncated syllogism.
Keywords: Anti-Ukrainian discourse, Russian media, narrative, topoi,
manipulative devices, intertextual allusion, conversational implicature.

Introduction. The article is focused on the topoi, manipulative
strategies and techniques of the anti-Ukrainian discourse of the Russian
politicians (ADRP) considering the formation and transformation of the
new archetypal dichotomy “Russia/Ukraine” in analogy with archetypal
opposites good - evil, order - chaos, light - darkness, top - bottom, male female, altruism - egoism with a clear tendency towards absolute
antagonism of members of the opposition and their association with other


Prof. PhD. Hab., Doctor of Science, Kyiv National Linguistic University,

Kyiv.

224

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

dichotomous archetypes, i.e. Russia = order = goodness = light, etc. and
Ukraine, respectively, chaos = evil = darkness, etc.
Such a dichotomy is superimposed on the discourse-forming
conceptual dichotomy “we-they”, inherent in any ideological discourse,
with a universal cognitive strategy to generalize members of the opposed
groups, which involves not only the image of Ukraine itself and the image
of Russia in relation to Ukraine, but also the image of the West and its
relations with Russia in connection with the events in Ukraine, as well as
other members of the group categorization “own” – “alien”.
The purpose of the article is to reveal the method of manipulative
argumentation in shaping the image of Ukraine, Russia, and the West in
the anti-Ukrainian discourse from the perspective of topoi, manipulative
strategies, techniques for their implementation and narratives for
conceptualizing recent events and their participants.
Data and methods
The paper employs integrative methodology composed of critical
discourse analysis in combination with elements of rhetorical analysis and
narrative analysis1 to identify metaphorical narratives. Critical discourse
analysis is added by pragmatic analysis within the framework of Grice’s
theory of conversational Implicature2 since the ideological anti-Ukrainian
discourse is a violation of all maxims of cooperation, which are deformed
to actualize discursive implicatures, that is, to implement manipulative
influence at the implicit level.
The research data encompass the texts of Russian politicians Vladimir
Putin3, Vladislav Surkov4, Oleg Roy 5and Denis Dubrovin6. The paper
1 Narrative analysis was used as a component of discourse analysis and relied on
studies identifying narrative and metaphorical models for the conceptualization of wars in
the 20th century. Examples of such an analysis are presented in: G. Lakoff, “Metaphor
and war: The metaphor system used to justify war in the Gulf”. Cognitive Semiotics, VI
(2) (2009), 5-19; J. Lule, War and its Metaphors: News language and the prelude to war
in Iraq. Journalism Studies, 5(2) (2003), 179-190.
2 P. Grice, (1975), Logic and conversation. In Cole, P. & Morgan, J.L. (eds.), Syntax
and semantics 3, New York: Academic Press. 41-58.
3 Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022 года
[Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24, 2022]. Available at:
http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/67843
4 Владимир Сурков. Украины нет. Есть украинство — специфическое
расстройство умов [Ukraine is not. There is Ukrainianism - a specific disorder of
minds]. Available at: https://eadaily.com/ru/news/2020/02/26/surkov-ukrainy-net-estukrainstvo-specificheskoe-rasstroystvo-umov
5 Олег Рой, “Украинство – сплав нацизма и манипуляции” [“Ukrainianism is an
alloy of Nazism and manipulation”], Взгляд. Деловая газета, 7 апреля 2022. Available
at: https://vz.ru/opinions/2022/4/7/1152532.html

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

225

employs integrative methodology composed of critical discourse analysis
in combination with elements of rhetorical analysis and narrative analysis 7
to identify metaphorical narratives.
Literature Review
The study has used the research background and terminology both of
the contemporary discourse-analysis and classical argumentation theory
dating back to Aristotle8 and Cicero9. Although both the theory of
argumentation within discursive-historical branch of the modern critical
discourse-analysis and the classical theory of argumentation use the same
concept of topos, which is one of the key concepts in this article, their
approaches in understanding this concept are radically different.
According to discourse analysts, topoi or loci are defined as
“conclusion rules”, which connect the argument with the claim, justifying
the transition from the argument to the conclusion10. Among the most
common topoi in political discourse the scientists identified Topos of
Burdening, Topos of Reality, Topos of Numbers, Topos of History, Topos
of Authority, Topos of Threat, Topos of Definition, Topos of Justice, Topos
of Urgency11, as well as the topoi of challenge, belonging, “constructing a
hero” and topos of History. For example, the topos of History can be
formulated as follows: “because history teaches that specific actions have
specific consequences, one should perform or omit a specific action in a
specific situation”.12 At this, discourse analysts use a simplified toposbased reconstruction scheme of the internal structure of arguments.
Денис Дубровин. Первая гибридная война: кровь, ложь и углеводороды [The
first hybrid war: blood, lies and hydrocarbons], 20 апреля 2022. Available at:
https://tass.ru/opinions/14415359?utm_source=google.com&utm_medium=organic&ut
m_campaign=google.com&utm_referrer=google.com
7 Narrative analysis was used as a component of discourse analysis and relied on
studies identifying narrative and metaphorical models for the conceptualization of wars in
the 20th century. Examples of such an analysis are presented in: Lakoff, G. “Metaphor
and war: The metaphor system used to justify war in the Gulf”. Cognitive Semiotics, VI
(2) (2009), 5-19; J. Lule, War and its Metaphors: News language and the prelude to war
in Iraq. Journalism Studies, 5(2) (2003), 179-190.
8 Aristotle, Topica (Transl. by E.S. Forster). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press, 1989; Aristotle. Art of Rhetoric (Transl. by J.H. Freese). Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1991.
9 Cicero, Topica (Transl. by T. Reinhardt). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003;
Rubinelli, Sara. Ars Topica. The Classical Technique of Constructing Arguments from
Aristotle to Cicero. Berlin: Springer, 2009.
10 Kienpointner, Manfred, Alltagslogik. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommannholzboog, 1992, p. 194.
11 Wodak, Ruth. The Discourse of Politics in Action. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2009, p. 44.
12 Op. cit., p. 40.
6

226

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

If compared to classical rhetoric, the discursive-historical
understanding of topoi is closest to the notion of specific topoi (in
Aristotelian definition - right / wrong, the good / the unworthy, the
advantageous / the disadvantageous, the noble /the base), which intersects
with the Aristotle’s concept idia. At the same time, the topoi of critical
discourse analysis do not correlate with Aristotle's general topoi, which
constitute the basic relations between concepts or their designating words
– for example, Genus / Species, Whole / Parts, Subject / Adjuncts,
Similarity / Difference, Cause / Effect, Antecedent / Consequence, Possible
/ Impossible, Past Fact / Future Fact, Authorities, Witnesses, etc.
In its attempt to generalize the discursive-analytical and rhetorical
approaches, our article uses the concept of topoi in its two facets: as a kind
of mental units, a ready-made argument putting the audience in a
favorable frame of mind13 (Rubinelli, 2009: 148), and a structuralsemantic models, rhetorical devices guiding the construction of
arguments.
In their first facet the topoi as universal values or normative reference
points (the idea of God, law, justice, morality) are the components in the
argumentative models, acceptable for any argument. At the same time, the
first aspect does not exclude and even presupposes the second one, since
to actualize the topoi-ideas, it is necessary to use a certain model of
argumentation, including semantic-structural and syntactic means.
A certain novelty of the article consists in its attempt to integrate the
research approach of critical discourse analysis and classical rhetoric
method in terms of explicating the topoi-ideas (close to specific topoi) in
terms of topoi–rhetorical models (close to general topoi).
In this perspective, topoi-rhetorical devices correlate with such levels
of critical discourse analysis (in its Norman Fairclough's14 version) as (a)
“discourse as text”, involving the interpretation of metaphors, lexicalsemantic and syntactic means as well as (b) “discourse as discursive
practice” based on discursive implicatures, intertextuality and
presuppositions as an implicit plan to activate and confirm such topoiidea. In their turn, the means of two first levels of analysis correlating with
rhetorical devices are aimed at revealing topoi-ideas as the arguments of
the evaluation-normative plan to substantiate discursive strategies and
discourse-forming concepts at the third level of critical-discourse analysis,
namely “discourse as a social practice”. Topoi-ideas underpin discursive
Sara Rubinelli, op. cit., p. 148.
Fairclough, Norman, Critical discourse analysis. London, New York: Longman,
1995; Fairclough, Norman. A dialectical-relational approach to critical discourse analysis
in social research. In R. Wodak & M. Meyer (Eds.), Methods of critical discourse analysis.
London: Sage, 2009, 162–186.
13

14

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

227

strategies associated with the pragmatics of “out-of-discursive” actions in
support of OWN group and discrediting the group of THEY. In this regard,
in addition to the discursive-historical notion of topoi, the article uses
some explanatory tools of cognitive-discursive approach - to identify the
basic cognitive strategies of the transposition and overgeneralization,
within the semantic category of Us-Them Categorization and Polarization,
introduced by Teun van Dijk15.
Another aspect of novelty of this paper is, in our opinion, an attempt
to demarcate the notions of “topos” and discourse-forming “concept”16.
Unlike the concept, the topos is communicatively oriented and sets the
model for the development of events, that is, it represents a dynamic plan
of the concept. For example, the concept “Under-State” is associated with
the topos of uselessness, which, in turn, is associated with the elimination
strategy “if such an entity is ineffective and useless, it must be abolished.”
As a dynamic / pragmatic plan of discourse-forming concepts, topoi-ideas

15 Van Dijk, Teun A., The Reality of Racism. In: Zurstiege G. (eds). Festschrift für die
Wirklichkeit. VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 2000, p. 211-226
16 The notion of a discourse-forming concept is used to designate a key concept that
integrates the structure of a certain discourse determining its cognitive semiotic space
(Kravchenko, N., Goltsova, M., Kryknitska, I. “Politics as Art: The Creation of a Successful
Political Brand”. Journal of History, Culture and Art Research, 9 (3) (2020), 314-323;
Kravchenko, N. et al. “Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication” or half a century of IT
consumer identity formation: A pragmatics approach”. Token: A Journal of English
Linguistics, 13 (2021),141-169). Kravchenko, N. Et al. “Illocutionary Pragmatic
Adaptation Challenge: Ukrainian Translations of English-language Soft Law Texts”.
Amazonia Investiga, 11(49) (2022), 267-276). In some studies, the term discourseforming concepts is substituted by a notion of discourse-forming values (Kravchenko, N.,
Pasternak, T. “Institutional eco-pragmatics vs. anthropo-pragmatics: problems,
challenges, research perspectives”. Cogito. Multidisciplinary research journal, XII (2)
(2020), 24-39; Kravchenko, N. et al. “Illocutionary Pragmatic Adaptation Challenge:
Ukrainian Translations of English-language Soft Law Texts”. Amazonia Investiga, 11(49)
(2022), 267-276). In discourses created by media, such discourse-creating values are
often ideologemes-simulacra that construct spaces of secondary signification and
mythologizing. When compared with the post-structural version of discourse analysis, the
“closest” to our understanding of discourse-forming concepts is the notion of nodal points
as privileged discursive points which partially fix the meaning in a chain of signification,
sustaining the identity of a certain discourse by constructing a knot of definite meanings"
- e.g., God, nation, party, class, etc. (Torfing, J. New Theories of Discourse: Laclau,
Mouffe and Zizek. Wiley, Social Science, 1999, 98-99). The notion of discourse-forming
concepts also intersects with the concept-ideas that provide the “internal form” of texts as
a macro-sign component of discourse in discursive semiosis (Kravchenko, N. Discourse
and discourse analysis: Concise encyclopedia. Kiev.: Interservis, 2017 (in Russian);
Kravchenko, N. Interactive, genre, and conceptual modelling of International Legal
Discourse. Kiev: Referat, 2006 (in Russian).

228

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

determine the argumentative strategies, and the metaphorical narratives
of the Tale of a Just War.
Discussion
The material of the study showed that the main topoi of AntiUkrainian discourse include the topoi of history, danger or threat, benefit /
uselessness, responsibility, law, abuse, justice, culture, strength, power. In
this respect ADRP is not original - most of these topoi used in ideological
discourse were identified by discourse analysts. Specific for ADRP is the
foregrounding and distribution of key and auxiliary topoi, as well as the
techniques and frequency of their actualization.
Thus, it is identified that one of the most frequent is the topos of
history, which, however, is instrumental, intermediate for actualizing key
topoi of threat, responsibility, protection, and power in the global
argumentative model of “Fair War” with narratives of “Self-Defense” and
“Salvation”.
In turn, such topoi are ambivalent - depending on their correlation
with the group “We” or “They”: we are responsible, they are irresponsible;
they threaten, we protect ourselves and / or protect others.
Topoi are determined by three discourse-creating concepts and their
subconcepts as shown in the Figure 1.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

229

Figure 1. Discourse-creating concepts and subconcepts in antiUkrainian discourse of the Russian media
Discourse-creating concepts and their associated topoi are revealed in
two narrative models of war conceptualization, schematically presented in
Table 1.
concepts

topoi

Ukronazis
vs.
Empire of
good
(Fighter
against
the forces
of Evil)

THREAT
POWER
JUSTICE

Empire of
evil vs.
Empire of
good.

THREAT
PROTECTION

230

pragmatic
aspect of
the topoi
Threat to
Ukraine
needs
protection
from
Russia

A world
threatened
by the UScentric
West needs
Russian
protection

narrative
models
A tale of just
war: “The
Story of
Salvation 1”:
Ukrainian
authorities
are a Villain
Ukraine is a
Victim /
Hostage
Russia is a
HeroLiberator
A tale of just
war: “The
Story of
Salvation 2”:
NATO / USA
/ Western
World are
Villain
Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Ukronazis,
Empire of
evil
vs
Empire of
good.

THREAT
PROTECTION

The danger
threatening
Russia
requires its
defensive
response

Ukraine is a
Villain's
accomplice
The World is
a Hostage
Russia is a
HeroLiberator
A tale of just
war: “Selfdefense
narrative”:
Russia is a
Victim and
Hero;
Ukraine or
Anti-Russia is
a Villain
NATO / USA
/ Western
World are
Demonic
forces,
Villain's
accomplice,
whose orders
are carried
out by Villain.

Table 1. Narrative models of a tale of just war in anti-Ukrainian
discourse of the Russian media
The “Liberation / Salvation" narratives, which position Russia as a
Hero-Liberator, the Western world as a villain, and Ukraine as an
accomplice of a villain, correspond to a model of argumentation based on
the topoi Threat (THEIR group, Western world) and Protection and
Strength (OUR group), as a dynamic plan of discourse-forming concepts
Empire of evil and Empire of good.
The two main models of argumentation construct respectively the
narrative of “Salvation” and the narrative of “Self-Defense”.
Narratives of Salvation
The Narrative of Salvation is manifested in Russian discourse in its
two versions: Liberation of Ukraine and Salvation of the World, with
various argumentative schemes and methods of their implementation.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

231

Accordingly, the construction of the scenarios involves topoi and
ideologemes to characterize, on the one hand, the role of the Liberator
and, on the other, the role of the Vilain, projected in the anti-Ukrainian
discourse on the dichotomous opposition WE and THEY. Consider this
dichotomy in view of the subtopoi that construct the key topoi as shown in
Table 2.
WE

THEY
Membership categorization
Metonymy: Russia; citizens
Metaphor: NATO and the whole
of
Russia,
Ukrainian
Western world as an “evil empire” that
territories or Ukrainians
threatens the “inner group”
who
want
selfMetonymy: USA, Ukraine=anti-Russia
determination
to
join
as the threat manifestations
Russia; countries that have
been attacked by NATO
KEY TOPOS: TRUSTWORTHINESS vs. THREAT
Instrumental topoi
RESPONSIBILITY
IRRESPONSIBILITY
на протяжении 30 лет
В ответ на наши предложения мы
мы настойчиво и
постоянно сталкивались либо с
терпеливо пытались
циничным обманом и враньём, либо
договориться с ведущими
с попытками давления и шантажа:
странами НАТО о
Те, кто претендуют на мировое
принципах равной и
господство, публично, безнаказанно
неделимой безопасности
и, подчеркну, без всяких на то
в Европе.
оснований объявляют нас, Россию,
своим врагом. В этом ряду и
обещания нашей стране не
расширять ни на один дюйм НАТО
на восток
Compliance with
Violation of international law: illegal
international law;
use of military force against other
Integrity
countries, distortion of UN Security
Council decisions;
Abuse
Что касается нашей
Сперва без всякой санкции Совета
страны, то после
Безопасности ООН провели
развала СССР при всей
кровопролитную военную операцию
беспрецедентной
против Белграда, использовали
открытости новой
авиацию, ракеты прямо в самом
современной России,
центре Европы Несколько недель
готовности честно
непрерывных бомбёжек по мирным
работать с США и
городам, по жизнеобеспечивающей
другими западными
инфраструктуре (…). Затем
232

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

партнёрами и в условиях
фактически
одностороннего
разоружения нас тут же
попытались дожать,
добить и разрушить уже
окончательно

Adherence to universal
values (Topos of justice)
based on archetypal
dichotomy of good and evil
Да, собственно, и до
последнего времени не
прекращались попытки
(…) разрушить наши
традиционные ценности
и навязать нам свои
псевдоценности,
которые разъедали бы
нас, наш народ изнутри,
те установки, которые
они уже агрессивно
насаждают в своих
странах и которые
прямо ведут к
деградации и
вырождению, поскольку
противоречат самой
природе человека17

наступила очередь Ирака, Ливии,
Сирии. Нелегитимное
использование военной силы против
Ливии, извращение всех решений
Совета Безопасности ООН по
ливийскому вопросу привело к
полному разрушению государства,
к тому, что возник огромный очаг
международного терроризма, к
тому, что страна погрузилась в
гуманитарную катастрофу, в
пучину не прекращающейся до сих
пор многолетней гражданской
войны. (…).Подобную судьбу
уготовили и Сирии. (…).Однако
особое место в этом ряду
занимает, конечно же, вторжение в
Ирак тоже без всяких правовых
оснований
a violation of universal values (topos of
injustice) based on archetypal
dichotomy of good and evil
Ведь такое шулерское поведение
противоречит не только
принципам международных
отношений, но прежде всего
общепризнанным нормам морали и
нравственности. Где же здесь
справедливость и правда?

Table 2. Topoi and subtopoi in anti-Ukrainian discourse of the
Russian media
Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022 года
[Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24, 2022].
17

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

233

Thus, the topos “threat” (for the world) is based on the subtopoi
“illegitimacy”, “injustice”, “irresponsibility” (of THEIR actions), revealing
aspects of the metaphorical ideologeme “empire of evil”, which is directly
nominated in the Russian discourse:
Поэтому с полным на то основанием, уверенно можно сказать,
что весь так называемый западный блок, сформированный США по
своему образу и подобию, весь он целиком и есть та самая “империя
лжи”18.
As shown by the Table 2, the subtopoi are primarely actualized by
direct nomination and evaluation of the actions of the group “THEY”:
threat to universal values and human nature; violation of international
law; the desire to redistribute the world and establish own order; creating
an imbalance in the world, the practice of unjustified attack on other
states; consequences: complete destruction of the states, humanitarian
catastrophes, international terrorism, mass migration, etc.
At the same time subtopoi, instrumental for the topos “threat”, are
based not only on the denotative level of events / actions description, but
also on the connotative level, associated with “personal” qualities of the
group of THEY, with the involvement of their negative evaluations: brazen
lie, pressure, blackmail, recognition of one's superiority over others,
euphoria from absolute superiority, low level of general culture and
arrogance, and so on.
In critical discourse analysis19, such labeling is defined as a means of
predication strategy, while substantiation of negative characteristics of the
group “THEY” through reference to their actions and associated events
correspond to the strategy of argumentation. Both strategies are
subordinated to a more global strategy of delegitimization - the
construction of a negative image of THEY as an image of the enemy.
With that in mind, predication as a marking of THEIR qualities is also,
in our opinion, a part of the argumentative strategy, since such
characteristics of the “alien group” as deceitful, insidious, cruel,
unprincipled at the connotative level activate the topos of “threat”.
Narrative of Salvation in the Tale of a Just War presupposes the roles
of Villain and Hero-Liberator. The paper identified that the construction of
these roles, especially the role of Villain, involves over-generalization and
transfer strategies.
The strategy of over-generalization is based on generalization of the
negative patterns of action or behavior of THEIR group into the cognitive
Op. cit.
R. Wodak, & M. Meyer, Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis. London: SAGE
Publications Ltd., 2001; Renkema, J. Discourse, Of Course: An Overview Research in
Discourse Studies. Amsterdam: John Benjamins B.V., 2009.
18
19

234

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

scheme (which is then activated during any references to this group). For
example, models of the situation related to military operations against
Iraq, Libya, Syria, Yugoslavia, are generalized to the general negative
cognitive pattern of action of Western "peacekeeping" forces; Cases of
hostilities not authorized by UN resolutions - to the scheme “all THEIR
actions violate international law”.
Some linguistic markers of over-generalization are displayed below
(Table 3).
example

linguistic device

вторжение в Ирак
тоже без всяких
правовых
оснований / the
invasion of Iraq is
also without any
legal basis
это наиболее
вопиющие, но
далеко не
единственные
примеры
пренебрежения
международным
правом / these are
the most egregious,
but by no means the
only examples of
disregard for
international law

an adverb-modifier
of the mode of
action тоже / also

adverbs of spatial
generalization
везде, во многих
регионах мира /
everywhere,
in
many regions of
the
world,
in
combination with
the attributes of
generalization
далеко
не
единственные /
no means the only
adverbal modifier
of
temporal
generalization и до
последнего
времени / and
until recently

function in the
implementation of
the strategy
to
denote
the
recurrence
and
systematicity
of
violations
of
international law
to indicate
regularity
violations

the
of

to refer to
recurrence of
negatively
connotated actions
of the group of
THEM.

Table 3. Linguistic markers of the strategy of overgeneralization.
Considered in terms of Aristotelian general topoi, the above means of
generalization correspond to peristasis as a description of attendant
circumstances in terms of recurrence. In its turn, peristasis is one of the
figures of reasoning contributing in rhetoric to amplification of thought or
subject matter.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

235

The strategy of generalization is also marked by such linguistic
techniques as the metonymic (synecdoche) identification of Genus and
Species concepts added by tactics of using words with diffuse (blurred)
semantics in combination with the tactics of “complexity reduction” and
the use of contrasting evaluative names to designate the forces of evil
(they) and the forces of good (we), as illustrated by the following example:
Ведущие страны НАТО (generalized nomination) для достижения
своих собственных целей (diffuse semantics) во всём (diffuse semantics)
поддерживают на Украине крайних националистов и неонацистов,
(“complexity reduction” with the use of contrasting negative evaluations),
которые в свою очередь никогда не простят крымчанам и
севастопольцам их свободный выбор – воссоединение с Россией. Они,
конечно же, полезут и в Крым (metaphor-metonymy with animalistic
input source space, associating the source conceptual space with insect or
reptile), причём так же, как и на Донбасс, с войной с тем, чтобы
убивать, как убивали беззащитных людей каратели из банд
украинских националистов, пособников Гитлера во время Великой
Отечественной войны20 (intertextual allusion).
Due to the vagueness of the metaphor-metonymy “will climb into the
Crimea”, it remains unclear who exactly “will climb” there. After all, the
pronoun “They” is semantically subordinated to two actors - NATO and
“extreme nationalists and neo-Nazis in Ukraine.” The vagueness of the
argument implements the strategy of hypo-hyperonymic identification of
NATO and Ukraine.
In terms of Aristotle the identified metonymy corresponds to Genus /
Species topics, when NATO and Ukraine are not associated as part and
whole (Ukraine is not a member of NATO), but as generic and specific
concepts based on political and ideological grounds and topos of threat to
Russia. Thus, such identification is another implicit argument for
justifying the war with Ukraine as a measure of protection against NATO
(topos of self-defense).
In addition to the strategy of generalization, the analysis of antiUkrainian discourse reveals the strategy of transfer, when a negative
model from one cognitive sphere is projected into another cognitive
sphere. Such a strategy aims to effectively build new or intensify old
models of situations, linking them with the negative schemes of others.
An explicit lexical-semantic marker of this strategy in the above
example is the adverb with a particle and a comparative conjunction так
же, как и на Донбасс (“just like in the Donbass”) to denote “similarly”.
Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022 года
[Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24, 2022].
20

236

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

Implicitly the transfer strategy is realized at the level of the
intertextual allusion, which refers to the topos of history. In terms of
rhetorical invention, the allusion corresponds to the topics of Past Fact /
Future Fact subcategorized to the topic of circumstances in which one
refers to general events in the past or to what will occur in the future based
on the record of the past. In such a way the allusion at the same time
overlaps both with Aristotle’s topos of Testimony, bringing precedents
forward from the past, and topos of the Possible and Impossible when
discussing what is likely or not for the future.
Due to the allusion to the events of World War II, the activated old
models of negatively connoted situations are transferred into the present
in order to form presuppositions about analogical behavior of Ukrainian
military forces and punishers from gangs of Ukrainian nationalists,
accomplices of Hitler (каратели из банд украинских националистов,
пособников Гитлера).
From a syntactic point of view, the means of generalization include
passive, impersonal and indefinite-personal sentences, an object in the
position of a phrasal subject, any impersonalization aimed at “removing”
the speaker from his own discourse to reduce responsibility for own
statements:
Apart from the image of the generalized Villain, the Narrative of
Salvation involves the image of the Hero-Liberator. If the Western world is
a Villain, then its antagonist, i.e the Hero-Liberator, is Russia. While in the
scenario “Salvation of Ukraine” such a role is explicit, in the scenario
“Salvation of the World” it is implied and marked connotatively by positive
and evaluative characteristics of the Hero, such as responsibility,
legitimity, justice, adherence to universal values (see Table 1 (left column).
But such subtopoi are not sufficient to construct the role of the HeroLiberator, because the implementation of this role requires such
parameters as strength and ability to resist the forces of evil.
Such topoi are actualized at the level of discursive implicatures, often
based on intertextual allusions involving the topos of history.
Именно так и было в 90-е годы, в начале 2000-х годов, когда
так называемый коллективный Запад самым активным образом
поддерживал сепаратизм и банды наёмников на юге России. Каких
жертв, каких потерь нам тогда всё это стоило, через какие
испытания пришлось пройти, прежде чем мы окончательно
сломали хребет международному терроризму на Кавказе21
At the implicit level there the paper has revealed an opposition of the
consequences of THEIR and OUR actions, identified at the level of
Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022 года
[Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24, 2022].
21

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

237

semantic coherence of the whole text. While They initiated a surge of
international terrorism, We broke his back, which actualizes the contextual
semes “strength”, “power”, “victory”, characterizing the Hero in the
context of trials that must always be passed to fulfill his mission (the sixth
stage in the Campbell's Monomif of the Hero22, when in the trial of the
hero increases his strength before the main trial - the struggle with
darkness, the forces of evil).
Just as in the world of myth and fairy tale when the Hero usually
fights a monster, this fragment uses a metaphor-idiom referring to a
terrible living creature whose back must be broken by the Hero in the
struggle to survive.
Through the reference in this passage to “international terrorism”, the
movement towards self-determination of the peoples of Ichkeria,
Tatarstan, etc. is generalized into the “international terrorism” scheme,
which becomes an argument to justify actions to combat the national
liberation movement, reversing the roles of the Victim-Attacker.
Besides the role reversal, the text under consideration also
demonstrates the manipulative technique of ambivalent interpretation of
the same concept. Depending on the context, the notion of selfdetermination is either equated to separatism generalized to international
terrorism, or is used to denote the “freedom of choice”.
The notion of “separatism (international terrorism)” is used when it
concerns liberation movements in Russia: Именно так и было в 90-е
годы, в начале 2000-х годов, когда так называемый коллективный
Запад самым активным образом поддерживал сепаратизм и банды
наёмников на юге России (the collective West most actively supported
separatism and mercenary gangs in southern Russia).
The concept of “freedom of choice” is employed when referring to the
Ukrainian territories: свобода выбора для всех самостоятельно
определять своё будущее и будущее своих детей. И мы считаем
важным, чтобы этим правом – правом выбора – могли
воспользоваться все народы, проживающие на территории
сегодняшней Украины, все, кто этого захочет. Крымчане и
севастопольцы сделали свой выбор – быть со своей исторической
Родиной, с Россией, и мы это поддержали23 (freedom of choice for all to
independently determine their own future and the future of their children.
And we consider it important that this right - the right to choose - could be

Joseph Campbell, The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1949.
23 Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022 года
[Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24, 2022].
22

238

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

used by all the peoples living on the territory of today's Ukraine, by anyone
who wants it).
Let us analyze one more example of the use of the topos of history for
the implicit construction of the role of the Hero-Liberator.
Почему всё это происходит? Откуда эта наглая манера
разговаривать с позиции собственной исключительности,
непогрешимости и вседозволенности? Откуда наплевательское,
пренебрежительное отношение к нашим интересам и абсолютно
законным требованиям? Ответ ясен, всё понятно и очевидно.
Советский Союз в конце 80-х годов прошлого века ослаб, а затем и
вовсе развалился. Весь ход происходивших тогда событий – это
хороший урок для нас и сегодня, он убедительно показал, что
паралич власти, воли – это первый шаг к полной деградации и
забвению. Стоило нам тогда на какое-то время потерять
уверенность в себе, и всё – баланс сил в мире оказался
нарушенным24 (Why is all this happening? Where does this impudent
manner of speaking from the position of one's own exclusivity, infallibility
and permissiveness come from? Where does the disdainful, disdainful
attitude towards our interests and absolutely legitimate demands come
from? The answer is clear, everything is clear and obvious. The Soviet
Union in the late 80s of the last century weakened, and then completely
collapsed. The whole course of events that took place then is a good lesson
for us today as well; it convincingly showed that the paralysis of power and
will is the first step towards complete degradation and oblivion. As soon as
we lost our self-confidence for a while, and that's it - the balance of power
in the world turned out to be disturbed).
This fragment is an example of violation of the cooperative maxim of
relevance of information. On the one hand, the speaker adheres to this
maxim at the level of cohesion, that is the formal-logical connection
“question-answer” (Почему всё это происходит? / Why is all this
happening?… Ответ ясен, всё понятно и очевидно / The answer is
clear, everything is clear and obvious), but violates it at the level of
coherence or semantic relationship, because further deployment of the text
does not explain “what exactly is clear and obvious.”
According to the principle of cooperation the answer to the speaker's
question is derived as a discursive implicature based on implicit antithesis.
In terms of rhetorical devices, it is based on truncated syllogism and
antitheton. A syllogism with unspecified prerequisite (entinema) omits the
main prerequisite:
Советский Союз в конце 80-х годов прошлого века ослаб, а
затем и вовсе развалился (...). Стоило нам тогда на какое-то время
24

Op. cit.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

239

потерять уверенность в себе, и всё – баланс сил в мире оказался
нарушенным (The Soviet Union in the late 80s of the last century
weakened, and then completely collapsed (...). As soon as we lost
confidence in ourselves for some time, and that's it - the balance of power
in the world turned out to be disturbed).
A complete formal syllogism would be as follows: because a strong
empire was the guarantor of balance in the world.
The antitheton, built from сontraries, includes the following parts:
(a) our weakness leads to the strengthening of the group THEM and to
the imbalance in the world: наглая манера разговаривать с позиции
собственной
исключительности,
непогрешимости
и
вседозволенности? (impudent manner of speaking from the position of
one's own exclusivity, infallibility and permissiveness come from?)
(b) our strength would lead to Their weakening and restoring balance.
Thus, the discursive implicature is inferred as: Russia is responsible for the
balance in the world; the restoration of a strong Russia will ensure balance
in the world.
Another vector of actualization of the Hero-Liberator role is the way
the anti-Ukrainian discourse covers the events of this war.
On the one hand, the messianic role of Russia as the Hero-Liberator of
the world from Nazism is explicitly actualized through the construction of
the discourse-creating concept of Ukronazis (see Figure 1), based on
animalistic metaphors, labeling, and other devices.
Мы удивляемся жестокости нацбатовцев, но эта жестокость
– прямое следствие их приверженности идеологии украинства. (…)
Потому что именно мы обязаны показать миру звериную
сущность украинства, чтобы ни оно само, ни что-то подобное
никогда больше не возродилось25 (We are surprised at the cruelty of the
National Battalion, but this cruelty is a direct consequence of their
commitment to the ideology of Ukrainianism. (...) Because it is we who are
obliged to show the world the bestial essence of Ukrainianism, so that
neither it, nor anything like it, will ever be reborn).
On the other hand, the implicit actualization of the messianic role of
the Hero-Liberator of the world is carried out through the use of
presuppositions that identify Ukraine with the forces of world evil (the role
of the Villain in the Fairy tale about a just war - see Table 1). The
mechanism of formation is the structural or semantic complication of the
thematic (left) part of the statement, which requires some cognitive effort
to interpret it. Due to this, the rhematic part, which is intended to become
new presuppositional information, is taken for granted.
Олег Рой, “Украинство – сплав нацизма и манипуляции” [“Ukrainianism is an
alloy of Nazism and manipulation”],
25

240

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

If to present such a mechanism in terms of Aristotle's rhetoric, then
such a technique will correspond to the method of constructing arguments
Subject - Adjuncts, i.e. the subject - free members of the sentence. The
focus in such an argumentative model is not on what is essential
(“subject”), but on what is accidental or simply characteristic of something
(its “adjuncts”). That is, the semantic focus of the phrase on the subject
distracts attention from its adjunct characteristics allegedly secondary in
meaning, and therefore the information presented as secondary is not in
doubt, constructing the presupposition.
(…) это Первая мировая гибридная война. Которая идет не
столько на украинском театре боевых действий, сколько в мировой
экономике в виде торговых, логистических и финансовых войн, а
также в медийном, культурном, кибернетическом пространстве и
даже на научном треке (примером которого является военнобиологическая деятельность США на Украине …)26.
Due to the fact that some of the information is given in brackets (‘an
example of which is the military biological activity of the United States in
Ukraine’), the semantic emphasis of the phrase is focused on the concept
of “world hybrid war” and its manifestations. At the same time, an example
that illustrates the peripheral facet of such a war is perceived as verified
information that forms the premise about Ukraine as a springboard for US
biological projects to develop biological weapons directed against Russia.
The construction of the concept of UKRONAZIS with the topos
“threat” is used not only in the scenario “Salvation of the World”, but also
the “Salvation of Ukraine”.
Even though such a scenario is increasingly moving to the periphery, it
is still relevant, although it now concerns the East of Ukraine, the
“liberation” of the Russian-speaking population.
In this scenario, Russia's role as a Liberator is often explicitly
mentioned:
Терпеть всё это было уже просто невозможно. Необходимо
было
немедленно
прекратить
этот
кошмар –
геноцид
в отношении проживающих там миллионов людей, которые
надеются только на Россию, надеются только на нас с вами.
Именно эти устремления, чувства, боль людей и были для нас
главным мотивом принятия решения о признании народных
республик Донбасса27 (It was simply impossible to endure all this. It was

Денис Дубровин. Первая гибридная война: кровь, ложь и углеводороды [The
first hybrid war: blood, lies and hydrocarbons],
27 Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022 года
[Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24, 2022].
26

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

241

necessary to immediately stop this nightmare - the genocide against the
millions of people living there, who rely only on Russia, hope only on us).
At the same time, the scenario of Liberation-Salvation can be
actualized implicitly - by allusive nominations associated with certain
ideologemes. For example, the ideologemes “Soviet people” and “common
Soviet identity” are actualized by the address Уважаемые товарищи!/
"Dear comrades!", allusion to a common Soviet past (fight against
fascism), inclusive pronoun нашу / our, and words with the seme
“commonality” (общую Родину).
Уважаемые товарищи! Ваши отцы, деды, прадеды не для того
сражались с нацистами, защищая нашу общую Родину, чтобы
сегодняшние неонацисты захватили власть на Украине (Dear
comrades! Your fathers, grandfathers, great-grandfathers did not fight the
Nazis, defending our common Motherland, so that today's neo-Nazis
seized power in Ukraine).
The analysis of anti-Ukrainian discourse shows that the concepts of
“liberation” and “fraternal people” are only semantic ideologemes, empty
signifiers that are filled with meaning only in certain ideological contexts.
In particular, the positive connotations associated with such meanings are
destroyed in the context of the whole anti-Ukrainian discourse, in which
such ideologemes as “insidiousness of Ukrainians”, “understate” and
others are implanted. Thus, a direct allusion to historical events becomes
the basis for the actualization of the ideologeme of “insidiousness of
Ukrainians.”
То атаман Полуботок подведет, то западенцы к Гитлеру
переметнутся. Принуждение силой к братским отношениям единственный метод, исторически доказавший эффективность на
украинском направлении28 (Ataman Polubotok will let you down, then
the Westerners will go over to Hitler. Forced coercion into fraternal
relations is the only method that has historically proven effective in the
Ukrainian direction).
Since the syntactically dependent idiom “fraternal relations” includes
semes “unity”, “love” and “friendship”, then in combination with the main
component Принуждение силой (Coercion by force) it forms an implicit
oxymoron: Coercion by force to unity, love, and friendship. This device
violates the maxim of relevance as the semantic coherence and stimulates
the search for an argument - a discursive implicature that should be the
answer to the question “Why should fraternal relations be forced?”.
Intertextual allusions with negative historical connotations intensify old
Владимир Сурков. Украины нет. Есть украинство — специфическое
расстройство умов [Ukraine is not. There is Ukrainianism - a specific disorder of
minds].
28

242

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

models of situations that are transferred to modern realities and
generalized to the scheme (transfer strategy): Ukraine and Ukrainians
have always been insidious and unreliable towards their “benefactors”, so
they need to be forced for friendship.
Narrative of Self-Defense
The narrative scenario of Self-Defense of The tale of the Fair War is
primarily based on the topos of history as part of a more generalized
argumentative scheme with the topos of "danger / threat." Such scenario
involves intertextual allusions underpinning the pragmatic strategies of
transfer and generalization.
In particular, in the example below, a direct allusion to the events of
World War II is used to implement the transfer strategy: negative
historical connotations about the unexpected attack of Nazi Germany are
transferred to the model of behavior of NATO and Ukraine as metonymic
manifestations of threat forces.
В результате страна оказалась не готова к тому, чтобы в
полную силу встретить нашествие нацисткой Германии, которая
без объявления войны напала на нашу Родину 22 июня 1941 года. Врага
удалось остановить, а затем и сокрушить, но колоссальной ценой.
Попытка ублажить агрессора в преддверии Великой Отечественной
войны оказалась ошибкой, которая дорого стоила нашему народу. В
первые же месяцы боевых действий мы потеряли огромные,
стратегически важные территории и миллионы людей. Второй раз
мы такой ошибки не допустим, не имеем права29 (As a result, the
country was not ready to fully meet the invasion of Nazi Germany, which
attacked our Motherland on June 22, 1941 without declaring war. The enemy
was stopped and then crushed, but at a colossal cost. An attempt to appease
the aggressor on the eve of the Great Patriotic War turned out to be a mistake
that cost our people dearly. In the very first months of hostilities, we lost
huge, strategically important territories and millions of people. The second
time we will not allow such a mistake, we have no right).
Thus, the discursive implicature that is inferred by combining two
conceptual spheres based on the transfer strategy, can be formulated as
follows: we can no longer wait for them (i.e. Ukraine as a metonymic
personification of the “alien” group) to attack first. Involving the topos of
history with the transfer strategy becomes a means of actualizing the key
topos of “threat”, which becomes an implicit argument in favor of an attack
on Ukraine. At the same time, thanks to the allusion, the ideologeme of
“NATO / Ukraine insidiousness” is being formed.
Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022 года
[Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24, 2022].
29

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

243

Conclusion
The construction of Russia's positive image in the anti-Ukrainian
discourse is carried out through the delegitimization of the image of Ukraine
and the Western world in the narratives of Self-Defense and Liberation of the
Tale of a Just War. The “Liberation / Salvation" narrative, which positions
Russia as a Hero-Liberator, the Western world as a villain, and Ukraine as an
accomplice of a villain, is a model of argumentation based on the topoi Threat
(THEIR group, Western world) and Protection and Strength (OUR group), as
a dynamic plan of discourse-forming concepts Empire of evil and Empire of
good. The argumentation model associated with another variant of the
Liberation/Salvation narrative is based on such a configuration of roles as the
Ukrainian authorities - the Villain, Ukraine - the Victim / Hostage and Russia
- the Hero-Liberator.
The same topoi Threat (THEIR group, Ukrainian power) and
Protection and Strength (Russia) are underpined in this model by the
discourse-creating concepts of Ukronazis and Empire of good.
The Self-defense narrative of the Tale of Fair War positions Russia as a
Victim and Hero at the same time, Ukraine or Anti-Russia as a Villain and
NATO / USA / Western World – as Demonic forces, embodied Evil, whose
orders are carried out by Villain. This model of the event conceptualization
is based on the topos Threat associated with the discourse-forming
concepts of Ukronazis, Empire of evil and Empire of good.
As subtopoi, the article identified such components arguing topoiideas as responsibility / irresponsibility, legitimacy / illegitimacy,
universal human values / pseudo-values, justice / injustice in the
archetypal dichotomy of good - evil associated with the opposition WETHEY. The most frequent is the topos of history, which is equally
productively used by both groups as realizing the strategy of transfer when
a negative model from one cognitive sphere is projected into another
cognitive sphere to build new or intensify old models of situations
associated with the “alien” group.
In addition to transfer, the article identified the cognitive-pragmatic
strategy of over-generalization aimed at constructing the internal and
external groups and their associated images of the Hero and the Villain in
the generalized value dichotomy of Good and Evil. At the verbal level this
strategy is marked with metaphors, metonymy, and lexical semantic
means to denote the recurrence, systematicity and regularity of negatively
connotated actions of the “alien” group.
At the pragmatic level the generalized images of We and They are
based on means of ideologemes-based intertextuality, as well as the
flouting of the cooperative maxims triggering the discursive implicatures.
Maxims violation is marked by such manipulative techniques as the role
244

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

reversal, ambivalent interpretation of the same concept, tactics of using
words with diffuse semantics, “complexity reduction”, the construction of
presupposition and the use of contrasting evaluative names to designate
the forces of evil and good.
The article revealed the correlation of manipulative techniques of the
verbal and pragmatic levels with general rhetorical topoi. The lexical
semantic means of generalization correspond to peristasis as the figure of
reasoning and amplification. Metonymy and synecdoche correlate with
Genus and Species topos. Intertextual allusions relate to the topics of Past
Fact / Future Fact and overlap with Aristotle’s topos of Testimony,
bringing precedents forward from the past, and topos of the Possible and
Impossible. Violations of maxims of cooperation with inference of
discursive implicatures are associated with truncated syllogism. Implicit
antitheses correspond to antitheton and the technique of presuppositions
construction relies on Subject – Adjuncts topos.
References
Aristotle, (1999), Topica (Transl. by E.S. Forster). Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Aristotle, (1991), Art of Rhetoric (Transl. by J.H. Freese). Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Campbell, Joseph, (1949), The Hero with a Thousand Faces.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1949.
Cicero, (2003), Topica (Transl. by T. Reinhardt). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Grice, P., (1975), Logic and conversation. In Cole, P. & Morgan, J.L.
(eds.), Syntax and semantics, 3. New York: Academic Press, 41-58.
Дубровин, Д., (2022), Первая гибридная война: кровь, ложь и
углеводороды [The first hybrid war: blood, lies and hydrocarbons], 20
апреля 2022. Available at:
https://tass.ru/opinions/14415359?utm_source=google.com&utm_m
edium=organic&utm_campaign=google.com&utm_referrer=google.com
Fairclough, Norman (1995). Critical discourse analysis. London, New
York: Longman.
Fairclough, Norman, (2009), A dialectical-relational approach to
critical discourse analysis in social research. In R. Wodak & M. Meyer
(Eds.), Methods of critical discourse analysis. London: Sage, 162–186.
Kienpointner, Manfred (1992). Alltagslogik. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt:
Frommann-holzboog.
Kravchenko, N., Prokopchuk, M., Pozhar, A., Rozhkov, Y., &
Kozyarevych-Zozulya, L., (2022), Illocutionary Pragmatic Adaptation

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

245

Challenge: Ukrainian Translations of English-language Soft Law Texts.
Amazonia Investiga, 11(49), 267-276.
Kravchenko, N., Valigura, Meleshchenko, V., Chernii, L., (2021),
Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication” or half a century of IT consumer
identity formation: A pragmatics approach. Token: A Journal of English
Linguistics, 13, pp. 141-169.
Kravchenko, N., Pasternak, T., (2020), Institutional eco-pragmatics
vs. anthropo-pragmatics: problems, challenges, research perspectives
Cogito. Multidisciplinary research journal, XII (2), 24-39.
Kravchenko, N., Goltsova, M., Kryknitska, I., (2020), Politics as Art:
The Creation of a Successful Political Brand. Journal of History, Culture
and Art Research, 9 (3), 314-323.
Kravchenko, N., (2012), Discourse and discourse analysis: Concise
encyclopedia. Kiev.: Interservis, 2017 (in Russain).
Kravchenko, N. (2006). Interactive, genre and conceptual modelling
of International Legal Discourse. Kiev: Referat (in Russian).
Lakoff, G., (2009), Metaphor and war: The metaphor system used to
justify war in the Gulf”. Cognitive Semiotics, VI (2), 5-19.
Lule, J., (2003), War and its Metaphors: News language and the
prelude to war in Iraq. Journalism Studies, 5(2), 179-190.
Обращение Президента Российской Федерации 24 февраля 2022
года [Address of the President of the Russian Federation February 24,
2022]. Available at: http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/67843
Рой, О., (2022), Украинство – сплав нацизма и манипуляции”
[“Ukrainianism is an alloy of Nazism and manipulation”], Взгляд.
Деловая газета, 7 апреля 2022. Available at:
https://vz.ru/opinions/2022/4/7/1152532.html
Rubinelli, Sara, (2009), Ars Topica. The Classical Technique of
Constructing Arguments from Aristotle to Cicero. Berlin: Springer.
Сурков, Вю (2020). Украины нет. Есть украинство —
специфическое расстройство умов [Ukraine is not. There is
Ukrainianism - a specific disorder of minds]. Available at:
https://eadaily.com/ru/news/2020/02/26/surkov-ukrainy-net-estukrainstvo-specificheskoe-rasstroystvo-umov
Van Dijk, Teun A., (2000), The Reality of Racism. In: Zurstiege G. (eds).
Festschrift für die Wirklichkeit. VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 211-226.
Wodak, Ruth, (2009), The Discourse of Politics in Action.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wodak, R., & Meyer, M., (2009), Methods of Critical Discourse
Analysis. London: SAGE Publications Ltd., 2001; Renkema, J. Discourse,
Of Course: An Overview Research in Discourse Studies. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins B.V.
246

Vol. XIV, no. 3/September, 2022

SEMANTIC PHENOMENA IN ENGLISH CLINICAL
TERMINOLOGY OF VETERINARY MEDICINE
Olena Syrotina,
o.mishak@nubip.edu.ua
Yurii Rozhkov,
yuriev694@gmail.com
Valerii Lashkul
lash58095@gmail.com
Abstract: This paper explored semantic phenomena in English clinical
terminology of veterinary medicine. The aim of this work is to study such semantic
phenomena as synonymy, antonymy, polysemy and hyperogyponymia in clinical
veterinary terminology. The author focuses on the generalization of theoretical
views on the essence of the phenomena of synonymy and antonymy in terminology
in general. The peculiarities of the using synonymous and antonymous units in
English clinical terminology of veterinary medicine are shown. The main types of
synonyms and antonyms and their structural features in the studied terminology
are identified and analyzed. Synonymy and antonymy are typical phenomena in
this system that make it more flexible. They are characterized by sufficient
consistency and order. The phenomenon of polysemy in veterinary clinical
terminology is rare, but in various forms. Hyper-hyponymic relations between
units, based on generic-species conceptual commonality, form multi-level
hierarchical structures that represent a complex framework of the terminological
vocabulary of clinical veterinary medicine. This type of relationship between units
is one of the most important principles for structuring knowledge and organizing
the terminological composition of the "animal disease" term system.
Keywords: semantic phenomena, clinical terminology, veterinary
medicine, synonyms, antonyms, structural types, polysemy, hyperogyponymia.



PhD. in Pedagogy, Associate Professor, National University of Life and
Environmental Sciences of Ukraine (Kyiv, Ukraine).

PhD. in Philology, Senior Lecturer at National University of Life and
Environmental Sciences of Ukraine (Kyiv, Ukraine).

PhD. in Pedagogical Sciences, Lecturer, National University of Life
and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine (Kyiv, Ukraine).

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

247

Introduction
The terminology of veterinary medicine is a set of names denoting the
concepts of veterinary medicine as a science, and special nomenclature
names of veterinary medicine as a field of professional activity. Modern
terminology of veterinary medicine is one of the most extensive and
complex systems. The lexicon of veterinary medicine is several hundred
thousand words and phrases. The huge volume of modern veterinary
terminology is explained by the exceptional diversity of the categories of
scientific concepts it reflects.
The terminology of veterinary medicine consists of 3 main
terminological groups: anatomical, clinical and pharmaceutical, each of
which defines its own range of concepts. Anatomical terminology names
the organs of the animal and their functions, clinical designates the names
of diseases, their symptoms, disease states, and pharmaceutical gives the
names of drugs. In clinical terminology, the most frequent are lexical units
denoting the names of diseases, processes and treatment methods.
The terminology of veterinary medicine is a set of terms denoting the
concepts of veterinary medicine as a science and special nomenclature of
veterinary medicine as a field of professional activity. The modern
terminology of veterinary medicine is one of the most extensive and
complex in terms of concepts and content systems of terms. The lexicon of
veterinary medicine consists of several hundreds of thousands of words
and word combinations. The huge volume of modern veterinary
terminology is explained by the exceptional variety of categories of
scientific concepts reflected in it.
The terminology of veterinary medicine consists of 3 main
terminological groups: anatomical, clinical and pharmaceutical, each of
which defines its own scope. Anatomical terminology names the organs of
the animal and their functions, clinical terminology indicates the names of
diseases, their symptoms, painful conditions, and pharmaceutical
terminology gives the names of medicinal products. In clinical
terminology, the most frequent are the lexical units denoting the names of
diseases, processes and treatment methods.
А whole number of studies of veterinary clinical terminology, defining
its main characteristics, have been carried out by such linguists: S.
Amelina and I. Hopak1, L. Komarova2,3, V. Lashkul4, T. Nemova and M.
1 S.M., Amelina, I.M. Hopak, Structural and semantic peculiarities of English terms in
the veterinary sublanguage in the context of Ukrainian translation. Scientific herald of
National University of Life and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine: Philological sciences.
Kyiv, 2016, Vol. 248, 156-161.
2 L.N., Komarova, The origins of veterinary terminology II International Scientific
and Practical Conference. "A new word in science: development strategies". Cheboksary,
CHGU, 2017, 1(9), 1-4.

248

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

Lychuk5, Yu. Rozhkov6,7, O. Syrotina8, Yu. Timkina9,10, T. Cherepovska and
O. Binkevich11, L. Yagenych12 and others.
However, semantic phenomena based on paradigmatic relations, such
as hypero-hyponymy (generic-species), synonymy, antonymy, polysemy,
homonymy, characteristic of veterinary terms, have not been sufficiently
investigated by linguists in these works.
The problem of semantic phenomena of English clinical veterinary
terminology still remain unresolved, which determines the relevance of the
study.
The aim of our work is to study the specifics and analysis of
semantic phenomena in English clinical veterinary terminology.
Materials and methods of research
The terms for the study were selected from the following
lexicographical sources: Black’s Veterinary Dictionary (2015); Concise
veterinary dictionary (1988); Veterinary dictionary (2012); Dictionary of
Veterinary Nursing E-Book (2007); Saunders comprehensive veterinary
dictionary e-book, Veterinary Dictionary (2018).
L.N. Komarova, Eponyms in Veterinary Medicine in English. XI International
scientific-practical conference "Priority directions of development of science and
education". Cheboksary, CHGU, 2016,1-5.
4 V.A. Lashkul, Language means of process category in the English epizootological
terminology. International journal of philology, 2021, 12(4), 50-54.
5 Т.V. Nemova, М.І. Lychuk, Features of formation and translation of terminology
of clinical veterinary hematology. International journal of philology, 2020, 11 (3), 73-81.
6 Yu. H. Rozhkov, From the history of formation of the English veterinary
terminology. International journal of philology. 2021, 12 (3), 90-97.
7 Yu. H. Rozhkov, Verbalization of Animal Diseases in English: Linguocognitive
and Structural-Semantic Aspects. Dissertation for a Doctor of Philosophy in Philology
degree: specialty - 035 Philology. Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, 2021, 224.
8 E.A. Sirotina, Categories of space and time in the English terminology of
veterinary medicine. Studia Humanitatis, 2020, No. 3.
9 Yu. Yu Timkina, English-language lexical and grammatical units in the field of
«Veterinary science». Baltic Humanitarian Journal. Kaliningrad: Assotsiatsiya PAAS,
2019, 2 (19), 62-65.
10 Yu. Yu Timkina, Classification of veterinary terminology in English. Philological
sciences. Questions of theory and practice. Tambov: Gramota, 2017, 6(1), 72, 156-158.
11 T. Cherepovska, & O. Binkevych, Morphological peculiarities of veterinary
terminology in the context of teaching English for specific purposes. Scientific
Proceedings of Ostroh Academy National University: Philology Series, 2019 (5 (73)), 310312.
12 L.V. Yagenich, On the classification of veterinary medicine terminology in
modern English. Fundamental science for universities. Moscow: Moscow State
Pedagogical University, 2020, (1), 342-351.
3

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

249

The main methods used in the study were sampling of language
material, definition analysis, classification as well as word-formation and
term-component analyzes.
Literature Review
To the semantic phenomena in terminology, which are traditionally
considered in lexicological studies, linguists include such phenomena as
synonymy (doubling), antonymy, homonymy, polysemy, metaphorization,
metonymization in terminology, and more recently also paronyms, that is,
the proximity of words by form with their complete or partial difference in
meaning, which causes their mixing in use, and hyponyms are generic
semantic relations between lexical units.
The works of D. Lotte, A. Akhmanova, S. Grinev, D. Shmelev, T.
Kandelaki, A. Superanskaya, A. Reformatsky, V. Danilenko, T. Kiyak, B.
Golovin, I. Kochan, V. Leichik, S. Shelov, L. Alekseev and others are
devoted to the study of synonymy and antonymy.
V. Leichik, S. Shelov, S. Grinev, V. Tatarinov, L. Alekseeva, N.
Novodranova in their scientific research not only recognize, but also
regard terminological synonymy as a positive process, indicating a high
level of development of science.
Analysis of modern linguistic literature indicates two absolutely
opposite points of view regarding the essence of terminological synonymy
and the classification of synonymous terms. Some researchers (L.
Alekseeva, S. Hrynyov, V. Leychyk, S. Majhaeva, Yu. Slozhenikina, S.
Shelov, etc.) treat synonymy in terminology positively. Other linguists (V.
Favorin, A. Shapiro, E. Tolikina, V. Molodets, O. Akhmanova and others)
deny synonymy in terminology.
The works of Yu. Apresyan, Sh. Bali, L. Vvedenska, V. Danylenko, E.
Derdy, L. Novikov, O. Taranenko, and others are devoted to the study of
the theoretical foundations of antonymy on the material of different
languages. Terminological antonymy as a systemic phenomenon was
studied on the material of the English language by R. Dudok, Yu.
Melnikov, R. Shutnikov, S. Shabarzina, and others.
Research of many domestic and foreign scientists V. Gladko, Yu.
Gurova, V. Karaban, Z. Karimova, V. Levitskyi, F. Lytvyn, I. Olshanskyi, A.
Superanskaya, O. Taranenko, J. Lyons, E. Schneider and others are
devoted to the diverse aspects of the polysemy study, the peculiarities of
the formation of branch terminological systems, and the relations between
the structural units of professional languages.
Research by R. Boltyanska, V. Vynogradova, Y. Kovalik, L. Lipko and
others is devoted to the problem of distinguishing the phenomena of
polysemy and homonymy.
250

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

Although polysemy, homonymy and synonymy are undesirable
phenomena in medical terminology, they are relatively common and no
field of veterinary medicine can avoid them. Polysemy and synonymy
accompany the development of every new branch of medicine. This
situation is typical for the time of rapid formation of new terms and
theoretical treatment of scientific terminology. Although homonyms are
quite rare within the same field of veterinary medicine, synonyms
quantitatively expand the vocabulary.
The phenomenon of hyperonymy occupies a central place in the
terminology of both the English language and any other language of
scientific communication. At the end of the 20th and the beginning of the
21st century, many works of scientists (B. Laurel., Frank W. Roder, J.
Lyons, N. Arutyunova, S. Hrynyov-Grynevych) were devoted to the study
of hypero-hyponymic categories.
Among the research of modern Ukrainian scientists devoted to the
problem of hyperonymy, published over the last decade, we should note
the works of N. Mashtakova, M. Teplova, O. Konovalova, A. Shevchuk.
Synonymy
Synonymy is a common phenomenon in the English clinical
terminology of veterinary medicine, which includes names denoting
pathogens and vectors of diseases; diseases and pathological conditions of
the animal; forms of their course and signs (symptoms, syndromes);
environmental factors affecting the health of the animal; methods of
diagnosis, prevention and treatment of diseases, etc.
Extreme activity in synonymous relations in the English clinical
terminology of veterinary medicine was demonstrated by terminological
units that nominate animal diseases. Selected by continuous sampling
from special dictionaries13,14,15 these terms served as material for the study
of synonymous relations.
Despite significant advances in the study of synonymy, there is still no
generally accepted definition of the term "synonym" in linguistics. In
modern scientific literature, there are many definitions of the concepts of
"synonym" and "synonymy", however, a single point of view and a single
approach to their definition has not been developed. Synonyms are, as you
know, words that have the same or similar meaning. Terms expressing the
B. Edward, Black's Veterinary Dictionary. London: Bloomsbury, 2015, 514p.
V.P. Studdert, Saunders Comprehensive Veterinary Dictionary. London: Elsevier
Ltd, 2015, 508 p.
15 R.G. Bengis, R.A. Kock, J. Fischer, (2002), Infectious animal diseases: the
wildlife/livestock interface. Revue scientifique et technique - Office international des
epizooties. Vol. 21 (1), 53-65.
13

14

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

251

same concepts, denoting the same objects and phenomena of reality, these
are the terms-synonyms. T. Panko defines synonyms in terminology as
“terms related to the same denotation, but having differences in terms of
concepts, as well as differing in the semantics of word-forming elements,
etymology, degree of modernity and features of functioning”16.
E. Kortun believes that term synonymy is a type of semantic
relationship based on the ability of different terminological units to
designate the same special concept, expressing various additional features,
emotional or stylistic coloring, compatibility with other terminological
units17.
In the general literary language, synonymy is a positive phenomenon,
since it contributes to its enrichment. Synonyms in terminology are treated
ambiguously. Until recently, the opinion prevailed that this phenomenon
is undesirable in term systems, since it violates one of the mandatory
requirements for terms.
From another point of view, in the paradigm of cognitive science,
synonymy is treated positively. Studies conducted in line with cognitive
linguistics, terminologists (L. Alekseeva, S. Grinev, V. Leichik, S.
Madzhaeva, Yu. Slozhenikina, S. Shelov, etc.) indicate that the processes of
synonymy and variance are active processes and testify to the constant
nature of the development of the science language. Synonymous relations
are considered "backbone"18, and the ability of synonyms to name the
same special concept, highlighting its individual features from different
angles, is necessary in the scientific process19.
Linguists who recognize the existence of terminological synonymy
distinguish a number of its specific features, in contrast to a similar
phenomenon in common vocabulary20,21. From a linguistic point of view,
the presence of synonyms provides the functional flexibility of the
terminological system necessary for the implementation of various
communicative tasks.
T.I. Panko, Ukrainian terminology, Lviv: Svit, 1994, p. 181.
E.A. Kortun, Synonymy of terms (based on the terminology of the oil-producing
and oil-refining industries). Scientific notes of the Komsomolsk-on-Amur State Technical
University, 2012, No. 2(9), p. 36.
18 M.Ya. Salamakha, Synonymous relations in the English-language termschology
of the field of environmental protection. Scientific journal of the Chershvet National
University named after Yury Fedkovich. German Philology, 2013, Issue 653, p. 128.
19 V.A. Tatarinov, General Terminology: Encyclopedic Dictionary. Russian
Terminological Society RossTerm. Moscow: Moscow Lyceum, 2006, pp. 172-173.
20 I.V. Artemova, Terminological specifics of medical discourses. Herald of the
Russian Friendship University: Series "Education Issues: Languages and Specialties",
2006, 1 (3), 49-52.
21 Yu.V. Slozhenikina, Terminological variability: semantics, form, function.
Moscow: LKI Publishing House, 2010, 288 p.
16
17

252

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

An analysis of the synonymy features of veterinary terminology gives
reason to present its classification according to the following criteria:
according to the degree of absolute identity of the meaning (absolute and
relative synonyms), by structure (synthetic, analytical).
A detailed analysis of absolute / relative synonyms with corresponding
examples from the terminology under study is given below.
Absolute synonyms arise as a result of the existence in the terminological
system of borrowings, loan translation and terms created on the basis of their
own language to denote the same concept: absolute synonymous terms are
interchangeable in any context. As the results of the study showed, the
composition of the synonymic series of absolute synonyms, as a rule, includes
terms formed from Latin-Greek elements and national terms.
Examples of absolute synonymy are the following synonymous series:
fluorosis – mottled enamel, pneumonia – pneumonitis, peritoneal
inflammation – peritonitis, pharyngemphraxis – pharyngeal obstruction,
heart disease – cardiac disease, myocarditis – myocardial inflammation,
pericarditis – inflammation of pericardium; elephant leg – elephantiasis.
In the course of our research, we discovered synonymous relations
between 1) borrowed terms: stomatitis – mucositis, toxanemia – toxic
anemia, bilharziasis – schistosomiasis, toxomplasmosis – toxoplasma
infection; 2) terms from the actual English language: rabies – canine
madness; lumpy jaw – big jaw; black leg – quarter evil; 3) borrowed and
actually English terms: Avian cholera – Chicken cholera.
So, in the terminology of veterinary medicine, the phenomenon of
absolute synonymy is caused, as a rule, by the existence of two variants of
terms: international (Latin and Greek) and national. The gradual
assimilation of veterinary terminology in the national language led to the
development of its own means of nomination. The main reason for the
spread of this phenomenon lies in the peculiarities of the development of
veterinary terminology in the English language, which took place on the
basis of Greek and Latin.
This process was accompanied by the formation of synonymous series
consisting of borrowed and proper English terms, for example: Pestis
African Suum – African Swine Fever – African Pig Plague – Montgomery
Swine Flue; Rabies – Hydrophobia – Dog Madness; Asiatic fowl cholera –
Avian flu – Chicken Flu.
Relative synonyms are synonyms in which the identity of
individual lexical and semantic meanings is found, that is, incomplete
coincidence of the component composition of denotative meanings 22.
22 M.Ya. Salamakha, Synonymous relations in the English-language termschology
of the field of environmental protection. Scientific journal of the Chershvet National
University named after Yury Fedkovich. German Philology. 2013, Issue 653, p. 130.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

253

These include the veterinary terms, which have the same semantic core of
meaning, but different peripheral components. As an example, consider a
synonymous series of relative synonyms: disease, illness, sickness,
morbidity, infirmity, ailment, indisposition; complaint, disorder, malady,
badness.
Our research shows that the activity of using these synonyms is
different. In English clinical terms, only three nominations are used to
denote animal diseases: disease, sickness and illness. For example, May
sickness, Grass sickness, African Horse sickness, Mad Dog disease, Swine
Vesicular disease, etc. Moreover, "disease" is a certain, serious illness. This
word usually refers to various diseases, viruses, for example: Lyme disease,
Nairobi sheep disease, Pullorum disease, Rabbit hemorrhagicc disease.
The following synonymous series can serve as examples of relative
synonyms: Tuberculosis – Pearl disease. The term Tuberculosis in English
and Ukrainian means a disease that affects the lungs of animals and
humans, while the term Pearl disease means tuberculosis that affects
animals. Elephant foot – Barbados leg. In the first case, the name of the
disease was formed from the symptom that led to infection with filaria (the
causative agents of elephantiasis), various parts of the body, most often the
legs, were covered with huge growths that resembled the legs of an
elephant. In the case of Barbados leg, the same disease had a completely
different history of its name. The disease was discovered in Africa, but was
brought from the island of Barbados. In the English terminology for
animal diseases, these terms denote partially overlapping concepts. In
particular, the semantic analysis of these key terms showed that these
units with their own content volume differ in shades of meaning, have
different origins and are characterized by different combinatorial
compatibility.
The synonymy of the studied terms is characterized by the variant of
their form, by which we mean formal variations of the same linguistic sign.
Such relations of variant occur between units identical in content and
different in the way of expression.
According to the structure, veterinary terms-synonyms can be
classified on the basis of the following structural types when they enter
into synonymous relationships:
1) one-word term – one-word term: contusion – seizure, dropsy –
hydrophobia, volvulus – ileus, deitis – vulvitis23;
2) terminological combination – one-word term: goat posthitis –
goatpox, cattle plague – rinderpest, breast inflammation – mastitis;
23

254

B. Edwards, Black's Veterinary Dictionary. London: Bloomsbury, 2015, p. 59.

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

3) terminological phraseology – terminological phraseology: fog fever
– acute bovine pulmonary edema, wooden tongue – wooden tone, quarter
evil – black leg, cardiac defect – valvular defect24;
4) eponym – one-word term: Lyme disease – borreliosis, Corrion's
disease – bartonellosis,
5) abbreviation – terminological combination: BP – blood pressure,
ANS – autonomic nervous system, CVS – cardiovascular system, EDUD –
eating, drinking, urinating and defecating, BHV – bovine herpesvirus, BT
– blue tongue25.
The presence of a large number of the above-described terms is mainly
due to non-linguistic reasons – the peculiarities of the development of
veterinary science and practice.
First of all, there is a fundamental possibility of distinguishing
different distinguishing features in the same object, which is manifested in
the use of different motivational features when defining terms. Secondly,
the same object (symptom, syndrome, disease, pathological process,
diagnostic method, method of treatment, surgical operation, infectious
agent, etc.) can be discovered or described and, accordingly, named
differently by different specialists in one country or by specialists from
different countries, or at different times, or simultaneously, but
independently of each other. If at the same time a similar scientific concept
has formed in the thinking of specialists, then the names created by them
are synonyms of the interpretive type. Thirdly, in connection with a deeper
knowledge of the object, the concept formed about it is enriched. In the
thinking of a specialist, other essential distinguishing features of the
concept are depicted. On this basis, there is a need to express an enriched
concept with a new sound complex, in which a more precisely oriented
sign would be presented. Fourth, interpretive synonyms can arise when a
new classification of a group of concepts appears. Fifth, interpretive
synonymy can be the result of establishing the identity of a disease that
was previously denoted by different names.
Therefore, synonyms in terminology continue to appear and exist, and
therefore require constant study. It must be recognized that modern
terminology in general and the terminology of veterinary medicine in
particular have created the necessary theoretical foundation for a broad
scientific analysis of synonymous relationships between terminological
units.

24
25

Ibid, p. 78.
Ibid, p. 61.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

255

Antonymy
Semantic relations in the lexical system of the language are
supplemented by antonymy. With its definition, the concept of opposites
acquires a philosophical, logical and linguistic meaning. According to M.
Pestova, antonyms are words that are opposed by the most general and
most significant semantic feature, and they are at the extreme points of the
corresponding lexical and semantic paradigm26.
The vocabulary of the language of science, with the same frequency as
the general literary language, is also characterized by the phenomenon of
antonymy. But, considering the terms named various animal diseases, we
came to the conclusion that in this term system antonymic relations are
less frequent compared to synonymy. At the same time, examples of two
types of antonyms can be found in the veterinary vocabulary: lexical and
derivative.
In the nominations of animal diseases, lexical type of antonymy can
be demonstrated by the following example: abrachia – apodia. Antonymy
in this pair of nominations is achieved by contrasting one of the
components of the meaning: upper (limbs) – lower (limbs), since the term
abrachia in English means the absence of upper limbs, apodia –
respectively, lower limbs.
Derivative antonymy is formed by using antonymous morphemes,
indicating respectively redundancy, exaggeration and insufficiency,
lowering the established norm. Most often, this role is played by pairs of
prefixes such as hypo- (hyper-), oligo- (poly-), macro- (micro-), for
example: hypertrophy (growth, increase in the size of something, in
particular an organ) – hypotrophy (underdevelopment, for example, of an
organ, part of the body); hyperaesthesia (abnormally increased sensitivity
to pain in an animal) – hypoaesthesia (reduced sensitivity to pain);
hyperkinesia (increased muscle activity of the limbs of the animal's body)
– hypokinesia (limited movement of the limbs due to limited muscle
functioning); oligodontia (a congenital pathology in the absence of one or
more teeth – polydontia is a congenital pathology, which is characterized
by an excessive number of teeth; oligodactyly (an anomaly in the
development of the animal, consists in an insufficient number of fingers on
the paws of the animal) – polydactyly (consists in the presence of such a
number of fingers in the animal that exceeds the norm; macrostomia
(developmental anomaly: excessively wide mouth gap) – microstomia

M.S. Pestova, Antonymy as an object of theoretical research. Bulletin of the South
Ural State University. Series Linguistics. Yuzhno-Uralsk: Publishing House. SURU, 2014,
18-21.
26

256

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

(developmental anomaly characterized by narrowing of the mouth
opening)27.
There are many antonymous pairs among the English composite
terms of veterinary medicine, for example: autochthonous microorganisms
(microorganisms, typical and permanent inhabitants of this ecosystem (for
example, soil, gastrointestinal tract, etc.) – allochthonic microorganisms
(microorganisms alien to a given ecosystem, temporarily present in it or
those that are at rest. Their presence depends on a random change in
external conditions (an increase in the concentration of nutrients or the
addition of new, certain substances) that allow the development of the
above microorganisms)28; active immunity (the body's resistance that
develops in response to the introduction (hit) of an infectious agent or
vaccine preparation and, as a rule, is characterized by an increase
(appearance) of antibodies29 – passive immunity (the resistance of the
body, obtained due to ready-made protection factors30; multifactorial
etiology / disease (diseases in which more than one agent / cause is
responsible for a specific pathological process31 – monofactorial etiology /
disease (diseases in which one agent / one cause is responsible for a
specific pathological process)32.
The nominations of generic antonymous terms - composites mainly
express the unity of opposite concepts, attributes express their opposite
signs, that is, the values of attributes are opposed according to one of the
semantic components.
So, antonymy is a significant specific feature characteristic of the
English clinical terminology of veterinary medicine. It allows you to
designate the semantics of the term system and ensures its symmetry,
stability and consistency.
Polysemy
One of the special features of the term is its unambiguity. The study of
various terminological systems and subsystems showed that in the
terminological vocabulary, as well as in the literary language, there is such
a phenomenon as ambiguity, or polysemy. By polysemy we understand the
presence of the same word in several interconnected meanings, which
Yu. H. Rozhkov, Verbalization of Animal Diseases in English: Linguocognitive
and Structural-Semantic Aspects. Dissertation for a Doctor of Philosophy in Philology
degree: specialty - 035 Philology. Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, 2021, p. 125.
28 V.V. Nedosyekov, V.P. Lytvyn, V.V. Polishchuk, V.V. Melʹnyk, O.M. Homzykov,
O.H. Martynyuk, Dictionary of epizootological terms. Kyiv: VAT Ryabyna, 2014, p. 5.
29 Ibid, p. 27.
30 Ibid, p. 27.
31 Ibid, p. 34
32 Ibid, p. 34.
27

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

257

usually arise during the modification and development of the primary
meaning of this word33.
There is no doubt that among the main features of terms, unambiguity
is the leading one34. It is natural that this feature turns into a requirement
for a term when creating a term, since it is known that each concept is
unambiguous in itself. And this is, according to the law of identity, one of
the elementary conditions of correct thinking35.
According to T. Stasiuk36, the notion of the unambiguity of the term is
a common mistake that arose as a result of attributing to it (the term) the
unambiguity of the reflection of reality.
The reasons for ambiguity (polysemy) and the forms of its expression
in veterinary terminology vary. Yu. Shestok37 outlines two reasons for the
ambiguity of veterinary terms.
1. Epistemological: human thinking at the same time supports the
tendency towards unambiguity and precision of word usage, and
counteracts it by finding verbal expression for new concepts.
2. The nature of the development of veterinary science: the number of
micro-terminological systems is increasing, which makes it possible to use
the same language units to denote different concepts.
According to S. Shelov, the reason for ambiguity lies in the "lagging" of
the term from the evolution of the content of the expressed concept 38.
Following the development of scientific knowledge, this or that concept is
divided into two or more independent concepts, and the same sound
complex continues to be used for their expression within the same
microsystem.
Observations show that in the English-language terminological system
for the designation of animal diseases, the main property of the term –
ambiguity – manifests itself consistently. The phenomenon of polysemy is
represented by individual examples. Polysemy can occur in unit cases.
First, as a result of convergence of the meanings of the term denoting a
certain organ or its parts and diseases of the organ. Thus, alveolitis has two
O.S. Akhmanova, Dictionary of linguistic terms. Moscow: Ripol Classic, 2013, p. 43.
S.V. Grinev-Grinevich, Terminology. Moscow: Academy, 2004, p.120.
35 Yu.V. Slozhenikina, Terminological variability: semantics, form, function.
Moscow: LKI Publishing House, 2010, p. 55.
36 T.V. Stasyuk, The nature of the term in the cognitive-anthropological paradigm
of linguistics. Scientific Bulletin of the UNESCO Department of KLNU. Series Philology.
Pedagogy. Psychology. Kyiv: Nat. lingu. un-t, 2012, 25, 95-100.
37 O.V. Shestok, Polysemy of terms of medical sciences. (Dis...candidate of philol.
sciences). Krasnodar, 1996, pp. 156-158.
38 S.D. Shelov, Essay on the theory of terminology: composition, conceptual
organization, practical applications. Moscow: PrintPro., 2018, p. 211.
33

34

258

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

meanings fixed in Orlov's dictionary: 1) inflammation of the alveoli of the
lungs, without further damage to the bronchi; 2) inflammation of the
alveoli of the teeth, which develops during the removal of teeth in animals.
Secondly, polysemy arises as a result of the synonymy characteristic of the
name of various organs, when differentiating, for example, the
nominations of inflammatory processes: brucellosis – can be inflammation
of the lymph nodes around the genital organs of an animal, as well as
inflammation of the genital organs themselves, for example, testicles39.
Polysemy is introduced into veterinary terminology by homonymous
terms, which are words that are written the same way, but are different
from the similarities and meanings of the words of the ancient Greek
language. Thus, the homonymous pair athelia – -а+thele is based on two
terms: athelia ‒ comes from the Greek ateles ‒ "incomplete, imperfect", is
used with the meaning "incomplete development of a certain organ or
tissue" and negative from the Greek prefix -a + root ‒thele ‒ "sedge" ‒
"anomaly of development: absence of mammary nipples".
So, we can see that the polysemy of veterinary terms that refer to
animal diseases is natural due to the asymmetry of the linguistic sign,
when the same form is used to denote different objects and perform
different functions. The problem of polysemy in scientific terminology, and
in particular, the semantic differentiation of polysemous terms, seems to
be important, since the accuracy of the description of scientific concepts
depends on the use of terms. This statement also applies to veterinary
terminology, for which the accuracy of the choice of the term is also
important, since the health of the animal depends on it, and therefore the
health of the person.
Analyzing various veterinary terms that denote the names of diseases,
we can conclude that the phenomenon of polysemy (multiple meanings) in
veterinary terminology is less common than in literary language, but
occurs in different forms.
Hyperogyponymia
Multi-level hierarchical structures, built on the relations of
hyperogyponymy between professional concepts, represent a complex
frame of terminological vocabulary. Interrelations in the hierarchy
between individual language units and between their associations depend
on the interconnected positions of terms in relation to each other. A
hyperonym is the name of a generic concept characterized by general
important qualities, while specific concepts are represented by hyponyms,
F.M. Orlov, Dictionary of veterinary clinical terms. Moscow: Rosselkhozizdat,
2018, p. 198.
39

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

259

which are names of a specific concept that can include a larger number of
components. The majority of veterinary clinical terms, combined by
formal-semantic hyponymic relations, are formed on the basis of joining a
hyperonym with one or more consistent and inconsistent definitions
expressed by nouns.
For example, in the English language, the term "disease" is a generic
(hypernym) for a number of disease types included in the term system
"animal diseases": Bovine diseases ‒ diseases of ruminants; avian diseases
‒ diseases of birds; sheep and goat diseases (diseases of sheep and goats);
equine diseases (diseases of horses); swine diseases (pig diseases); bees
diseases (bee diseases); multiple species diseases (diseases of different
species of animals)40. The relations of hypero-hyponymy permeate the
entire hierarchical structure of terms for animal diseases. The basis of any
terminological system is the genus-species principle. Hyponymy is
considered a "categorical relationship of lexical units based on logical and
semantic subordination"41.
The construction of a hierarchical structure of terms for the
designation of animal diseases was carried out by analysis of the
relationship between a term denoting a general generic concept and a term
reflecting species variants of the same concept. Similar terms form a
hierarchy that is built on sequential subordination, for example: infectious
diseases (hyperonym) ‒ Lyme disease, Rabies, Leptospirosis, Canine
hepatosoonosis, Canine skin pythiosis (hyponyms); cattle diseases
(hyperonym) ‒ Theileriosis, Bovine tuberculosis, Bovine babesiosis, Bovine
brucellosis, Dermatophilosis (hyponyms).
Hypero-hyponymous connections of terms for animal diseases are
built on the basis of differentiation: 1) Diseases by location, 2) Diseases by
types of animals.
In the terminology used to denote animal diseases, hyperohyponymous connections are formed between the terms indicating the
place affected by the disease and the species of animals. The hyperonym
Diseases by location is generic in relation to other terms included in its
group: endocrine and metabolic diseases; hematology, oncology and
immunology; dermatological diseases; diseases of the gastrointestinal
tract; cardiac and respiratory diseases; diseases of the urinary tract;
diseases of the reproductive system; neurological and musculoskeletal
disorders; ophthalmological diseases. At the same time, in each
hyperonym, a number of hyponyms can be distinguished, which are

Ibid, p.49.
M.V. Lysyakova, Hyper-hyponymic taxonomy in terminology. Bulletin of the
Peoples' Friendship University of Russia. Series "Linguistics", 2006, 8, p. 26.
40
41

260

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

presented in the form of a structure of terminology for the designation of
animal diseases.
Diseases by location
1. Іnfectious diseases: sepsis; Feline leukemia virus; Feline
immunodeficiency virus; Feline infectious peritonitis; Lyme disease;
Rabies; Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis; Canine Bartonella vinsonii infection;
Leptospirosis; Canine hepatosoonosis; Canine skin pythiosis; Nasal cavity
aspergillosis.
2. Endocrine and metabolic diseases: Diabetes insipidus; Canine
Hypotheriosis;
Canine
hypertheriosis;
Hyperparathyroidism;
Hypercalcaemia; Insulinoma; Pituitary gland-specific hypercorticoidism;
Pituitary gland-specific hyperadrenocorticoidism; Adrenal tumor;
Hyperkalemia; Hypernatremia.
3. Hematology, oncology and immunology: Immune mediated
trombocytopaenia; Hyperthermia; Systemic lupus erythematosis;
Willebrand disease; Postvaccinal fibrosarcoma.
4. Dermatological diseases: Alopecia; Itch; Dermatophythosis;
Demodecosis.
5. Diseases of gastrointestinal tract: Stomatitis; Oesophagitis;
Canine Megaesophagus; Cholangiohepatitis.
6. Cardiac and respiratory diseases: Supraventricular
arrhythmia; Feline dirofilariasis; Polyps of air passages; Tracheae
paralysis.
7.
Diseases
of
urinary
ways:
Polyuria;
Polydipsia;
Glomerulonephritis.
8. Diseases of reproductive system: Hytheriosis; Infertility;
Orchitis.
9. Neurologic and musculoskeletal disorders: Canine
vegetative dystonia; Feline convulsive disorder; Feline Born’s disease.
10.
Ophthalmological
diseases:
Epiphora;
Dry
keratoconjuctivitis; Ulcerous keratitis; Eyes neoplasia.
The second type of hypero-hyponymous connections of terms for the
designation of animal diseases is built according to the principle of
differentiation of Diseases by types of animals. This hyperonym is
represented by diseases of specific animal species.
Diseases by types of animals
1. Multiple species diseases: Anthrax; Aujeszky disease;
Leptospirosis; Rabies; Trichinellosis.
2. Cattle diseases: Theileriosis; Bovine tuberculosis; Bovine
babesiosis; Bovine brucellosis; Dermatophilosis; Malignant catarrhal fever.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

261

3. Sheep and goat diseases: Contagious agalactia; Scrapie; Nairoby
sheep disease; Contagious caprine peluropneumonia; Caprine arthritis.
4. Equine disease: Contagious equine metritis; Dourine; Epizootic
lymphangitis.
5. Lagomorphs diseases: Tularemia; Rabbit haemorrhagic disease;
Myxomatosis.
6. Avian diseases: Avian chlamidiosis; Fowl pox; Fowl typhoid;
Avian tuberculosis; Marek’s disease.
7. Fish diseases: Spring viraemia of carp; Infectious haemapoietic
necrosis; Epizootic haematopoietic necrosis.
8. Mollusks diseases: Bonamiosis; Perkinsosis; Microcytosis.
9. Swine diseases: Atrophic rhinitis of swine; Enterovirus
encephalomyelitis.
10. Bee diseases: Acariosis of bees; American foulbrood; European
foulbrood; Varroosis.
Therefore, in the process of interaction of terms located at different
hierarchical levels, stable connections are established during transitions
from one concept to another, and their interpenetration occurs. Any
veterinary medical classification is a hierarchical structure entering into
hyperogyponymic relationships of terms forming large term systems. The
terms for animal diseases show the interrelationships of phenomena,
processes, subjects corresponding to this field of work of veterinary
doctors, and their arrangement can be achieved thanks to the correct
classification of realities from which terms are created based on the
selection of generic and species phenomena. Therefore, the regularity of
the participation of terminological units in stable systemic relations of
subordination, which are characteristic of the processes of integration or
differentiation of their components both at different and at the same level
of their detection, is expressed.
Conclusions
Semantic phenomena based on paradigmatic relations, such as
hypero-hyponymy (generic-species), synonymy, antonymy, polysemy,
homonymy, play an important role in the organization of the English
terminology of clinical veterinary medicine. Thus, synonymy and
antonymy are typical phenomenon in terminology. This testifies to the
existing flexibility of terminology, which allows, in the case of synonymy,
to interchange terms, in the case of antonymy, to structure concepts based
on the opposition of their meanings.The frequency of the use of synonyms
in the the English terminology of clinical veterinary medicine is higher
than that of antonyms. This is mainly due to non-contractual reasons - the
262

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

peculiarities of the development of veterinary science and practice. The
phenomenon of polysemy in veterinary clinical terminology is less
common than in literary language, but occurs in various forms. Hyperhyponymic relations between units, based on generic-species conceptual
commonality, form multi-level hierarchical structures that represent a
complex framework of the terminological vocabulary of clinical veterinary
medicine. This type of relationship between units is one of the most
important principles for structuring knowledge and organizing the
terminological composition of the "animal disease" term system. The
structural analysis of the hierarchical organization of the English terms of
clinical veterinary medicine allows not only to have an idea of the content
of this subject area, but also to better understand the principles of
formation of branch terminology, which is of great importance for
lexicographic and translation practice.
The structural analysis of the hierarchical organization of the English
terms of clinical veterinary medicine allows not only to have an idea of the
content of this subject area, but also to better understand the principles of
formation of industry terminology, which is of great importance for
lexicographic and translation practice.
References
Akhmanova, O.S., (2013), Dictionary of linguistic terms. Moscow:
Ripol Classic, 614.
Amelina, S.M., Hopak, I.M., (2016), Structural and semantic
peculiarities of English terms in the veterinary sublanguage in the context of
Ukrainian translation. Scientific herald of National University of Life and
Environmental Sciences of Ukraine: Philological sciences. Kyiv. Vol. 248, pp.
156-161.
Artemova, I.V., (2006), Terminological specifics of medical
discourses. Herald of the Russian Friendship University: Series
"Education Issues: Languages and Specialties". 1 (3), 49-52.
Bengis, R.G., Kock, R.A., Fischer, J., (2002), Infectious animal
diseases: the wildlife/livestock interface. Revue scientifique et technique Office international des epizooties. Vol. 21 (1), 53-65.
Cherepovska, T., & Binkevych, O., (2019), Morphological peculiarities
of veterinary terminology in the context of teaching English for specific
purposes. Scientific Proceedings of Ostroh Academy National University:
Philology Series, (5 (73)), 310-312.
Edward, B., (2015), Black's Veterinary Dictionary. London:
Bloomsbury, 514 p.
Grinev-Grinevich, S.V., (2004), Terminology. Moscow: Academy, 304.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

263

Komarova, L.N., (2016), Eponyms in Veterinary Medicine in English.
XI International scientific-practical conference "Priority directions of
development of science and education". Cheboksary: CHGU, 1-5.
Komarova, L.N., (2017), The origins of veterinary terminology II
International Scientific and Practical Conference. "A new word in science:
development strategies". Cheboksary: CHGU. 1(9), 1-4.
Kortun, E.A., (2012), Synonymy of terms (based on the terminology
of the oil-producing and oil-refining industries). Scientific notes of the
Komsomolsk-on-Amur State Technical University, No. 2(9), 35-39.
Lashkul, V.A., (2021), Language means of process category in the
English epizootological terminology. International journal of philology,
12(4), 50-54.
Lysyakova, M.V., (2006), Hyper-hyponymic taxonomy in
terminology. Bulletin of the Peoples' Friendship University of Russia.
Series "Linguistics", 8, 23-28.
Nedosyekov, V.V., Lytvyn, V.P., Polishchuk, V.V., Melʹnyk, V.V.,
Homzykov, O.M, Martynyuk, O.H., (2014), Dictionary of epizootological
terms. Kyiv, VAT Ryabyna, 90.
Nemova, Т.V., Lychuk М.І., (2020), Features of formation and
translation of terminology of clinical veterinary hematology.
International journal of philology, 11 (3), 73-81.
Orlov, F.M. (2018), Dictionary of veterinary clinical terms. Moscow:
Rosselkhozizdat, 367 p.
Panko, T.I., (1994), Ukrainian terminology. Lviv: Svit, 216 p.
Pestova, M.S., (2014), Antonymy as an object of theoretical research.
Bulletin of the South Ural State University. Series Linguistics. YuzhnoUralsk: Publishing House. SURU, 18-21.
Rozhkov, Yu. H., (2021), From the history of formation of the English
veterinary terminology. International journal of philology». 12 (3), 90-97.
Rozhkov, Yu. H., (2021), Verbalization of Animal Diseases in English:
Linguocognitive and Structural-Semantic Aspects. Dissertation for a
Doctor of Philosophy in Philology degree: specialty - 035 Philology. Borys
Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, 224.
Salamakha, M. Ya., (2013), Synonymous relations in the Englishlanguage termschology of the field of environmental protection. Scientific
journal of the Chershvet National University named after Yury Fedkovich.
German Philology. Issue 653, 127-133.
Shelov, S.D., (2018), Essay on the theory of terminology:
composition, conceptual organization, practical applications. Moscow.:
PrintPro., 472.
Shestok, O.V., (1996), Polysemy of terms of medical sciences.
(Dis...candidate of philol. sciences). Krasnodar, 159.
264

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

Sirotina, E.A., (2020), Categories of space and time in the English
terminology of veterinary medicine. Studia Humanitatis. No. 3.
Slozhenikina, Yu. V., (2010), Terminological variability: semantics,
form, function. Moscow: LKI Publishing House, 288 p.
Stasyuk, T.V., (2012), The nature of the term in the cognitiveanthropological paradigm of linguistics. Scientific Bulletin of the
UNESCO Department of KLNU. Series Philology. Pedagogy. Psychology.
Kyiv: Nat. lingu. un-t, 25, 95-100.
Studdert, V.P., (2015), Saunders Comprehensive Veterinary
Dictionary. London: Elsevier Ltd, 508 p.
Tatarinov, V.A., (2006), General Terminology: Encyclopedic
Dictionary. Russian Terminological Society RossTerm. Moscow: Moscow
Lyceum, 528 p.
Tatarinov, V.A., (2005). Terminological vocabulary of the Russian
language: Evolution of problems and aspects of study. Russian language
in modern society: Functional and status characteristics. Otv. red. Oparina
Ye. O., Kazak Ye. A. Seriya «Theory and history of linguistics». Moscow:
RAN. INION, 133-164.
Timkina, Yu. Yu., (2017), Classification of veterinary terminology in
English. Philological sciences. Questions of theory and practice. Tambov:
Gramota, 6(1), 72, 156-158.
Timkina, Yu. Yu., (2019), English-language lexical and grammatical
units in the field of «Veterinary science». Baltic Humanitarian Journal.
Kaliningrad: Assotsiatsiya PAAS, 2 (19), 62-65.
Yagenich, L.V., (2020), On the classification of veterinary medicine
terminology in modern English. Fundamental science for universities.
Moscow: Moscow State Pedagogical University, (1), 342-351.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

265

TYPOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF ILLOCUTIONARY
SPEECH ACTS:
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Oleksandra Tuhai
o.tuhai@kubg.edu.ua
alex.tuhai2020@gmail.com
Abstract: This article provides a comprehensive analysis of English
illocutionary speech acts' typological peculiarities of utterances-statements in
dialogic discourse of Old-, Middle-, and Early Modern English. The research is
the first attempt to identify and prove the relevance of English affirmative,
imperative, interrogative statements' use as direct, indirect illocutionary speech
acts in diachrony. Corpus data of the research are certified and argued in
English utterances-statements as the illocutionary speech acts in the paradigm
as: assertive or verdictive utterances, directive or exercitive utterances,
commissive utterances, expressive or behabiative utterances, declarative or
expositive utterances. Illocutionary force intensity feature is characterized by
the speaker's intentional purpose in English utterances-statements of
illocutionary assertive, directive, commissive, expressive, declarative goals,
which actualize different types of illocutionary speech acts as "strong
illocutionary force – weak illocutionary force". Direct / indirect illocutionary
speech acts are highlighted in the objective / subjective content of an utterance,
depending on the illocutionary force and purpose, the syntactic type, and
conventionality / unconventionality of the speech acts as "affirmative
statements", "imperative statements", "interrogative statements". Peculiarities
of English illocutionary speech acts' relevant use in diachrony are outlined as
the realization of speaker's intentional verbal proposition, depending on
illocutionary paradigm of the main illocutionary verbs in utterancesstatements.
Keywords: direct / indirect illocutionary speech act, utterance-statement,
illocutionary force, illocutionary verb, Old- / Middle- / Early Modern English.

Introduction
Nowadays, the study of the speech acts taxonomy in the dialogic
discourse of modern Germanic languages is the subject of numerous
discussions and controversies among worldwide well-known linguists,
where they do not always find a unanimous solution as to the usage of a


PhD. in Philology, senior lecturer at the Department of Germanic
Philology, Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine.

266

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

certain type of the speech act in the appropriate context. Modern
philological studies offer a solution to the issue of the speech acts typology
realization by taking into account the application of a three-level stage of
the speech acts analysis, namely a comprehensive analysis of illocutionary,
locutionary, and perlocutionary speech acts. The scientific research of
foreign and Ukrainian scholars is increasingly focused on the study of
Germanic languages' modern discourse of speech by illocution, locution,
and perlocution of an utterance by a speaker (addresser) for the
achievement of the set goal.
In historical Germanic and English studies, the direct / indirect
speech acts' feature by illocutionary purpose and utterance force in
complex sentences with illocutionary verbs in the diachronic development
of languages acquires special significance. Despite the wide range of
researches to the field of speech acts' implementation in dialogic discourse,
there still remain insufficiently covered issues, which are referred to
coverage of actualization and functioning of direct or indirect speech acts
as illocutionary ones in discourse of different texts' genres in a diachronic
perspective: in Old-, Middle-, Early Modern English. This is a certain gap
in the analysis of language discourse in the studied periods.
The object of the present scientific research is complex
affirmative sentences with illocutionary verbs that implement different
types of speech acts in Old English, Middle English, and Early Modern
English. The subject of the research is the communicative and
pragmatic properties of affirmative utterances-statements in diachrony.
The aim of the article is to provide a comprehensive communicativepragmatic analysis of the illocutionary speech acts of objective intentional
affirmative content within the subjective context in complex affirmative
sentential constructions in historical English studies.
Thus, the key objectives of the research involve:
1) characterizing the syntactic and communicative paradigms of direct
/ indirect illocutionary speech acts of affirmative utterances-statements in
the Old English, Middle English, and Early Modern English periods;
2) finding out and highlighting the basic peculiarities of the speech
acts' feature and functioning with the illocutionary goal of different
utterances intentions in complex sentences with matrix verbs of
illocutionary force of speech in historical diachrony.
The material of the study served English positive / affirmative
utterances-statements (12382 sentences) with main illocutionary verbs (66
verbs) in the dialogic discourse from Old English, Middle English, and
Early Modern English, selected from the corpus of 77 different written
works by Jeffrey Chaucer, William Shakespeare, Tomas Middleton and 1
epic work by an unknown (anonymous) author.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

267

Literature Review
Within the theory of speech acts, modern philological studies are
distinguished by numerous achievements of scientific research in various
communicative, pragmatic aspects of linguistic discourse in modern and
historical Germanic, as well as English studies. For the last decades of XXXXI centuries, scientific researches of foreign and Ukrainian pragmatic
English studies were focused, primarily, on the following aspects: 1) speech
acts taxonomy studies – J.L. Austin1, J.R. Searle2; 2) general conceptual
principles of communicative and pragmatic syntax – G.G. Pocheptsov3,
D.E. Ekoro & M. Gunn4; 3) illocutionary, locutionary, perlocutionary
aspects of speech acts – S. Bäckström5, A.I. Prihodko6, N. Kravchenko et
al.7; 4) direct / indirect speech acts in an illocutionary perspective – N.
Kravchenko8, J.M.G. Núñe9; 5) pragmatic peculiarities of English sentence
in a synchronic perspective – O.M. Tuhai10.
The current literature review shows that modern linguistics lacks the
particular historical works on the comprehensive analysis of
communicative syntax in terms of the study of illocutionary speech acts in
complex affirmative sentences-statements with the involvement of basic
periods in the English language development, namely Old-, Middle-, and
Early Modern English. Even though there are numerous publications on
speech acts, public speech's utterances in the discourse of modern
language on various topics, the ones based on the dialogic discourse in
diachrony of the English language are missing from these studies.
Additionally, locutionary and perlocutionary phenomena of the modern
dialogic discourse speech acts are still to be studied as well. So, the present
paper is aimed to make a major contribution to the research of pragmatic
J.L. Austin, How to do things with words. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962, 166 p.
J.R. Searle, A taxonomy of illocutionary acts. In K. Gunderson (Ed.), Language,
mind and knowledge, 1975, pp. 344-379.
3 G.G. Pocheptsov, Selected works on linguistics. Vinnitsa: Nova kniga, 2013, 560 p.
4 D.E. Ekoro, & M. Gunn, Speech act theory and Gricean pragmatics: A review.
LWATI: A journal of contemporary research, 18 (4), 2021, pp. 130-143.
5 S. Bäckström, A dogma of speech act theory. Inquiry, 2020, pp. 1‒17.
6 A.I. Prihodko, Illocutive typology of evaluatory utterances. Science and education
a new dimension: Philology, 4, 2013, pp. 32-36.
7 N. Kravchenko, M. Prokopchuk, A. Pozhar, L. Kozyarevych-Zozulya, & Y. Rozhkov,
Illocutionary Pragmatic Adaptation Challenge: Ukrainian Translations of Englishlanguage Soft Law Texts. Amazonia Investiga, 11(49), 2022, pp. 267-276.
8 N. Kravchenko, Illocution of direct speech acts via conventional implicature and
semantic presupposition. Lege artis. Language yesterday, today, tomorrow. The journal of
University of SS Cyril and Methodius in Trnava, II (1), 2017, pp. 128-168.
9 J.M.G. Núñez, Embedded root phenomena and indirect speech reports.
Linguistics, 59 (6), 2021, pp. 1531-1566.
10 O.M. Tuhai, Pragmatic potential of Early Modern English sentence with clausal
complementation. Transcarpathian philological studies, 10 (2), 2019, pp. 28-36.
1

2

268

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

aspects in terms of illocutionary speech acts characteristics with
illocutionary verbs in the historical perspective.
Theoretical Framework
One of the directions of modern linguistics in terms of
communicative-functional syntax is historical pragmatic linguistics, which
outlines the pragmatic properties of speech communication in the
language discourse as a system in the historical development of a language
with the definition of constant and variable elements of speech acts in
complex sentences, which is the result of dynamic processes in verbal
communication, self-development of language, culture, and society1111.
Language and speech are the main sources of information, which
constitute the basis for the establishment of laws, categories, forms of
human thinking. Language serves as a form of thought existence in
situations of objective reality. In the process of linguistic communication,
the important aspect for perceiving and understanding particular features,
patterns, varieties of human thinking is the comprehensive study of
sentence semantics, which occurs to become an important legitimate
object of a linguistic research. The social essence of a language is to
provide the communicative component between the participants of
information or news imparting, where the latter is implemented by
utterances or sentences12. As a system of arbitrary speech sound signs,
language can be interpreted as the sound, produced by the human speech
apparatus. Based on this concept, pragmatics and communicative
linguistics can be interpreted as knowledge of understanding words'
semantics in relevant situations and sentence utterances as speech acts in
the closely related context13.
The basics of the theory of language or speech acts were developed by
J.L. Austin (1962) in the 30-th of the XX-th century and foremost covered
in his lecture courses at Oxford University (1952-1955) and then at
Harvard University (1955) – "How to do things with words", where for the
first time ever the researcher represented the concept of performative
utterances, speech acts in the interaction "sentence – utterance – speech
11 L.P. Kalytyuk, English interrogative sentence. Structure. Semantics. Pragmatics:
A manual for students of higher educational institutions. Kyiv: Borys Grinchenko Kyiv
University, 2014, 116 p.
12 Pocheptsov, op. cit., pp. 391-392.
13 F. Faisal, D. Saputri, E. Nurliza, N. Azmi, S.N. Fauzia, & I. Indani, Indirect speech
act analysis of Indonesian education department students of Serambi Mekkah
University. In M. Usman, W. Khafidah, & M. Daud (Eds.), The proceeding book of the 4th
international conference on multidisciplinary research, 4 (1), 2021, p. 85; O. Tuhai,
Subject Control Infinitive Constructions in Early Modern English. World Journal of
English Language, 12 (1), 2022, pp. 367-383.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

269

act", as well as he provided his own classification of speech acts. The
central idea of this interaction is that all utterances-statements can be
performing illocutionary, locutionary, perlocutionary speech acts at the
same time14.
Some of the Austin's developed speech acts types such as verdictives,
exercitives, commissives, behabitives, expositives were transformed then
by Searle (1975) into utterance acts as representatives, directives,
commissives, expressives, declarations. And "in the context, an
illocutionary act is carried out by way of pronunciation, that is the
performance of an illocutionary speech act in saying or announcing
something. Context is one of the factors that determine an illocutionary act
by uttering a statement"15.
In our study of complex sentences of affirmative nature in Old English
(OE), Middle English (ME), Early Modern English (EModE), we focus on
sentences-statements as illocutionary speech acts' utterances, taking into
account communicative and pragmatic orientation of addresser's verbal
propositional actualization in the utterances-statements, depending on
semantics of illocutionary verbs in the dialogic discourse as the semantic
material organization in communication. The rationale stance of our
research is based on the verbal intentional action of the speaker in
complex sentences along with significant illocutionary aspects within the
theory of speech acts by Austin (1962), Searle (1975).
(1) ME: "For I defye the seurtee and the bond Which that thou seyst
that I have maad to thee". – "For I renounce the bond and its demand
Which you assert that I have made with you" (Chaucer, "The Canterbury
tales: The knight's tale")16.
In example (1) we witness the usage of the illocutionary verb assert
(seyst – ME) as an illocutionary speech act-assertive in the dialogic
discourse of Middle English, where the knight as a speaker addresses to
the addressee and claims that he rejects the bond and its demand – what
the listener asserts that the speaker had made with the latter one. The
illocutionary force of assertiveness, the purpose of this statement are
directed to the addressee, who is aware of this fact and accepts the
addressed statement as appropriate.
In order to solve the tasks set in our study, it is essential to consider
and clarify such concepts and points as pragmatics, speech act,
Austin, op. cit.
Ibid., pp. 83-99; Searle, op. cit., pp. 354-359.
16 M. Hutchins, (Ed.), Troilus and Cressida and the Canterbury tales by Geoffrey
Chaucer. With modern English versions of both works. In Great books of the western
world, Vol. 22. Chicago – London – Toronto – Geneva – Sydney – Tokyo – Manila:
William Benton, Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952, p. 186.
14
15

270

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

illocutionary force of an utterance, locution and perlocution, as well as
direct / indirect speech act and discourse.
Pragmatics describes any language units regardless of confession or
differentiation of their linguistic nature, and unites them into groups on
the basis of commonality of an addressee's reaction. It classifies linguistic
units from the standpoint of the theory of human behaviour in
communication17. Pragmatics is the study of language use in human
communication of society conditions as to pragmatic aspects of
implicature, presupposition, deixis, and speech acts18. Language pragmatic
aspects are fully manifested within the speech acts, which stand to be the
main components of communicative acts, where an addresser in the
process of generating a communicative unit (statement) performs a certain
action. A speech act is a sentence in action reported by an utterance 19.
The analysis' leading parameters in any speech act are locutionary,
illocutionary, perlocutionary aspects, which describe an utterance, namely
its content, form, force of influence that corresponds to the plan of
content, expression, and actualization of an utterance in speech 2020.
Generally, there are four types of speech acts such as: 1) locution – an act
of pronunciation; 2) proposal – an act of instruction; 3) illocution – an act
of giving a statement the communicative purpose; 4) perlocution – an act
of influence on the addressee21.
Speech acts are distinguished by the degree of a speaker's illocutionary
force expression and by semantic features in a sentence-utteranc22. The
illocutionary force is distinguished by the illocutionary goal, the way to
achieve it, the intensity of illocutionary force, and so on. One of the most
important components of illocutionary force is the illocutionary goal,
which serves as a fundamental concept of illocutionary logic. The purpose
of any illocutionary act is an idea that is intrinsic to it as an act of this type.
Moreover, each illocutionary verb of a natural language names or claims
some illocutionary force or any type of an illocutionary speech act23.
Pocheptsov, op. cit., p. 434.
A.P. Jaya, & H. Haryati, Illocutionary act and paradigmatic case in selected
chapters of short stories book "Australia day" by Melanie Cheng. Proceeding of national
seminar on linguistics, literature, culture and language teaching, 11, 2021, p. 44.
19 R.D. Orizka, Oktaviani, & A. Triyogo, An analysis of speech acts used in Peter
Rabbit movie. E-link journal, 8 (2), 2021, pp. 150-157.
20 M.M. Buzrukova, The study of speech act as a unit of discursive activity.
JournalNX- A multidisciplinary peer reviewed journal, 6 (9), 2020, pp. 5-7.
21 Capone, Speech acts: Classification and definition. In K. Brown (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of language and linguistics. 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier, 2006, p. 682.
22 Pocheptsov, op. cit., p. 434; E.W. García, Toward a pragmatic account and
taxonomy of valuative speech acts. Pragmatics, 29 (1), 2019, pp. 107-131.
23 Bäckström, op. cit., pp. 1‒17.
17

18

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

271

The term "verbs of the speech act" is widely used to apply to all verbs
that belong to any type of verbal behaviour such as to claim, to threaten, to
praise, to complain, to boast, or to a less common group of verbs that
actualize the target intentions of a speaker such as to say, to interrupt, to
whisper. Such terms as "verbs of illocutionary force", "verbs of
communication", "verbs of speech", "performative verbs" are considered
synonymous with the above mentioned term to denote verbs of the speech
acts realization24.
In pragmatic linguistics, language discourse is considered as a
verbalized form of social activity, which is "determined by values, social
norms, conventions or social practice"25. The term "discourse" is the
multidimensional phenomenon and is used in different contexts as "the
blurred category". Discourse is the environment for diverse linguistics and
speech phenomena functioning; it is operational space for dynamic
meaning creation. Classic definitions of discourse are as "coherent text in
conjunction with extralinguistic – pragmatic, socio-cultural, psychological,
and other factors", "text in the post event / action aspect", "speech, which
is immersed in life"26. Moreover, the lingual aspect of discourse
development includes communicators' speech actions and the text itself,
where a discourse space is described as "a communicative event, in which
the speakers' interaction is mediated by a text"27.
Example (2) is considered as the linguistic discourse in the dialogic
speech between the speaker Lord Bassanio and the listeners Antonio and
Portia in the context of social speech activity in the work of Shakespeare:
(2) EModE: Lord Bassanio (to Antonio and Portia): "Nay, but hear
me: Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear I never more will break an
oath with thee" (Shakespeare, "The merchant of Venice")28.
Complex sentence can convey an action that serves as a speech act,
K. Proost, Speech act verbs. In K. Brown, & K. Allan (Eds.), Concise encyclopedia
of semantics. 1st ed. Oxford: Elsevier, 2009, pp. 915-916; O.M. Tuhai, Performative verbs
as expression of volitional inducement in Early New Modern English. In L. Shlossman
(Ed.), The fifteenth European conference on languages, literature and linguistics.
Proceedings of the conference, May 10, 2017, pp. 27-31.
25 O. Kolesnyk, & M. Holtseva, Lies and deception in modern English diplomatic
discourse: pragmatics in interdisciplinary focus. Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research
Journal, Vol. 14, Issue 1, 2022, pp. 154‒173; D. Skrypkaru, & O. Kolesnyk, Semantic
dimension of discourse space (based on the scripts of English TV series "How to get
away with murder"). Studia philologica, 17 (2), 2021, pp. 59-60.
26 Ibid., Skrypkaru & Kolesnyk, pp. 59-60.
27 S. Zhabotynska, & N. Slyvka, Emotive speech acts and their discourse
modifications in the literary text. Discourse and interaction, 13 (1), 2020, p. 122.
28 A.L. Rowse, (Ed.), The annotated Shakespeare: Three volumes in one illustrated:
The comedies, the histories, sonnets, and other poems, the tragedies and romances. New
York: Greenwich House, 1988, p. 332.
24

272

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

which can be expressed directly and indirectly through a sentence. As a
direct speech act, a sentence and a speech act equally realize identical
semantic correspondence with unanimous illocutionary force expression.
An indirect speech act implies the implicit expression of speaker's
communicative intention, where it is clearly illustrated by the definition of
pragmatic meaning as the formula that a speaker wants to express.
Namely, assertive-statements realize the illocutionary force of a
dominant statement. Indirect speech acts-assertives actualize ascertaining
shades of assertion, assumption, doubt, (dis)agreement29.
Next examples demonstrate direct speech acts (3) – (4) and indirect
speech acts (5) in the dialogic discourse of Old English, Middle English,
and Early Modern English:
(3) OE: "þenden reafode rinc oðerne, nam on Ongenðio irenbyrnan,
heard swyrd hilted ond his helm somod, hares hyrste Higelace bær. He
ðam frætwum feng ond him fægre gehet leana mid leodum, ond gelæste
swa". – "One warrior stripped the other, Looted Ongentheow's iron mailcoat, His hard sword-hilt, his helmet too, And carried the graith to King
Hygelac; He accepted the prize, promised fairly That reward would
come, and kept his word" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")30.
(4) ME: "Of him thenke I my tale for to holde, Bothe of his joye, and of
his cares colde; And al his werk, as touching this matere, For I it gan, I
wil ther-to refere". – "My proper tale hereafter I shall hold, Both of his
joy and of Ins cares so cold. And all the business of this sad affair, As I
began, I shall to you declare" (Chaucer, "Troilus and Cressida")31.
(5) EModE: Fenton: "Her father hath commanded her to slip Away
with Slender and with him at Eton Immediately to marry: …"
(Shakespeare, "The merry wives of Windsor")32.
Methodology
Presently, the scientific study of speech acts is characterized by
interdisciplinary approaches, taking into account related scientific
paradigms in the linguistic area of the issue under discussion. The overall
methodology of our scientific research is complex and includes the
following methods: 1) the theory of speech acts was used to determine
illocutionary acts of utterances-statements in dialogic discourse of the Old
English, Middle English, and Early Modern English periods; 2) the
taxonomy of speech acts, introduced by Austin (1962) and Searle (1975),
Kalytyuk, op. cit., pp. 54-62.
S. Heaney, (Trans.), Beowulf: A new verse translation. New York – London:
W.W. Norton & Company, 2000, pp. 200-201.
31 Hutchins, op. cit., p. 6.
32 Rowse, op. cit., p. 495.
29

30

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

273

was involved to identify the relevant basic types of speech acts as
utterances-statements; 3) the method of communicative-pragmatic
analysis was used to outline the communicative feature of complex
sentence constructions as direct and indirect speech acts in the English
language of the studied periods; 4) the descriptive qualitative and
quantitative methods were introduced to describe diverse phenomena of
illocutionary speech acts and highlight the exact number of their most /
least usage in Old English, Middle English, and Early Modern English;
5) historical analysis was used to compile the corpus of research, to
characterize the formulated sample sentences as utterances-statements in
their functional realization as illocutionary speech acts in the historical
diachronic perspective.
Results and Discussion
Basic types of illocutionary speech acts with illocutionary
verbs in Old English, Middle English, and Early Modern English
In this study, we focus on the illocutionary aspect of the analysis of
sentences-utterances as the illocutionary speech acts, as we consider and
witness particular complex sentences that contain illocutionary verbs of
different types of speech acts in the dialogic discourse of Old English,
Middle English, and Early Modern English. Foremost, it seems relevant to
highlight the typology of speech acts by Austin (1962) and Searle (1975),
taking into account the general meaning and particular semantics of the
studied illocutionary verbs. According to semantics of illocutionary verbs
under the research (66 verbs from our corpus data) and their historical or
Anglo-Saxon equivalents from Old- and Middle English33, we distinguished
five types of illocutionary speech acts in the English diachronic dialogic
discourse – total 12382 sentences (see Appendix, Table 1):
I. Assertives or verdictives as illocutionary speech acts in the studied
complex sentences with the illocutionary verbs such as assert, assure,
predict, inform, tell, notify, inform, acknowledge, admit, remind, testify,
confirm, certify, prove, confess, assume, guess, state, swear, insist (total
5202 sentences from OE, ME, EModE).
Examples (6) – (8) show complex sentences as utterances-statements
from Old-, Middle-, and Early Modern English dialogic discourse, where
the exemplified sentences actualize implementation of illocutionary
assertive or verdictive speech acts with the help of illocutionary verbs as
inform (secgan – OE), assure (graunte – ME), predict – EModE:
(6) OE: Beowulf maþelode, bearn Ecgþeowes: "Nu we sæliðend
secgan wyllað, feorran cumene, þæt we fundiaþ Higelac secan. Wæron
H. Sweet, (Ed.), The student's dictionary of Anglo-Saxon, 11th ed. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1981.
33

274

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

her tela willum bewenede; þu us wel dohtest". – Beowulf, son of
Ecgtheow, spoke: "Now we who crossed the wide sea have to inform you
that we feel a desire to return to Hygelac. Here we have been welcomed
and thoroughly entertained. You have treated us well" (Anonymous,
"Beowulf")34.
(7) ME: "Ther were never two so wel y-met, Whan ye ben his al hool,
as he is youre: Ther mighty god yet graunte us see that houre!" – "You
two will make the best pair ever yet! And heaven bless the day which well
assures That vou are his as much as he is vours" (Chaucer, "Troilus and
Cressida")35.
(8) EModE: "Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, Pointing to each
his thunder, rain and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well, By oft
predict that I in heaven find: But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And, constant stars, in them I read such art As truth and beauty shall
together thrive, If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert; …"
(Shakespeare, "Sonnets")36.
II. Directives or exercitives as illocutionary speech acts in the studied
complex sentences with the illocutionary verbs such as ask, order,
command, request, plead, pray, invite, prescribe, demand, offer, induce,
incite, persuade, seduce, beg, advise, recommend (total 3594 sentences
from OE, ME, EModE).
Examples (9) – (11) demonstrate complex sentences as utterancesstatements from Old-, Middle-, Early Modern English dialogic discourse,
where these sentences actualize implementation of illocutionary directive
or exercitive speech acts with the help of illocutionary verbs as offer
(wordum – OE), pray (preyen – ME), request – EModE:
(9) OE: "Gesæt þa wið sylfne se ða sæcce genæs, mæg wið mæge,
syððan man-dryhten þurh hleoðorcwyde holdne gegrette, meaglum
wordum". – "After Hygelac had offered greetings to his loyal thane in
lofty speech, he and his kinsman, that hale survivor, sat face to face"
(Anonymous, "Beowulf")37.
(10) ME: Melibee, Dame Prudence: "And therfore, dere and benigne
lady, we preyen yow and biseke yow as mekely as we conne and mowen,
that it lyke unto your grete goodnesse to fulfillen in dede your goodliche
wordes; …". – "Therefore, dear and benign lady, we pray and beseech
you, as humbly as we can, that it shall please you, in your great
goodness, to fulfill your goodly words in deeds; …" (Chaucer, "The

Heaney, op. cit., pp. 124-125.
Hutchins, op. cit., p. 32.
36 Rowse, op. cit., p. 1501.
37 Heaney, op. cit., pp. 134-135.
34
35

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

275

Canterbury tales: The tale of Melibeus")38.
(11) EModE: Lord Cardinal: "Your news is pleasing. Whilst you
remain in Milan, I request you To know the welcome of no house but
ours" (Middleton, "More dissemblers besides women")39.
III. Commissives as illocutionary speech acts in the studied complex
sentences with the illocutionary verbs such as commit, promise, contract,
undertake, intend, threaten, agree, vow, vouch, refuse, decline (total 1180
sentences from OE, ME, EModE).
Sentences (12) – (14) exemplify complex utterances-statements from
Old-, Middle-, Early Modern English dialogic discourse, where the
exemplified sentences realize implementation of illocutionary commissive
speech acts with the help of such illocutionary verbs as refuse (nolde –
OE), vouchsafe (voucheth – ME), threaten – EModE:
(12) OE: "ða se gist onfand þæt se beadoleoma bitan nolde, aldre
sceþðan, ac seo ecg geswac ðeodne æt þearfe; ...". – "But he soon found
His sword fails to do his battle-torch extinguished: the shining blade
refused to bite" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")40.
(13) ME: "Now voucheth sauf that I may yow devyse How that I may
been holpe and in what wyse". – "Now vouchsafe that I may for you
devise A plan to help me, telling in what wise" (Chaucer, "The Canterbury
tales: The Franklin's tale")41.
(14) EModE: Edmund: "When I dissuaded him from his intent, And
found him pight to do it, with curst speech I threaten'd to discover him: he
replied, 'Thou unpossessing bastard!" (Shakespeare, "King Lear")42.
IV. Expressives or behabiatives as illocutionary speech acts in the
studied complex sentences with the illocutionary verbs such as
congratulate, thank, deplore, welcome, praise, compliment, regret,
condole, greet (total 1888 sentences in OE, ME, EModE).
Complex sentences (15) – (17) exemplify utterances-statements from
Old-, Middle-, Early Modern English dialogic discourse, where the
represented sentences actualize implementation of illocutionary expressive
or behabiative speech acts with the help of such illocutionary verbs as
welcome (wilcuman – OE), thank – ME, praise – EModE:
(15) OE: þa to dura healle Wulfgar eode, word inne abead: "Eow het
secgan sigedrihten min, aldor Eastdena, þæt he eower æþelu can, ond ge
him syndon ofer sæwylmas heardhicgende hider wilcuman". – At the
Hutchins, op. cit., p. 428.
G. Taylor, & J. Lavagnino, (Eds.), Thomas Middleton. The collected works. Oxford
– New York: Clarendon Press, 2007, p. 1041.
40 Heaney, op. cit., pp. 104-105.
41 Hutchins, op. cit., p. 356.
42 Rowse, op. cit., p. 1899.
38
39

276

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

door of the hall, Wulfgar duly delivered the message: "My lord, the
conquering king of the Danes, bids me announce that he knows your
ancestry; also that he welcomes you here to Heorot and salutes your
arrival from across the sea" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")43.
(16) ME: "And thanked god, that he mighte han hire al, That no wight
of his blisse parten shal". – "And he thanked God that he might have her,
all, That none partook of his bliss now, nor shall" (Chaucer, "The
Canterbury tales: The merchant's tale")44.
(17) EModE: Master to wife: "Was it in man to wound so kind a
creature? I'll ever praise a woman for thy sake" (Middleton, "A
Yorkshiere tragedy")45.
V. Declaratives or expositives as illocutionary speech acts in the
studied complex sentences with the illocutionary verbs as declare,
announce, proclaim, approve, authorize, excommunicate, name,
reproach, surrender, bless (total 518 units in OE, ME, EModE).
Examples (18) – (20) represent complex sentences as utterancesstatements from OE, ME, EModE dialogic discourse, where the
exemplified sentences implement realization of the illocutionary
declarative or expositive speech acts with the help of such illocutionary
verbs as announce (bodode – OE), proclaim (dorste – ME), bless –
EModE:
(18) OE: "Reste hine þa rumheort; reced hliuade geap ond goldfah;
gæst inne swæf oþþæt hrefn blaca heofones wynne bliðheort bodode. ða
com beorht scacan scima after sceadwe". – "That great heart rested. The
hall towered, gold-shingled and gabled, and the guest slept in it until the
black raven with raucous glee announced heaven's joy, and a hurry of
brightness overran the shadows" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")46.
(19) EModE: Dogberry: "Come hither, neighbour Seacole. God hath
blessed you with a good name: to be a well-favoured man is the gift of
fortune; but to write and read comes by nature" (Shakespeare, "Much ado
about nothing")47.
(20) ME: "And hardily, they dorste leye hir nekke, The miller shold
nat stele hem half a pekke Of corn by sleighte, ne by force hem reve; …". –
"And stoutly they proclaimed they's bet their neck The miller should not
steal one half a peck Of grain, by trick, nor yet by force should thieve; …"
(Chaucer, "The Canterbury tales: The reeve's tale")48.
Heaney, op. cit., pp. 26-27.
Hutchins, op. cit., p. 325.
45 Taylor & Lavagnino, op. cit., p. 466.
46 Heaney, op. cit., pp. 122-123.
47 Rowse, op. cit., p. 420.
48 Hutchins, op. cit., p. 226.
43

44

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

277

Utterances-statements as illocutionary speech acts in Old
English, Middle English, Early Modern English
I. Assertive utterances / verdictive utterances: they include the
delivering of an official or an unofficial evidence fact or value verdict that
is based upon the truth and belief of a speaker's propositional action.
(21) ME: "Nay," quod the syke man, "by Seint Simoun! I have be
shriven this day at my curat; I have him told al hoolly myn estat;". –
"Nay," said the sick man, "by Saint Simeon! I have been shriven today by
my curate; I have him told the whole truth of my state;" (Chaucer, "The
Canterbury tales: The summoner's tale")49.
In example (21), we evidence the assertive or verdictive utterance as
the assertive or verdictive illocutionary speech act with the illocutionary
verb tell, where the speaker – a sick man – expresses his statement about
the fact (evidence fact) of the truth of his current affairs that he has already
told a third person (curate) the whole truth about the state of his affairs
under the confession. Thus, we can confirm actualization of assertiveness
in Middle English discourse and the illocutionary effect of the represented
assertive speech act.
II. Directive utterances / exercitive utterances: they include the
intentional / urged direction proposition, based upon the speaker's
decision of a certain cause of actions to get an addressee to do / to induce
(persuade) something to be performed.
(22) EModE: Duke of York: "At your pleasure, my good lord. Who's
within there, ho!" (to a Servingman) "Invite my Lords of Salisbury and
Warwick To sup with me to-morrow night. Away!" (Shakespeare, "King
Henry VI" Part II)50.
Sentence (22) demonstrates the directive or exercitive utterance as the
directive or exercitive illocutionary speech act with illocutionary verb
invite in the imperative mood. Based on his intentional directive
proposition with illocutionary verb invite, the addresser, the Duke of York,
invites the addressees (Lords Salisbury and Warwick) to come to dinner
(to sup) with him the following evening. Such communicative act of
invitation's expression along with the speaker's urgent directive
proposition stands as the exemplification of recipients' inducement to
perform the suggested communicative action regardless of the addressees'
desire. By this fact, we can surely confirm the feature of illocutionary
exercitive speech act as a directive / exercitive utterance in Early Modern
English discourse.
III. Commissive utterances: they include the speaker's commission /
obligation to perform some course of an action in the future.
49
50

278

Ibid., p. 291.
Rowse, op. cit., p. 836.

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

(23) OE: Wiglaf maðelode, wordrihta fela sægde gesiðum him wæs
sefa geomor: "Ic ðæt mæl geman, þær we medu þegun, þonne we geheton
ussum hlaforde in biorsele, ðe us ðas beagas geaf, þæt we him ða
guðgetawa gyldan woldon gif him þyslicu þearf gelumpe, helmas ond
heard sweord". – Sad at heart, addressing his companions, Wiglaf spoke
wise and fluent words: "I remember that time when the mead was
flowing, How we pledged loyalty to our lord in the hall, Promised our
ring-giver we would be worth our price, Make good the gift of the wargear, Those swords and helmets, as and when His need required it"
(Anonymous, "Beowulf")51.
In complex sentence (23), the commissive utterance with the
illocutionary verb promise (geheton – OE) represents the commissive
illocutionary speech act, where the speaker Wiglaf expresses their (his and
other people's) commitment and obligation to the person, who gave them
the rings, to be worthy of this award and repay for the provided fighting or
combat equipment. By the fact of the obligation utterance or obligatory
speech commitment by Wiglaf before the addressee, we testify and prove
the addresser's relevant use of illocutionary speech act of commission in
the spoken discourse of Old English.
IV. Expressive utterances / behabiative utterances: they include the
speaker's psychological / emotional state under the certain conditions
about the state of affairs, specified in the propositional content.
(24) EModE: Tangle: "Non declaravit adversarius, sayst thou? What
a villain's that. I have a trick to do thee good: I will get thee out a proxy,
and make him declare with a pox to him". – First suitor: "That will make
him declare to his sore grief. I thank your good worship. But put case he
do declare?" (Middleton, "The phoenix")52.
In the dialogic discourse of sentence (24), we testify the reaction of the
First suitor as a speaker to the previous offer of the addresser Tangle to do
him good, namely to release him (the speaker) from all powers
(obligations) and force the enemy to declare that he has a pox on the skin
and can not be married. As a reaction to Tangle's speech, the First suitor
expresses his emotional state – namely gratefulness in his speechutterance to the addresser with the help of the illocutionary verb thank,
where the expressive or behabiative utterance realizes the expressive
illocutionary speech act in the form of gratitude and high appreciation for
the expressed proposition. Based on this example, we confirm the
appropriate use of the expressive / behabiative utterance as an expressive
or behabiative illocutionary speech act in the dialogic discourse of Early
51
52

Heaney, op. cit., pp. 177-179.
Taylor & Lavagnino, op. cit., p. 100.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

279

Modern English.
V. Declarative utterances / expositive utterances: they include the
speaker's proclamation of the state of affairs, based on the propositional
content and reality.
(25) OE: "Swa hit oð domes dæg diope benemdon þeodnas mære, þa
ðæt þær dydon, þæt se secg wære synnum scildig, hergum geheaðerod,
hellbendum fæst, wommum gewitnad, se ðone wong strude, næs he
goldhwæte gearwor hæfde agendes est ær gesceawod". – "The high-born
chiefs who had buried the treasure Declared it until doomsday so
accursed That whoever robbed it would be guilty of wrong And grimly
punished for their transgression, Hasped in hell-bonds in heathen
shrines. Yet Beowulf's gaze at the gold treasure when he first saw it had
not been selfish" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")53.
In the linguistic discourse of Old English (25), we witness the use of the
illocutionary verb declare (benemdon – OE) in the declarative or expositive
utterance for the implementation of the declarative / expositive
illocutionary speech act as the proclamation by high-ranking leaders
(þeodnas mære – OE), who buried the treasure, of their will (desire) or
volition that anyone, who robs this place with the gold treasure, will be
found guilty of wrong, grimly punished in this crime for their transgression,
and hasped in hell-bonds in heathen shrines. In fact, in their speechutterance þeodnas mære (the high-born chiefs) as the speakers proclaim
and expose the current state of affairs, based upon the real situation about
the buried gold treasure, specifying the fact that "Yet Beowulf's gaze at the
gold treasure when he first saw it had not been selfish".
Thus, the speakers proclaim both the latest state of affairs and their
will, but at the same time they expose their warning about the
consequences of the wrongdoing or the violation of the law in case of
robbery of the buried gold treasure. Moreover, this way of addressers'
declarative proclamation along with their expositiveness and warning with
the help of the verb benemdon (declare) gives us the reason to assert the
relevant use of the declarative or expositive statement as an illocutionary
speech act to achieve the purpose of the addresser in the presented
dialogic discourse. So, we confirm the relevant use of the declarative /
expositive utterance in the OE language.
Illocutionary force and goal of utterances-statements in
complex sentences of Old English, Middle English, and Early
Modern English
In our research, it is witnessed that the studied utterances-statements
in complex sentences of Old-, Middle-, and Early Modern English
53

280

Heaney, op. cit., pp. 206-207.

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

demonstrate certain illocutionary force of the speaker's utterance
intentional orientation or direction in order to realize a particular
illocutionary goal by the corresponding illocutionary verb from our corpus
data.
In terms of the speech acts theory, the main types of the speaker's
illocutionary goals are distinguished as: 1) an assertive goal – to state how
things are going on; 2) a directive goal – to motivate or force someone to
do something; 3) a commissive goal – to oblige a speaker to do something;
4) an expressive goal – to express personal feelings, instructions; 5) a
declarative goal – to change a world by way of this utterance54.
According to the five types of an illocutionary goal of utterancesstatements in complex sentences of the Old English, Middle English, and
Early Modern English periods, we distribute sentences-utterances as
illocutionary speech acts by an illocutionary purpose or a goal along with
the determination of the intensity of illocutionary force in the paradigm:
"strong illocutionary force:: weak illocutionary force", taking into
consideration such following aspects as, respectively: 1) social status of a
speaker in the paradigm "authoritative / equal status:: subordinate status",
2) obligation of speaker's propositional action realization in the paradigm
"obligatory implementation of a speaker's verbal proposition:: optional
implementation of a speaker's verbal proposition", 3) controllability of
speaker's propositional action realization in the paradigm "controllability
of speaker's verbal proposition implementation by an addresser::
controllability of speaker's verbal proposition implementation by an
addressee", 4) direction / orientation of speaker's propositional action
realization in the paradigm "focus of speaker's verbal proposition
implementation on a recipient / an addressee:: focus of speaker's verbal
proposition implementation on the interests of an addresser".
I. Utterances-statements of the illocutionary assertive goal:
(26) EModE: Mariana (to the Duke): "My lord, I do confess I ne'er
was married; And I confess besides I am no maid: I have known my
husband; yet my husband Knows not that ever he knew me"
(Shakespeare, "Measure for measure")55.
In example (26), the illocutionary assertive goal is realized by the
illocutionary verb confess in order for the speaker Mariana to utter the
statement as the fact to convince the Duke as an addressee that she is not
married and is not a servant. The social status of the addresser is defined
as the subordinate status to the reference of the Duke as an addressee,
because he has a higher social level. Implementation of the speaker's
54
55

Ekoro & Gunn, op. cit., pp. 130-143.
Rowse, op. cit., p. 741.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

281

propositional action's illocutionary goal is optional, but controlled.
So, the intensity of a speaker's assertive goal in speech act of an
assertive utterance-statement is defined as the weak illocutionary force.
II. Utterances-statements of the illocutionary directive goal:
(27) OE: The coast-guard: "Swylce ic maguþegnas mine hate wið
feonda gehwone flotan eowerne, niwtyrwydne nacan on sande arum
healdan, oþðæt eft byreð ofer lagustreamas leofne mannan wudu
wundenhals to Wedermearce, …". – The coast-guard: "What's more, I'll
order my own comrades On their word of honor to watch your boat
Down there on the strand keep her safe In her fresh tar, until the time
comes For her curved prow to preen on the waves And bear this hero
back to Geatland" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")56.
III. Utterances-statements of the illocutionary commissive goal:
(28) ME: Author: "This Januarie is ravisshed in a traunce At every
time he loked on hir face; But in his herte he gan hir to manace, That he
that night in armes wolde hir streyne Harder than ever Paris dide
Eleyne". – Author: "January was rapt into a trance With each time that
he looked upon her face; And in his heart her beauty he'd embrace, And
threatened in his arms to hold her tight, Harder than Paris Helen did,
that night" (Chaucer, "The Canterbury tales: The merchant's tale")57.
In examples (27) – (28), the directive and commissive illocutionary
goals of the illocutionary verbs order (hate – OE), threatened (manace –
OE), respectively, actualize the strong intensity of the speech act's
illocutionary force of the speakers' commissive utterances-statements due
to the authoritative / equal social status of the addressers – the coastguard (27), January (28). The latter fact determines obligatory
implementation of speakers' verbal propositions of order, threat with
controllability by the addressers and the direction or orientational focus on
the recipients.
IV. Utterances-statements of the illocutionary expressive goal:
(29) ME: "Thou seist also, that it displeseth me But-if that thou wolt
preyse my beautee, And but thou poure alwey up-on my face, And clepe
me "faire dame" in every place; …". – "You say also that it displeases me
Unless you praise and flatter mv beauty, And save you gaze always upon
mv face And call me "lovely lady" every place; …" (Chaucer, "The
Canterbury tales: The physician's tale")58.
In sentence (29), the illocutionary expressive speech act is realized by
illocutionary verb praise (wolt preyse – ME) in the speaker's expressive
Heaney, op. cit., pp. 20-21.
Hutchins, op. cit., p. 327.
58 Ibid., op. cit., p. 261.
56
57

282

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

utterance-statement. The intensity of the illocutionary expressive goal is
determined as the weak illocutionary force due to the subordinate social
status because of speaker's less authority that exclusively causes the
addresser's feeling expression of addressee's glorification as his own
interest without any controllability from a speaker's side. Thus,
implementation of an illocutionary expressive goal of an addresser's verbal
propositional action is confirmed as optional with focus of speaker's verbal
proposition implementation on the interests of an addresser.
V. Utterances-statements of the illocutionary declarative goal:
(30) OE: "cwæð, he guðcyning ofer swanrade secean wolde, mærne
þeoden, þa him wæs manna þearf". – "He (Hygelac) announced his plan:
To sail the swan's roads and search out that king, The famous prince who
needed defenders" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")59.
In example (30), the illocutionary verb announced (cwæð – OE)
actualizes the illocutionary declarative goal of the speaker's declarative
utterance-statement. The social status of the addresser (Hygelac) and the
addressee (king) is defined as the equal social status with focus on the
latter. Hence, it is witnessed and determined the strong intensity of the
illocutionary declarative goal with the obligation of speaker's verbal
propositional action implementation and the controllability by the
addresser.
Thereby, numerous exemplifications from of Old-, Middle-, Early
Modern English dialogic discourse witness and confirm the characteristics
of utterances-statements with:
I. The strong illocutionary force, which implements and includes:
1) authoritative social status:: equal social status of a speaker;
2) obligation of speaker's propositional action implementation;
3) controllability of speaker's verbal proposition implementation by an
addresser;
4) direction / orientation / focus of speaker's verbal proposition
implementation on a recipient / an addressee.
II. The weak illocutionary force, which actualizes and contains:
1) subordinate social status of a speaker;
2) optionality of speaker's propositional action implementation;
3) controllability of speaker's verbal proposition implementation by an
addressee;
4) direction / orientation / focus of speaker's verbal proposition
implementation on the interests of an addresser.

59

Heaney, op. cit., pp. 14-15.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

283

Direct and indirect illocutionary speech acts in Old English,
Middle English, and Early Modern English
In historical English studies, it is noticed that complex sentences with
the studied illocutionary verbs can realize direct or indirect speech acts of
utterances-statements of different types as assertives, directives,
commissives, expressives, declaratives.
In sentences (31) – (37), it has been exemplified assertive utterances,
directive utterances, commissive utterances, expressive utterances,
declarative utterances as the direct speech acts (31) – (33), (36) – (37)
with such illocutionary verbs as thanked (þancedon – OE), swear (swere
– ME), intend (entende – ME), command (command – EModE), bless
(bless – EModE), and the indirect speech acts (34) – (35) with such
illocutionary verbs as persuade (glose – ME), ask (ask – EModE):
(31) OE: "þá wæs sund liden éoletes æt ende. Þanon up hraðe Wedera
léode on wang stigon saéwudu saéldon syrcan hrysedon gúðgewaédo;
Gode þancedon þæs þe him ýþ-láde éaðe wurdon". – "It was the end of
their voyage and the Geats vaulted Over the side, out on to the sand, And
moored their ship. There was a clash of mail And a thresh of gear. They
thanked God For that easy crossing on a calm sea" (Anonymous,
"Beowulf")60.
(32) ME: "And this on every god celestial I swere it yow, and eek on
eche goddesse, On every Nymphe and deite infernal, On Satiry and
Fauny more and lesse, That halve goddes been of wildernesse; And
Attropos my threed of lyf to-breste If I be fals; now trowe me if thow
leste!" – "And this I swear, by every God supernal, And swear it, too, by
every bright Goddess, By every Nymph and Deity infernal, By every
Faun and Satyr, more and less, Those demi-gods that haunt the
wilderness, That Atropos may snip her fatal shears If I am false or justify
your fears!" (Chaucer, "Troilus and Cressida")61.
(33) ME: Author: "Whan that she leyser hadde, and for to entende To
lernen bokes was al hir lyking, How she in vertu mighte hir lyf dispende".
– Author: "Whenever she hail time; she did intend To learn from books,
which were to her liking, I low she in virtue might her whole life spend"
(Chaucer, "The Canterbury tales: The monk's tale: Zenobia")62.
(34) ME: "Ye shal eek seen, your fader shal yow glose To been a wyf,
and as he can wel preche,…". – "You'll see – your father shall you so
persuade, You'll marry there, for he knows how to preach; …" (Chaucer,
"Troilus and Cressida")63.
Heaney, op. cit., pp. 16-17.
Hutchins, op. cit., p. 117.
62 Ibid., p. 440.
63 Ibid., p. 116.
60
61

284

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

1. (35) EModE: Follywit: "Yet I am a fool to ask that, for how can
they keep their countenance that have lost their credits?" (Middleton, "A
mad world my masters")64.
(36) EModE: Temper (to Jesus): "If thou be the son of God, command
that these stones be made bread" (Middleton, "The two gates of salvation:
The evangelists")65.
(37) EModE: Florizel: "I bless the time When my good falcon made
her flight across Thy father's ground" (Shakespeare, "The winter's tale")66.
At this given point of direct and indirect illocutionary speech acts with
English illocutionary verbs, it should be mentioned that specific share of
direct / indirect speech acts in different periods of English language
development varies, where the use of complex sentences to denote direct /
indirect speech acts is the peculiar reflection of general trends in the
speech behaviour of communicators67. In the period from the VI-th to the
XVII-th centuries, there occurs the tendency for the amount increase of
direct speech acts realizations by complex sentences implementations with
the studied illocutionary verbs at the expense of assigning to the statement
more categorical, confidential sense with corresponding illocutionary
verbs in specific speech acts, as it was exemplified in (38):
(38) EModE: Sir Nathaniel: "When in the world I lived, I was the
world's commander; By east, west, north, and south, I spread my
conquering might: My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander"
(Shakespeare, "Love's labour's lost")68.
Direct and indirect speech acts are characterized by morphological
and syntactic indicators. In some languages, linguists distinguish three
leading syntactic types of sentences, which are typically associated with
three basic illocutionary forces of utterances, namely complex sentences
are considered in the paradigm "syntactic type of a sentence –
illocutionary force / type of an utterance" as: declarative sentences –
"assertiveness / statement", interrogative sentences – "request / question"
and imperative sentences – "order / request"69. Hence, in case of the direct
corresponding of a sentence's syntactic type with the illocutionary force of
an utterance, a complex sentence actualizes the direct speech act.
However, the indirect relationship between the syntactic type of a complex
sentence and the illocutionary force signals about the indirect speech act.
Taylor & Lavagnino, op. cit., p. 418.
Ibid., p. 689.
66 Rowse, op. cit., p. 2369.
67 Kalytyuk, op. cit., p. 54.
68 Rowse, op. cit., p. 223.
69 Y. Huang, Speech acts. In K. Brown, & K. Allan (Eds.), Concise encyclopedia of
semantics, 1st ed. Oxford: Elsevier, 2009, p. 922.
64
65

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

285

An illocutionary speech act is associated with intentionality and
sentence proposition that actualize the objective content of the discourse,
and with the utterance conventionality or conventions, which are
considered as the subjective content of context with speaker's independent
ways of his purpose and intentions' implementation, and identification by
the listener. Actualization of an illocutionary speech act as an objective
content of the dialogic discourse is based on the subjective content of
language discourse, pragmatic conventions, where the latter are associated
in consciousness of a native speaker with a certain scenario interaction
within a given communicative situation. Realization of an illocutionary
speech act is based on conventions as the ability of language signs to
represent related concepts in a particular language environment70.
Functioning of complex sentences-statements of affirmative nature in
the dialogic discourse of Old-, Middle-, Early Modern English is witnessed,
according to such parameters as: 1) illocutionary force and illocutionary
goal as an objective content of an utterance-statement – assertive,
commissive, directive, declarative, expressive; 2) syntactic type of the
sentence-statement, depending on the intentional purpose – in the
paradigms: "affirmative statement", "imperative statement", "interrogative
statement"; 3) conventionality / unconventionality of the speech act as +/subjective content of an utterance-statement.
From our corpus data of Old-, Middle-, Early Modern English, we
witness and testify that sentences-utterances of the affirmative character
actualize direct illocutionary speech acts in all five types of the speech acts
of the English language dialogic discourse as:
I. Affirmative statements:: conventional speech acts :: + / + objective /
subjective content of the English dialogic discourse:
(39) ME: "Who fedde the Egipcien Marie in the cave, Or in desert? no
wight but Crist, sans faille. Fyve thousand folk it was as gret mervaille
With loves fyve and fisshes two to fede. God sente his foison at hir grete
nede". – "Who gave Egyptian Mary food to eat In cave or desert? None
but Christ, say I. Five thousand folk, the gospels testify, On five loaves
and two fishes once did feed. And thus God sent abundance for her need"
(Chaucer, "The Canterbury tales: The tale of the man of law")71.
(40) EModE: Demetrius: "I am full sorry That he approves the
common liar, who Thus speaks of him at Rome: but I will hope Of better
deeds to-morrow. Rest you happy!" (Shakespeare, "Antony and
Cleopatra")72.
I. Budiy, Conventionality and intentionality in the performative concept. A young
scientist. Vol. 4.3 (44.3), 2017, p. 23.
71 Hutchins, op. cit., p. 243.
72 Rowse, op. cit., p. 2011.
70

286

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

II. Imperative statements:: conventional speech acts :: + / + objective
/ subjective content of the English dialogic discourse:
(41) EModE: Lucius (to Captain): "This forwardness Makes our
hopes fair. Command our present numbers Be muster'd; bid the captains
look to't" (Shakespeare, "Cymbeline")73.
(42) OE: Wiglaf (to the old King – the leader of the Geats): "hátað
heaðo-maére hlaéw gewyrcean, beorhtne æfter baéle æt brimes nósan". –
"Order my troop to construct a barrow on a headland on the coast, after
my pyre has cooled" (Anonymous, "Beowulf")74.
(43) ME: "And at o word, with-outen repentaunce, Wel-come, my
knight, my pees, my suffisaunce!" – "I am content, befall what may
befall; Welcome, my knight, mv peace, mv all in all!" (Chaucer, "Troilus
and Cressida")75.
Examples (39) – (43) are defined as complex sentences of declarative
and imperative nature with such illocutionary verbs as testify, approve,
command, order, welcome, which implement the direct illocutionary
speech acts in concordance of the specified syntactic types of the
exemplified sentences with particular illocutionary force of utterancesstatements in paradigms "affirmative statement", "imperative statement".
The assertive goal (39), the declarative goal (40), the directive goal (41) –
(42), the expressive goal (43) as the intentional purpose of these
utterances-statements actualize the objective content in studied complex
sentences with the conventional use of speech acts in the subjective
context of their representation as the statements with identification by an
addressee as the affirmative, imperative statements of affirmative nature
in discourse of OE, ME, EModE.
Interestingly, in speech act's theory development, as noticed by
Lewiński (2021), the basic form of illocutionary pluralism is recognized to
be the one, involved in indirect speech acts realized as questions or
requests, where illocutionarily secondary (indirect) speech acts, but
locutionarily primary (direct) speech acts, are the means to perform
illocutionarily primary (direct) speech acts, but locutionarily secondary
(indirect) speech acts.
Hence, questions and requests are regarded as indirect illocutionary
speech acts with direct locutionarity76.
According to our research results, we can confirm that the rationale
stance of the indirect speech act's use in the Old English, Middle English,
Ibid., p. 2312.
Heaney, op. cit., pp. 188-189.
75 Hutchins, op. cit., p. 79.
76 M. Lewiński, Speech act pluralism in argumentative polylogues. Informal logic,
41 (3), 2021, pp. 430-431.
73

74

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

287

Early Modern English languages can be considered by speech act's
realization at the syntactic / grammatical level by the complex sentence
itself in the form of an interrogative statement, as well as by an indirect
question, which is placed in the subordinate / complementary clause in the
postposition of the main illocutionary verb of the speech act.
Indirect illocutionary speech acts are witnessed in the complex
sentences of the studied periods in diachrony as utterances-statements of
the interrogative affirmative character as:
III. Interrogative statements:: unconventional speech acts :: + /objective / subjective content of the English dialogic discourse:
(44) ME: But Pandarus brak al this speche anoon. And seyde to
Deiphebus: "wole ye goon, If yourë wille be, as I yow preyde, To speke
here of the nedes of Criseyde?" – Till on the conversation Pandar broke
And said: "Deiphebus, to all this folk, May I now beg you somewhat to
declare Of Cressida's unfortunate affair?" (Chaucer, "Troilus and
Cressida")77.
(45) ME: "Eek though I speke of love unfelingly, No wonder is, for it
no-thing of newe is; A blind man can nat juggen wel in hewis". – "And if
unskilled in love my pen I ply, No wonder that, for who would dare assert
A blind man should in colors be expert?" (Chaucer, "Troilus and
Cressida")78.
(46) EModE: Mother Gruel: "Then she demanded of me whether I
was your worship's aunt or no?" (Middleton, "Michaelmas tearme")79.
(47) EModE: Cade: "Dare any be so bold to sound retreat or parley,
when I command them kill?" (Shakespeare, "King Henry VI" Part II)80.
Sentences (44) – (47) from Middle English and Early Modern English
have been exemplified as complex sentences of the interrogative
affirmative character with such illocutionary verbs as beg, declare, assert,
demand, command, which implement or actualize indirect illocutionary
speech acts in concordance of the interrogative syntactic type of these
sentences with the illocutionary directive or exersitive force (beg, demand,
command), declarative force (declare), assertive force (assert) of the above
mentioned utterances-statements in the paradigm "interrogative
statement". The objective content of these interrogative statements is
ensured by actualizing the relevant illocutionary force and the intentional
purpose of the utterances-statements as the directive, declarative, or
assertive force / goal in the interrogative context, where the latter is
perceived by the listener not as the subjective content, but more as the
Hutchins, op. cit., p. 51.
Ibid., p. 22.
79 Taylor & Lavagnino, op. cit., p. 356.
80 Rowse, op. cit., p. 872.
77

78

288

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

objective content of the speaker's verbal proposition, which is
implemented or realized by the directive statements, declarative
statements, and assertive statements.
To recapitulate, in the English dialogic discourse in diachrony, above
mentioned exemplifications of the illocutionary speech acts (44) – (47) are
fixed as the unconventional speech acts in the objective content of the
objective context, which determines their actual perception or
identification by the addressee as the interrogative statements, outlining
the latter as indirect illocutionary speech acts.
Conclusions
In the long run of our discussion, we put forward and claimed our
rationale stance that in the dialogic discourse of Old-, Middle-, Early
Modern English complex sentences as the utterances-statements with
illocutionary verbs were testified as assertive utterances (verdictives) (with
such illocutionary verbs as assert, assure, predict, inform, tell, notify,
inform, acknowledge, admit, remind, testify, confirm, certify, prove,
confess, assume, guess, state, swear, insist), directive utterances
(exercitives) (with such illocutionary verbs as ask, order, command,
request, plead, pray, invite, prescribe, demand, offer, induce, incite,
persuade, seduce, beg, advise, recommend), commissive utterances (with
such illocutionary verbs as commit, promise, contract, undertake, intend,
threaten, agree, vow, vouch, refuse, decline), expressive utterances
(behabiatives) (with such illocutionary verbs as congratulate, thank,
deplore, welcome, praise, compliment, regret, condole, greet), declarative
utterances (expositives) (with such illocutionary verbs as declare,
announce, proclaim, approve, authorize, excommunicate, name,
reproach, surrender, bless).
The findings showed the studied English utterances-statements to
function as the illocutionary direct and indirect speech acts of the
illocutionary goal with weak or strong illocutionary force depending on the
addresser's intentional verbal proposition. The feature of the speaker's
illocutionary force is characterized by the social status of an addresser, the
obligatory implementation of a speaker's verbal proposition, controllability
and orientation or direction of a speaker's verbal propositional action.
It has been defined the meaning of the objective and subjective
contents of the illocutionary direct and indirect speech acts as "affirmative
statements", "imperative statements", "interrogative statements" due to
the indicators or parameters of illocutionary force / goal, of the special
syntactic type of utterances-statements, and conventionality /
unconventionality of the studied speech acts. Further research
perspectives are considered in the study of the pragmatic potential of

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

289

locutionary, illocutionary, perlocutionary speech acts in the linguistic
discourse space of the diachronic Germanic studies.
References
Austin, J.L., (1962), How to do things with words. Oxford: Clarendon
Press. 166 p.
Bäckström, S., (2020), A dogma of speech act theory. Inquiry, pp.
1‒17.
Budiy, Z.I., (2017), Conventionality and intentionality in the
performative concept. A young scientist. Vol. 4.3 (44.3), pp. 20-24.
Buzrukova, M.M., (2020), The study of speech act as a unit of
discursive activity. JournalNX- A multidisciplinary peer reviewed
journal, 6 (9), pp. 5-11.
Capone, A., (2006), Speech acts: Classification and definition. In K.
Brown (Ed.), Encyclopedia of language and linguistics. 2nd ed. Oxford:
Elsevier, pp. 681-684.
Ekoro, D.E., & Gunn, M., (2021), Speech act theory and Gricean
pragmatics: A review. LWATI: A journal of contemporary research, 18
(4), pp. 130-143.
Faisal, F., Saputri, D., Nurliza, E., Azmi, N., Fauzia, S.N., & Indani, I.,
(2021), Indirect speech act analysis of Indonesian education department
students of Serambi Mekkah University. In M. Usman, W. Khafidah, & M.
Daud (Eds.), The proceeding book of the 4th international conference on
multidisciplinary research, 4 (1), pp. 85-90.
García, E.W., (2019), Toward a pragmatic account and taxonomy of
valuative speech acts. Pragmatics, 29 (1), pp. 107-131.
Heaney, S., (Trans.), (2000), Beowulf: A new verse translation. New
York – London: W.W. Norton & Company, 213 p.
Huang, Y., (2009), Speech acts. In K. Brown, & K. Allan (Eds.),
Concise encyclopedia of semantics, 1st ed. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 917-926.
Hutchins, R.M., (Ed.), (1952), Troilus and Cressida and the
Canterbury tales by Geoffrey Chaucer. With modern English versions of
both works. In Great books of the western world, Vol. 22. Chicago –
London – Toronto – Geneva – Sydney – Tokyo – Manila: William Benton,
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 550 p.
Jaya, A.P., & Haryati, H., (2021), Illocutionary act and paradigmatic
case in selected chapters of short stories book "Australia day" by Melanie
Cheng. Proceeding of national seminar on linguistics, literature, culture
and language teaching, 11, pp. 43-55.
Kalytyuk, L.P., (2014), English interrogative sentence. Structure.
Semantics. Pragmatics: A manual for students of higher educational
290

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

institutions. Kyiv: Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, 116 p.
Kolesnyk O., & Holtseva M., (2022), Lies and deception in modern
English diplomatic discourse: pragmatics in interdisciplinary focus. Cogito
– Multidisciplinary Research Journal, Vol. 14, Issue 1, pp. 154‒173.
Kravchenko, N., (2017), Illocution of direct speech acts via
conventional implicature and semantic presupposition. Lege artis.
Language yesterday, today, tomorrow. The journal of University of SS
Cyril and Methodius in Trnava, II (1), pp. 128-168.
Kravchenko, N., Prokopchuk, M., Pozhar, A., Kozyarevych-Zozulya, L.,
& Rozhkov, Y., (2022), Illocutionary Pragmatic Adaptation Challenge:
Ukrainian Translations of English-language Soft Law Texts. Amazonia
Investiga, 11(49), pp. 267-276.
Lewiński, M., (2021), Speech act pluralism in argumentative
polylogues. Informal logic, 41 (3), pp. 421-451.
Núñez, J.M.G., (2021), Embedded root phenomena and indirect
speech reports. Linguistics, 59 (6), pp. 1531-1566.
Orizka, R.D., Oktaviani, A., & Triyogo, A., (2021), An analysis of
speech acts used in Peter Rabbit movie. E-link journal, 8 (2), pp. 150-157.
Pocheptsov, G.G., (2013), Selected works on linguistics. Vinnitsa:
Nova kniga, 560 p.
Prihodko, A.I., (2013), Illocutive typology of evaluatory utterances.
Science and education a new dimension: Philology, 4, pp. 32-36.
Proost, K., (2009), Speech act verbs. In K. Brown, & K. Allan (Eds.),
Concise encyclopedia of semantics. 1st ed. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 912-917.
Searle, J.R., (1975), A taxonomy of illocutionary acts. In K. Gunderson
(Ed.), Language, mind and knowledge, pp. 344-379.
Skrypkaru, D., & Kolesnyk, O., (2021), Semantic dimension of
discourse space (based on the scripts of English TV series "How to get
away with murder"). Studia philologica, 17 (2), pp. 58-64.
Sweet, H. (Ed.), (1981), The student's dictionary of Anglo-Saxon, 11th
ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 217 p.
Taylor, G., & Lavagnino, J., (Eds.), (2007), Thomas Middleton. The
collected works. Oxford – New York: Clarendon Press, 2016 p.
Tuhai, O.M., (2017), Performative verbs as expression of volitional
inducement in Early New Modern English. In L. Shlossman (Ed.), The
fifteenth European conference on languages, literature and linguistics.
Proceedings of the conference, May 10, pp. 27-31.
Tuhai, O.M., (2019), Pragmatic potential of Early Modern English
sentence with clausal complementation. Transcarpathian philological
studies, 10 (2), pp. 28-36.
Tuhai, O., (2022), Subject Control Infinitive Constructions in Early
Modern English. World Journal of English Language, 12 (1), pp. 367-383.

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

291

Zhabotynska, S., & Slyvka, N., (2020), Emotive speech acts and their
discourse modifications in the literary text. Discourse and interaction, 13
(1), pp. 113-136.
Appendix
Table 1. Realization of illocutionary speech acts with illocutionary verbs in
Old English, Middle English, Early Modern English
Illocutionary speech acts in complex sentences as utterances-statements
with illocutionary verbs in dialogic discourse of
Old English, Middle English, Early Modern English
Illocutionary
speech acts / verbs

Old
English

Middle
English

Early Modern
English

"Beowulf"

Chaucer

Shakespear Middleton
e

1. assert

1

3

0

0

2. assure

0

34

123

107

3. predict

1

0

1

1

4. inform

2

8

42

6

5. tell

16

1387

1414

390

6. notify

0

3

2

1

7. acknowledge

1

8

25

30

8. admit

1

4

48

36

9. remind

0

2

0

0

10. testify

0

3

6

9

11. confirm

0

7

42

39

12. certify

0

0

3

10

13. prove

9

46

64

64

14. confess

0

62

162

200

15. assume

0

3

16

8

16. guess

0

50

54

46

17. state

0

2

1

0

18. swear

0

56

313

220

Total

I. assertives /
verdictives

292

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

19. insist

0

7

2

1

Total

31

1685

2318

1168

4

180

235

214

21. (take/give) order

20

16

19

21

22. (give) command

1

23

96

57

23. (have) request

1

5

8

15

24. plead

1

7

56

32

25. pray

0

295

812

768

26. invite

0

4

36

57

27. prescribe

0

0

4

6

28. demand

0

13

17

8

29. offer

3

11

42

84

30. induce

0

1

9

2

31. incite

0

2

6

1

32. persuade

0

1

63

51

33. seduce

0

0

11

6

34. beg

1

35

25

24

35. advise

1

41

90

46

36. recommend

0

1

4

2

32

635

1533

1394

37. commit

2

16

88

53

38. promise

4

42

68

53

39. contract

0

2

7

5

40. undertake

2

34

53

34

41. intend

1

8

87

32

42. threaten

4

4

35

30

43. agree

1

47

29

35

44. (make) vow

2

14

57

33

5202

II. directives /
exercitives
20. ask

Total

3594

III. commissives

Cogito – Multidisciplinary Research Journal

293

45.(avouch) / vouch(safe)

0

28

88

30

46. refuse

3

17

44

54

47. decline

1

3

22

8

20

215

578

367

48. congratulate

0

0

1

1

49. thank

7

125

303

322

50. deplore

0

5

1

5

51. welcome

7

35

373

507

52. praise

5

13

56

40

53. compliment

0

0

1

1

54. regret

1

4

0

0

55. condole

0

1

2

0

56. greet

3

12

40

17

23

195

777

893

57. declare

2

54

8

10

58. announce

4

2

0

0

59. proclaim

0

5

81

44

60. approve

0

11

43

35

61. authorize

0

0

1

1

62. excommunicate

0

0

2

1

63. name

3

8

46

50

64. reproach

0

11

6

1

65. surrender

0

0

2

0

66. bless

1

20

31

35

Total

10

111

220

177

518

Total speech acts /
verbs

116

2841

5426

3999

12382

Total

1180

IV. expressives /
behabiatives

Total

1888

V. declaratives /
expositives

294

Vol. XIV, no. 2/June, 2022

