The Trajectory and Trend of International Political
Economy in Southeast Asia
Miranda P. Tahalele1*, Ahmad Dhiaulhaq2, Rhevy Adriade Putra3,
Roseno Aji Affandi4, Lili Yulyadi Arnakim5, Tirta Nugraha Mursitama6
1,3,4,5,6International

Relations Department, Faculty of Humanities,

Bina Nusantara University, Jakarta, Indonesia 11480
2Research

Institute for Humanity and Nature (RIHN), Kyoto, Japan

miranda.paulina@binus.ac.id; mirandatahalele@gmail.com; rhevy.adriade@binus.ac.id;
rosena.affandi@binus.edu; lili.yulyadi@binus.edu; tmursitama@binus.edu
*Corresponding author
How to Cite: Tahalele, M. P., Dhiaulhaq, A., Putra, R. A., Aji, R., Arnakim, L. Y., Mursitama, T. N.
(2022). The Trajectory and Trend of International Political Economy in Southeast Asia. Journal of
ASEAN Studies, 10(2), 181−206. https:/doi.org/10.21512/jas.v10i2.9184

Abstract
International political economy debates in Southeast Asia have expanded in the
last decades from the perspectives of development theories in conjunction with the
structure of states relations to the links between state-market-society. The article
explores the studies of Southeast Asia’s political economy that has stimulated the
debate over the past years and its future trends. It intends to analyse the trajectory
of the issues and topics identified utilizing structured research of studies in
scientific databases and derive discussion on its future topics by looking at the
links between state-market-society. The existing topics related to issues of the
political economy of Southeast Asia are grouped into themes related to
development financing from traditional and emerging donors, State-Owned
Enterprises, and regional integration. In addition, it captures the topics based on
the trend that are proposed and emerged within the policy discussion and
academic forums. The initiated issues are climate change and environment, the
importance of sub-regional in ASEAN integration, and digitalisation and
technological advancement.
Keywords: ASEAN, Southeast Asia, International Political Economy, trends, and
trajectory

Journal of ASEAN Studies, Vol. 10, No. 2 (2022), pp.181−206
ISSN 2338-1361 print / ISSN 2338-1353 electronic
Received: 20th October 2022/ Revised: 27th December 2022/ Accepted: 27th December 2022

Introduction
Over the past 55 years, the political-economic debates of Southeast Asian countries or
ASEAN have stimulated discussion on its relevance to regional cooperation within the
changing architecture of global cooperation. In recent years, ASEAN as a regional institution
has extended its position by expanding the discourse of equal and central position to its
external partners and within the relations among member states. ASEAN has faced several
facets of international conditions since its establishment with the background of the cold war
to the aftermath of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the global war on terror, and the rise of
China in the region (Elias & Rethel, 2016; Juego, 2020), as well as to the current situation of
global pandemic (Mursitama, Karim, &Arnakim, 2021). Domestic politics of its member states
also evolved and varied from a militaristic government with a non-democratic authoritarian
regime to the post-populism government. The regional and domestic political contexts have
shaped the relations established among countries, including in understanding the economic
context attached to the political situations. These historical experiences cannot be separated
from the discussion on the political economy evolution of Southeast Asia as a region, and
within the countries, which is also intertwined with the social-political-cultural contestation
that happens in the societies (Al-Fadhat, 2020).
International political economy debates in ASEAN have expanded from the
perspectives of development theories in conjunction with the structure of state relations that
broaden into the links between state-market-society theories (Juego, 2020). This evolution
cannot be separated from the interaction between domestic actors, transnational stakeholders,
regional markets, and policy elites (Elias & Rethel, 2016). The debates capture the idealization
of relations, institutions, and perspectives that derives from how Southeast Asian countries
constituted the states, including government’s roles and interests within the political and
economic goals (Al-Fadhat, 2020; Jones & Hameiri, 2020). The region’s historical paths bring
an understanding of how regionalism among member states and with other countries is
shaped, including how it is embedded in the policy that developed within the regional
institution. However, regional relations cannot only be explored from the perspectives of
institutions, or government approaches solely but also from the context that shaped the
cooperation and relations among countries (Jones & Hameiri, 2020). Therefore, it raises the
question on how the ASEAN’s integrated documents, such as the Master Plan of ASEAN 2025,
the Initiative for ASEAN Integration, or the Outlook on the Indo-Pacific functions in regional
cooperation. Some might argue that these documents not only utilize as policy directions that
derive the relationship among the Southeast Asian States but also justify the need to expand
the state’s economic and market capitalism goals in the regions.
The article intends to question how the studies of international political economy
expanded in Southeast Asia? What are the trajectory and trends that derive the discussion
especially regarding the state-market-society relations in ASEAN. The article aims to capture
the trajectory of the research related to international political economy (IPE) in ASEAN
specifically looking at the state-market-society relations that were established and expanded.
It also intends to present the high and low of the debates related to IPE in ASEAN, including

182

The Trajectory and Trend

on the potential future trends that extend the discussion on political economic notions in
Southeast Asia. The discussion develops into several thematic issues that link directly and
intertwined with the political economic framework in Southeast Asia. The sub-topics are
related to the issues of financing for development and its development cooperation context,
region integration in politics and economic, and state-owned enterprises, as well as proposing
debates on the role of sub-regional government in deriving the idea of regionalism, climate
and environmental challenges, and industrialization and technology. These topics are selected
to explore the contestation of state-market-society that goes beyond the context of
institutionalization of ASEAN. These issues are being contested from the specific narratives
and context that appear within the dynamic relations that appear over the years among
Southeast Asia countries as well as with other external state and non-state actors involved in
the region.

Methodology
The article is developed based on the content analysis or scoping review on relevant
literature related to political economy in ASEAN over the period since the establishment of
ASEAN in 1967 until now, by identifying the occurring trends and narratives. The proposed
methods applied in this article are through: (1) structured search of scientific databases (web
of science, google scholar, and scopus), using search terms related to the topics from peer
review journal articles and edited books; and (2) by conducting literature review on the
selected topics. Annex 1 elaborates in detail the information gathered including data sets
available that link with the research related to the political economy of Southeast Asia or
ASEAN.
The structured search has gathered and analyzed around 509 articles relevant to
international political economy issues in Southeast Asia and ASEAN from 1990-2022. It
utilized the keywords of “Political Economy” and “ASEAN” and “Southeast Asia” in our
search strategy. Further, ASEAN and Southeast Asia are being used interchangeably in this
article as well. The search discovered a steep increase in knowledge production of IPE in
ASEAN starting from 2002. On average, there are around twenty articles published regarding
topics on the international political economy of ASEAN. It has also been found that Western
and developed countries are still the most significant contributors to knowledge production
for IPE in ASEAN. The United States is still the most productive country in producing
knowledge related to IPE in Southeast Asia, with a total of 126 articles, followed by Australia
with 111 articles, the UK with 86 articles, and Singapore in 4th with 67 articles. Indonesia, the
largest country in Southeast Asia, placed only in tenth place with 30 articles published on the
International Political Economy of ASEAN.
The same thing happened regarding citations, Western and developed countries still
dominate citations in the ASEAN IPE issue. It shows that Western and developed countries
continuously remain the centers of knowledge production, where the knowledge created
significantly influences the direction of the studies of political economy in Southeast Asia.

Journal of ASEAN Studies

183

Countries such as the United States, Australia, England, and Singapore produce works with
a high number of citations than other countries. Uniquely, although Thailand is not among
the top 10 countries that produce IPE works in ASEAN, they still ranked sixth in terms of the
number of citations. Likewise, Sweden and France, although in terms of quantity, are not
included in the 10 countries that produce IPE articles of Southeast Asia, but they are the
seventh and eighth largest countries in terms of the number of citations. This once again shows
that Indonesia, despite having more publications, still needs to have influential works in the
global debates on the political economy of Southeast Asia.
Looking specifically at the issues being discussed in the academic databases based on
the structure search on political economy of Southeast Asia, figure 1 presents the topics that
appeared and reappeared from 2000 to 2020. Concerning the earlier issues in the structure
search, specific topics related to economic integration, economic development, globalization,
and development states emerged in the early 2000s. From around 2006 to 2016, issues related
to development, governance, democracy, institutions, trade, regionalism, and development
also appeared and were reinstated within the study of political economy in Southeast Asia as
a region as well as within individual member countries, such as Philippine, Vietnam, and
Singapore. After 2016, issues related to foreign direct investment, regional integration,
ASEAN, and the Belt Road Initiative (BRI) dominated the discussion and the study of the
political economy of Southeast Asia up until now. As the progress and trajectory from the
early 2000s to now can be seen in the figure below, it also showcases the evolution of the issues
that cannot be separated from the geopolitical and geoeconomic conditions that happened in
the region within this period. Therefore, with this background, the exploration of issues of
political economy of Southeast Asia is contextualized with the result of the structured search
framed within the conceptual and theoretical approaches for further exploration. However,
the article has limitations, which include not covering all issues related to political economy
of Southeast Asia. Instead, selected topics regrouped within broader issues to consider their
relevance within current debates, and research interests that expand among researchers,
scholars, policymakers, and practitioners are explored.

Figure 1 Trajectory of Southeast Asia’s Political Economy Topics from 2000 - 2020

184

The Trajectory and Trend

The Ongoing Topics of Southeast Asia’s Political Economy
Looking at the topics being discussed in the context of the political economy of
Southeast Asia or ASEAN, it can be seen that there are several issues that continuously and
consistently appeared within the academic discussion. As identified in the structure search of
scientific databases, issues such as development, regionalism, and trade continued to emerge,
but differ in the numbers of publications. In the past ten years, there was a shift in the issues
being discussed, especially with the rise of China's roles in the region through their expansion
in political-economic cooperation in Southeast Asia. There is also a discussion regarding the
regional and global dynamics in trade especially in regard to the tension between deepening
regionally driven free trade through FTA or enhancing global trade through WTO (Karim,
2021). Therefore, in this part, the identification of these trajectory and current issues in the
political economy of Southeast Asia is being explored within specific grouping. Further, this
section identifies and explores three topics which are development financing, state-owned
enterprises, as well as ASEAN integration process.

Development Cooperation and Financing: From North to South
Since the 1950s, Southeast Asian countries have been engaged with various actors
internally in the region, with other Southern countries, as well as with its partners outside the
regions including western or traditional donors’ countries and agencies, especially concerning
financing for its development program and activities. As many Southeast Asian countries are
considered as low- and middle-income countries, its relations with the western donors’
countries and institutions (often identified as northern or traditional aid providers) have
emerged early on, even before the establishment of ASEAN. Leaders of the Southeast Asian
countries were used to the support from Northern aid providers in financing their
development program, compared to the cooperation with other southern provider countries
(Bae, 2022). Therefore, looking at the roles of the IMF, World Bank, Asia Development Bank,
European Union, and other traditional funding agencies, including Japan, Germany, and the
US, it can be identified that their involvement in the development process in the region were
significant (Carroll, 2020). On the other hand, ASEAN member countries have for many years
also expanded their cooperation with its neighbouring countries including China and India
as well as among Southeast Asian countries specially to finance their development programs,
including through modalities of aid, loan, or investment program. China, for example, has
engaged with many Southeast Asia countries as their development partners especially since
1991 by improving their cooperation as dialogue partners and official negotiation partners
including in perceiving specific identity discourse within the established cooperation (Bi,
2021; Gloria, 2021).
The Asian Financial Crisis (AFC) in 1998-1997 revealed the fragility of the political
economic conditions of many Southeast Asian countries, including its heavy crony capitalism
in the political system and inadequate economic policy oversight (Carroll, 2020). In this crisis
background, some countries extended their cooperation with international development
organizations to help deal with the effect of the AFC through bailout programs and finance
Journal of ASEAN Studies

185

their development program. For example, Indonesian and Thai Governments requested a
bailout program from the IMF and World Bank to recover from the impact of the financial
crisis with specific reform mandated. However, the Malaysian government applied different
approaches to the economic recovery program and refused the IMF reforms model (Carroll,
2020). The neoliberal strategy injected by the ‘Washington Consensus’ that attached these
Multinational Development Bank program applications in the region, has integrated the
extension of market liberalization combined, which only benefited the authoritarian political
regimes (Kilby, 2017; Rosser, 2020; Williamson, 1993). Further, the roles of these traditional
donors in ASEAN also applied specific approaches to its program that focus on the social
sectors, good governance, capacity building, and strengthening the roles of civil society
(Rosser, 2020).
Learning from the crisis, ASEAN as its regional organization, has established several
initiatives to build a more integrated, market-driven, and economic development region that
is still being questioned on its efficiency (Elias & Rethel, 2016). As part of the commitment
within ASEAN, to build and develop stronger connectivity among its member states, several
development programs continued to be expanded, including ASEAN Integration (IAI) IV and
Master Plan of ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC) 2025. However, the challenges remain
significant despite several commitments that have been made. The development cooperation
model remains segmented and symbolic rather than building more integrated cooperation.
For example, the Indo-Pacific outlook stated the importance of South-South Cooperation
(SSC) within the region as the model of cooperation that needed to be expanded. This initiative
is firmly based on building stronger connectivity between regions, especially Asia and Africa
(Prakash, 2018), but how the SSC can be effectively utilized in development cooperation
within this framework remains debatable.
As SSC has been derived by the region's neo-liberal development system, the
development cooperation model facilitated the similar construct of cooperation as previously
shaped by traditional donors (Engel, 2019). Several programs have been developed by their
aid agencies, including TICA (Thailand International Cooperation Agency) of Thailand and
Singapore Minister of Foreign Affairs with a similar location of intervention, including focus
on CLMV (Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Vietnam) countries utilizing the model of
technical cooperation. Looking further at the roles of Southeast Asian countries as the
provider of development support, they play significant roles as the provider countries.
However, there are unconscious competing nuances among Southeast Asian countries'
development cooperation agencies including among major Southeast Asian countries (such
as Indonesia, Thailand, and Singapore) working and focusing on the similar model of
cooperation and targeted countries (Engel, 2019). This regional development cooperation is
stimulated by geopolitical motivations including through aid giving process, as it specifically
focuses on its neighboring countries for creating stability and security (Engel, 2019;
Mawdsley, 2012) rather than by economic integration motives moreover within the regional
cooperation framework (Bae, 2022).
Over the past decade, development cooperation with China expanded beyond the
message of South-South Cooperation. It often challenged the position of traditional donors,

186

The Trajectory and Trend

especially with the establishment of Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank (AIIB). These programs have provided significant development support,
especially relevant infrastructure programs to ASEAN countries (Soong, 2016; Rosser, 2020).
For example, BRI has been the investment and development cooperation model through joint
contribution, cooperation, and sharing process that focuses on infrastructure and capacity
production (Bi, 2021). However, this has also extended the new interdependency of Southeast
Asian countries to China that intertwines with the capitalism model of governments that
engage from both ends. The strategy and accumulation of funds injected into the BRI
programs across Southeast Asia countries have underlined China’s model of an aid program
that derives the region into leaning toward China’s model of cooperation and weakening the
US effect in the region (Einzenberger & Schaffar, 2018). Therefore, the contestation between
the traditional donors and emerging donors in Southeast Asia’s development cooperation
signified power relations that intensify the ideological and strategic hegemony position,
moving from free market to state capitalism setting of political economy in the region.

State Owned Enterprises (SOE) in ASEAN
Overall, the discussion regarding SOE (State Owned Enterprises) in ASEAN needs to be
structured using a comparative analysis framework. Currently, scholars have narrowly
discussed SOE in the ASEAN context using a specific case study of SOE such as, among others,
in Indonesia (Choiruzzad, 2019; Kim, 2018; Kim, 2019; Kim, 2021; Kim & Sumner, 2021),
Malaysia (Lee, et al., 2022; Menon & Ng, 2017; Shawtari et al., 2017; Whah, 2020; Zhang, 2021),
and Singapore (Chen, 2016; Huat, 2016; Sikorski, 1989; Yeung, 1999). The discussion of SOE in
ASEAN is also predominantly situated within the role of external actors, especially China’s
SOE, toward the investment and development concerning its political and economic rising in
the region (Frost, 2004; Matthews & Motta, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Zhang, 2021). A
comprehensive understanding on the behavior and roles of SOE in ASEAN is needed since
scholars have been highlighting the dominant role of the state in the region, a quality that
makes ASEAN (or East Asian countries in general) unique compared to the experience of
other regions (Beeson, 2014; Ravenhill, 2010). Comparative studies are needed to enhance the
understanding of the complete picture regarding the role and behavior of state in political and
economic development in the region (Beeson, 2014), whether within the framework of the
developmental state of Northeast Asia or clientelist type of Southeast Asian Countries
(Ravenhill, 2010).
Echoing this narrative, the section attempts to highlight at least one agenda that can be
discussed in a comparative manner, particularly related to the roles of SOE in ASEAN.
Specifically, it concerns the issues of free trade agreement (i.e., regional trade governance) and
its impact on the region. Even though hegemonic competition in the region is uncertain and
complex (Beeson, 2009), this issue is becoming more relevant than ever, especially with the
growing hegemonic rivalry between China and US in the regions. Not only does this “new
cold war” represents the balance of power in the world today (Kaplan, 2019), but Asian
regionalism, which includes multiple regional powers like China, Japan, and ASEAN, is more
active than before in advancing their multilateral strategy within the regional framework
Journal of ASEAN Studies

187

(Oba, 2019). Despite criticism of overlapping bilateral agreement due to the absence of trade
governance in the region, which has been known as the “noodle bowl” syndrome (Baldwin,
2008), the advancement of multilateral institutions in Asia (including ASEAN) brings a new
wave of regionalism that encourage nations to adopt an “institutional hedging” strategy (Oba,
2019) to maintain their political and economic interest in the region. It means that further
development of trade agreements achieved in the region provides significant impact on many
aspects of power and trade-related issues including the state-owned enterprises (Chen et al.,
2018).
RCEP (Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership) agreement, for example, which
has been implemented since early 2022, is the first East Asian mega Free Trade Agreement
(FTA) (Shimizu, 2021) that covers “30% of the world’s population, contributes US$ 25,8 trillion
about 30% of global GDP, and account for US$ 12,7 trillion, over a quarter of global trade in
goods and services” (RCEP, 2022). There have been discourses among scholars on how
ASEAN can keep its value of ASEAN Centrality 1 toward the mega-regional FTA like RCEP
or even in the Indo-pacific context. Some scholars are pessimistic about the value of ASEAN
Centrality, such as on several issues, including the issue of the global value chain in the Indopacific (Fujita, 2021), trade and connectivity (Mueller, 2019), leadership in moderating greatpower relationships in East Asia (Jones, 2010) especially in regards to the rise of China (Jones
& Jenne, 2016), as well as in the issue of security amid the competition of great powers like
China and US (Kraft, 2017). Nevertheless, another research shows an optimistic view toward
the role of ASEAN Centrality in the region. ASEAN is considered well in leading the RCEP
negotiations process (which was finally signed in November 2020 and actively enforced this
year) during the rise of protectionism and the US-China trade frictions, as well as in
responding to the COVID-19 pandemic (Shimizu, 2021; Karim & Susanto, 2021).
These empirical and academic discourses signal the rising need to expand our research
agenda regarding the position of SOE in ASEAN. The concept of ASEAN Centrality here
should not be limited to its relationship of achieving ASEAN Connectivity 2025 or RCEP but
also on how it can be utilized to understand the role of state in the framework of state
capitalism. It is also necessary to stimulate the debates by exploring the impact of
infrastructure-centered foreign policy, such as China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) that has
been spread across Eurasia, by looking at how ASEAN states ruling elites maintain their
power, especially leaning closer to Beijing (Cheng-Chwee, 2018). Maintaining the value of
centrality or its strategy of institutional hedge is essential not only for the ASEAN states itself
but “also good for all other powers and players” (Cheng-Chwee, 2018). Therefore, the
discourse can explore how SOEs are being affected and influencing the debates of political
economy in the region further.

ASEAN centrality can be understood as a value that views ASEAN as a node in a network, which enables
ASEAN to influence regional processes while hedging its interest among powerful nations (Caballero-Anthony,
2014).
1

188

The Trajectory and Trend

Regional Institutions: Between Politic and Market integration
The establishment of the ASEAN as a regional institution in 1967 has expanded into a
unique set of mechanisms and network systems that connect its member countries with other
actors and institutions across Asia-Pacific (Acharya, 1997; Jones & Hameiri, 2020). As it also
evolved into a regional system of cooperation over time, ASEAN has derived cooperation and
relations among its members into political and economic spheres. ASEAN members
considered the ASEAN Way as the code of conduct of the cooperation, including the noninterferences and consensus decision-making process as the principles (Acharya, 1997;
Yukawa, 2018). As a multilateral agency, ASEAN also shaped the model of institutionalization
of cooperation engaged with the structure of relations constructed by their relations with other
actors outside its members. Further, regional economic integration can be considered to have
a stimulating effect to global economic cooperation and growth (Pasierbiak, 2018). However,
the debates on the institution's effectiveness to stimulate and strengthen regional integration
were significant over the years.
Part of the expansion of the ASEAN Way concept and its contribution to the
establishment of APEC or Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation was one of the catalysts to
support the idea of consensus building through its economic cooperation with its regional
counterparts (Acharya, 1997). APEC was considered the consultative mechanism to build
alliances and minimize the region's potential trade and economic tension strain (Acharya,
1997; Ergenç, 2020). However, the role of APEC was questioned in sustaining economic
cooperation in the region, especially when the Asian Financial Crisis 1997-1998 occurred, with
the aftermath that the idea to extend the effectiveness of economic cooperation in Southeast
Asia was more needed. Therefore, two main initiatives were developed to improve the
region's financial and economic cooperation. The first was the advancement of relevant
regional policies and regulations, including accelerating financial surveillance and improving
economic and market integration through Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) and the Chiang Mai
Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM). The second was establishing new regional groups such
as ASEAN+3 (APT) grouping with China, Japan, and South Korea and improving the existing
ASEAN free trade areas (AFTA), and later ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) in 2007 as
part of the ASEAN community pillar (Ermeydan, 2020; Jones & Hameiri, 2020; Permatasari,
2020).
In extending economic, trade, and finance cooperation in the region, the modalities and
approaches utilized by ASEAN also cannot be separated from how the dynamic of
cooperation, established ideas, policy direction, and its implementation linked to the
transformation of state and market in the region. In 2015, the ‘ASEAN Community’ was
launched with the expectation of managing cooperation in Southeast Asia, with the
establishment of ‘ASEAN 2025’ as a blueprint and action plan to regulate and be adopted by
member countries (Jones & Hameiri, 2020). With the Master Plan on ASEAN connectivity
2025, the intention to expand the ASEAN economic community (AEC) into comprehensive
market integration among Southeast Asian countries still faces many challenges. For example,
the domestic power relations of member countries on the implementation of AEC intertwined
with the interests of corporations and the state, including in the way competition among
Journal of ASEAN Studies

189

business is shaped, protectionist regulation applied to protect local enterprises, and skill
workers movement regulated (Jones & Hameiri, 2020). These challenges questioned whether
the model of ASEAN integration will ever be effective with the existing model of institutional
and regulations that often must clash with the power of domestic governance, mechanism,
and market system.
Several other initiatives are being established from these debates on the effectiveness of
ASEAN as an institution that led the integration process. One of the most recent ones is the
ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific in 2019. This initiative emphasizes the concept previously
identified by Japan’s Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and reiterated by the US government in
identifying the future trajectory of the Asia-Pacific region by involving other neighboring
countries such as India (Anwar, 2020; Choiruzzad, 2020). Indo-Pacific conveys conceptual
understanding as it refers to the shifting geopolitical and geoeconomics center of Asia to the
Indian and Pacific oceans that maintain international trade and transportation to support
economic growth in the region (Anwar, 2020). The reappearing of the concept was also
influenced by the expansion of China in the region. The need to balance the roles of China and
other external actors in the region has intensified the discussion and debate on the model of
integration that can be functional in the context of ASEAN, especially on ASEAN centrality
(Choiruzzad, 2020). ASEAN member countries also varied in response to the establishment of
this initiative. For example, Singapore questioned the initiative’s scope, demanding it to be an
ASEAN-led mechanism. At the same time, Indonesia took more positive notes to extend this
initiative within its middle-power roles in ASEAN (Anwar, 2020).
Looking further at the dynamic of ASEAN member countries in regional cooperation
through building mechanisms for ASEAN Integration, it must be addressed that the
conceptual ideas, policy direction, and implementation often clash with the domestic political
interest and markets. Jones (2019), for example, suggests extending ASEAN market
integration through developing comprehensive value chain system that can attract more
countries investing in the region. The construction of the integration model also cannot be
separated by how its economic and political regulations are established, not only by the
dynamic within the region and with its members' state interest, but also with the other
external actors and major powers involved in the region. Therefore, the regional integration
of ASEAN will continue to be relevant as part of the debate within the political economy
studies of the region.

The Future Trajectory of Political Economy of Southeast Asia
Having discussed the current issues of political economy research on Southeast Asia, it
is also essential to reflect the future trends in its academic debates. Other issues are often
neglected in the discussion, but it has a strong relevance with the political economy
perspective, especially concerning the link between the state, market, and society. These issues
are also being discussed widely within the international policy forum, such as Foreign Policy
Forum. Therefore, three additional topics are proposed to be the ensuing discussion of the
international political economy of Southeast Asia, which are climate change and environment,
190

The Trajectory and Trend

the roles of sub-national actors in ASEAN integration, and the digitalisation process and
technology.

Climate Change and Environment
While at the beginning of its establishment, ASEAN focused mainly on addressing
political and security issues in the region, since the late 1970s, environmental issues–
particularly those that have transboundary implications–have increasingly become a common
concern in ASEAN. It includes issues of protecting forests and biodiversity, air pollution,
water and soil contamination, declining marine, and fishery resources, transitioning to cleaner
and renewable energy, and climate change (Aggarwal & Chow, 2010; Elliott & CaballeroAnthony, 2013). Among others, two broad or major themes have gained more attention from
policymakers, scientists, and practitioners: 1) air pollution from the transboundary haze, and
2) Southeast Asian efforts to mitigate climate change, particularly in the energy and
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sectors.
Transboundary air pollution due to fire and haze originating from peat and forest fires
has arguably been one of the most conspicuous environmental issues in ASEAN in the last
decades (Aggarwal & Chow, 2010; Mayer, 2006). It has been part of regional affairs negotiated
in ASEAN because of the extent and impact of the pollution crosses into neighboring
countries’ airspace, especially Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore. At its worst, lesser effects
of the haze have also been reported in Brunei and Southern parts of Thailand and the
Philippines (Mayer, 2006). The phenomena cannot be separated from the globalization of the
agribusiness sector in the region, particularly in the palm oil sector (Varkkey, 2020). The
increasing global and domestic demands for oil palm as “flex crops” (i.e., crops that have
multiple uses) have made some countries in Southeast Asia, notably Indonesia and Malaysia,
prefer palm oil as their priority crop (Cramb & McCarthy, 2016). Scientists and NGO reports
associate the fire and haze phenomena with the expansion of palm oil plantations, particularly
in Indonesia and Malaysia (Pye, 2019, Marlier et al., 2015).
One of the questions raised by students of international politics has been why ASEAN–
as a platform for regional environmental governance–has not effectively addressed the fire
and haze problems. This issue has been discussed at the ASEAN level since the late 1980s,
which resulted in several policies, action plans, and a legally binding agreement to mitigate
the haze (e.g., the 2002 ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution), but the haze
episodes have been–in varying intensities–a recurring problem annually until present times
(Varkkey, 2020).
Some scholars blame the model of ASEAN cooperation–the “ASEAN way” --as the
culprit of this ineffectiveness. For example, Aggarwal & Chow (2010) and Tan (2005) argue
that the inability of ASEAN to address the issue can be rooted in its long-held norm of noninterference in the internal affairs of other states, respect for sovereignty, informality, and
consensual decision-making. Other scholars are not satisfied with this explanation. Varkkey
(2020), for example, argues that the ineffectiveness of ASEAN haze mitigation efforts is due

Journal of ASEAN Studies

191

to the prevalence of local and cross-border patron-client networks, particularly between the
government officials and well-connected businessmen in the oil palm plantation sector in
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore. The three most affected countries by the haze were also
the major players and heavily invested in the region’s palm oil sector. The combination of
national interests and the existence of a patron-client culture of doing business, which was
common in all three countries, resulted in regional outcomes where business elites in the
sector enjoyed the privilege and protection from the government of these countries. The
tendency to give in to corporate interests is a significant obstacle to more effective regional
environmental governance in ASEAN (Varkkey et al., 2021).
The second most important theme is related to Southeast Asian efforts to mitigate
climate change. Southeast Asia is one of the world's most vulnerable regions to climate change
(ASEAN, 2021). Four Southeast Asian countries–Myanmar, the Philippines, Vietnam, and
Thailand–were among the 10 most affected countries in the world in 1999 - 2018 (Eckstein et
al., 2020). It is projected that climate change will continue to have a major impact on the
prosperity and well-being of Southeast Asians in the future. To address the issue, ASEAN
member states joined the rest of the world under the Paris Agreement and committed to
reducing their GHG emissions to limit the temperature rise at 1.5oC. However, despite the
high vulnerability of the region to climate change, the NDCs of ASEAN member states under
the Paris Agreement is relatively modest, and considering the current policies (i.e., in its
business as usual (BAU)), it is predicted that the major ASEAN members states would not be
able to meet their NDC targets (Overland et al., 2021).
Particularly in the energy sector, scholars have pointed out some climate and energy
paradoxes (Overland et al., 2021). While ASEAN has set a target for renewable energy sources
to account for 23% by 2025 and some ASEAN member states are making progress in using
renewable energy, the current national energy frameworks are still centered on fossil fuelbased energy production, particularly coal. In contrast to the trajectory in other parts of the
world (e.g., Europe), coal consumption for electricity production in Southeast Asia has been
growing in recent years. It is predicted that coal will overtake natural gas as the primary
power source of ASEAN by 2030 (IEA, 2019). This coal’s persistence in the energy sector
cannot be separated from the broader political-economic processes and structure at local,
national, and regional levels. In Indonesia, for example, coal-based orientation in the energy
sector cannot be separated from the strong political influence and lobby of coal business elites
and perception by policymakers. It is identified that coal is the country’s cheapest energy
source to increase electrification levels in thousands of villages that do not yet have access to
electricity while at the same time helping absorb domestic coal supply after the decrease of
coal demand at the international market (e.g., China) (Fünfgeld, 2019). Similarly, in the
Philippines, the persistence of coal as the main source of energy generation is caused by the
combination of the focus on energy security and the strong influence of ‘oligarchs’ in the
power sector that still favor coal due to its associated profits. It is strengthened by the
continuous support from associated banks and influential policymakers to support coal-based
investments and the reluctance of many conglomerates to invest in renewables despite the
fact that the costs of renewable technologies have been declining (Manych & Jakob, 2021).

192

The Trajectory and Trend

Further, in the AFOLU sector, researchers, policymakers, and practitioners have put a
lot of attention to Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+)
programs as part of climate mitigation strategies in ASEAN, which aims to address the root
causes of deforestation, contribute to a more broadly sustainable forest management, and
enhance forest carbon stocks (ASEAN, 2021). The basic idea of REDD+ is to use market
mechanisms or economic incentives to compel state, non-state, and local actors to reduce
carbon emissions and conserve carbon stocks by avoiding deforestation and forest
degradation (Milne et al., 2019; Gellert, 2020). Southeast Asian countries are of central interest
in the implementation of REDD+ efforts as it contains one of the largest tropical forests in the
world after the Amazon and Congo Basin. With the increasing recognition that forests
function as carbon sinks, REDD+ has been central to global climate governance and gives
countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam leverage in climate
negotiations. However, studies evaluating the implementation of REDD+ in these countries
have shown sobering outcomes (Milne et al., 2019; Gellert, 2020). These studies have shown
that REDD+ has struggled to influence broader political and economic processes that drive
deforestation at the local level. REDD+ implementations have also driven social and political
tension and conflicts (Patel et al., 2013; Milne et al., 2019; Gellert, 2020). The broader political
economy of resource extraction, agricultural production, and land allocation has a crucial
effect and is paramount in determining REDD+ outcomes (Luttrell et al., 2014, Milne et al.,
2019).

Subnational Actors and ASEAN Integration
With the growing demand to make ASEAN closer to the people, the debates to enhance
the role of subnational actors in enhancing integration between ASEAN member countries
have become more significant than ever. It is due to the deepening of intra-trade cooperation
among ASEAN members as the achievement of ASEAN Economic Community 2025 is still at
the level of 22-25% (ASEAN, 2018; Jones & Hameiri, 2020). Further, based on data from
ASEAN Statistics in 2020, from 2011 to 2020, the urban population ranged from 40-44%, where
the rest of the population is still in rural areas with most of the land areas dominated by
agriculture (ASEAN, 2020). Apart from the higher percentage of the population in non-urban
areas, the sub-national area is close to and able to apprehend the needs and aspirations of its
people (Cheema & Rondinelli, 2007; Duchacek, 2019; Kuswanto, Hoen, & Holzhacker, 2016;
Tavares, 2016). Therefore, governments in sub-national societies are important actors that can
play significant roles in ASEAN integration. The discussion, then, intends to construct debates
that link the roles of cities or subnational level actors in the context of Para diplomacy and
political economy in Southeast Asia. It is necessary to stimulate comprehensive policy and
approaches to improve the ASEAN integration process beyond the state-level approaches.
Therefore, it can be identified that three themes related to the roles and importance of
subnational actors in enhancing ASEAN integration processes are being discussed.
In this globalized era, cities have become sites for the global capital grow and
contestation (Tavares, 2016; Wu, 2020). Thus, the roles of sub-national governments and the
institutions at the sub-national level have become an important narrative in international
Journal of ASEAN Studies

193

cooperation. With most of the global economic output generated at the level of cities, the
question raised on how the sub-national government and institutions of Southeast Asia
countries can engage in the internationalization process that enables them to negotiate and
position themselves at the global level (Wu, 2020). This question can be answered by engaging
in political and economic approaches to transborder relations that can contribute to and
challenge regionalism and integration in the region. However, it must be addressed that the
issues of capacity, scope, and directive tools also need to be identified to capture local
government's relevance in the regionalism process. To incorporate decentralized international
cooperation in the policy process (Tavares, 2016), the power relations and structures that
shaped the relations local, national, and regional governance, not to mention the non-state
actors involved in the process, such as private sectors and civil society groups need to be
addressed (Wu, 2020).
The concept of social capital of sub-national actors cannot be separated from the
historical, political, economic, and social conditions of the region, as the concept is based on
the bottom-up method as successfully implemented by the European Union in applying
regional integration (Panara, 2015; Prado, 2007). It is a necessary and pressing intention to
build ASEAN integration by creating social capital of sub-national actors with the resources
to build an integrated ASEAN community, especially from the lowest level (Affandi &
Mursitama, 2018). However, the challenges remain significant, including defining the scale
and framework of work that can be identified within the sub-regional cooperation (Karim,
2019). Issues such as economic development of small medium enterprises, land degradation,
and transborder conflict often emerged and evolved at the subnational level that links with
network build and mechanisms attached to the issues. Therefore, Tavares (2016) identifies
four phenomena that can emerge within this context, whether the network establishment
derives into the ceremonial approach, theme-related relations, global, and sovereignty Para
diplomacy. These phenomena constituted the local government's position, roles, and scope of
activities, including extending the model of cooperation and approaches that resulted from
the relations.
Concerning contribution to the debate on regionalism and regional integration, the
intra-regional economic and social cooperation aspects of ASEAN, especially its relation
among member countries, need to be strengthened (Balassa, 1969; EL-Agraa, 1989; Krapohl,
2017). It leads to the third issue to identify the debates, which are engagement motivations.
As historically can be identified, sub-national actors have been engaged with external actors
to support their policies, program, and other related activities. Several motivations to extend
their cooperation are: 1) to capture the economic and political opportunities; 2) to promote the
decentralization process by providing a more hands-on approach to governance and prevail
isolationism; 3) to provide welfare to citizens, including diaspora; 4) to extend interests of the
local leaders or stakeholders including engagement with opportunities and personal gain, and
promoting local culture and geographic positions (Tavares, 2016). These motivations remain
debatable but should also be captured in future discussions on the sub-regional engagement
in regional integration, especially in ASEAN contexts. Furthermore, the study of sub-regional
actors shall derive the idea, concept, model, and motivations that can stimulate debates on its
contribution to regional integration in ASEAN.
194

The Trajectory and Trend

Technology and Digitalisation
The discussion on technology and digitalization in ASEAN started off as early as the
1990s when the shift of the traditional economy from resource-based to manufacturing
emerged. Over the years, Southeast Asia countries have derived their industry and
technological advancement as part of their main force for ASEAN economic integration
despite the obvious challenges for member countries to expand their development potential
(Wai, 1995). In more recent years, these topics cannot be separated from globalization and
advancement of information technology, industry 4.0, digitalization of finance, and
consumption of digital technology and products (Rabe & Kostka, 2022). Indeed, Karim,
Irawan, & Mursitama (2021) have shown the importance of the domestic origin of banking
integration in ASEAN. However, ASEAN financial integration continues in the traditional
banking integration. Furthermore, globalization of digital technology and COVID-19 also
derive the development of the issues, in this case in ASEAN, as it also extends with the
background of China’s Digital Silk Road and policy approach of the states in shaping the
industrialization and digitalization process (Banna & Alam, 2021; Bernards & CampbellVerduyn, 2019; Rabe & Kostka, 2022). Therefore, the relations among stakeholders have
stimulated future debates related to the industrialization and technology evolution in
ASEAN, especially on the digital economic transformation, especially on the issues of
financial technology (Fintech), and the fourth industrial revolution post-manufacturing
industries.
The transformation of the digital economy in Southeast Asia has affected the
conceptualization, engagement, and institutional mechanism of ASEAN’s member states in
deriving and managing the issues further. Looking at the growing technological changes that
need to be accelerated, including fintech, cryptocurrency, artificial intelligence, and big data,
the political economic approach to understand this digital evolution and its implication to the
actors involved are still limited (Bernards & Campbell-Verduyn, 2019). ASEAN has developed
strategic frameworks and initiatives to guide its digital integration journey, which include the
ASEAN Digital Integration Framework and its Action Plan (DIFAP) and the Bandar Seri
Begawan Roadmap: An ASEAN Digital Transformation Agenda to Accelerate ASEAN’s
Economic Recovery and Digital Economy Integration. Digital transformation is becoming a
catalyst for economic development in ASEAN with the presence of e-commerce, online media,
digital financial services, and online ride-hailing activities. ASEAN already has important
features that will make digitalization much easier, such as having a 670 million market full of
a young and tech-savvy population (MTI, 2022). Currently, ASEAN has 400 million internet
users, and its regional mobile penetration is the third largest in the world, and the growth of
ASEAN’s internet economy is expected to be worth more than US$300BN by 2025 (Google,
Temasek, & Bain, 2020; MTI, 2022).
Looking at the scale and progress of digitalization in Southeast Asia, it remains
significant to capture how the actors, technology, and policy are intertwined in the process. It
can be identified that actors involved in the digital economy in Southeast Asia have also been
expanded. Previously, they were dominated by states, multinational enterprises, and external
actors such as China now have derived actors at the subnational level, such as small-medium
Journal of ASEAN Studies

195

enterprises that utilize digital technology to buy and sell their products (Karim et al., 2022).
Financial technology (fintech) in Southeast Asia has evolved in a way that created a specific
structure of relations among actors involved that influenced how policy and implementation
are applied. However, the implication and debates about technology disruption, especially
those that affected the political economic activities in the region, have often been missing in
the analysis. The debates need to capture how external and internal factors influence the
production and financial mechanism of the technology, including how technology
accumulated by the process of political economic relations between the country and the region
(Bernards & Campbell-Verduyn, 2019).
Furthermore, this digital transformation also cannot be separated from how the
industrial revolution 4.0 (IR4) impacted the way Southeast Asia countries take advantage of
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) (Ambashi, 2020). The concept of fourth industrial revolution
(4IR) has given birth to the idea of transformation by focusing on new technologies, which
have had tremendous effects on industries and societies since its introduction in 2016
(Ambashi, 2020). However, the 4IR has also posed challenges, such as deep disruption to jobs,
especially in manufacturing and services-based jobs (Enzmann & Moesli, 2022). It must be
addressed that institutional setting, capacity, access or network system, and infrastructure are
necessary to make the region's digitalization process work. ASEAN countries' readiness to
mitigate these digital technology changes and adaptation might differ from one country to
another (Ambashi, 2020). Therefore, the debates on the process, changes, and effect of the
technological disruption and digitalization in Southeast Asia are necessary to understand the
dualism that often appears such as bridging the policy and implementation, understanding
the subnational and regional conditions, bridging the political and economic interest, and
understanding the external and internal stakeholders involved (Bernards & CampbellVerduyn, 2019).

Conclusions
The research intends to explore and analyze the progress and alternative direction of
the political economy in Southeast Asia. The study of it has been constructed from various
phases of historical experiences and relations that emerged and evolved from its relations
between member states and with other countries outside the regions. The discussion also
cannot be separated from how the regions interact between states and its government, the
market and its enterprises, and the society at large, and how the established power relations
shape the dynamic cooperation among countries involved in the ASEAN further. Several
issues are constantly being discussed within the study of political economy based on the
structure of academic research databases. The topics that appeared and reappeared from 1990
to 2020 are constructed within three issues of development financing, namely: 1) traditional
donors’ countries or from other Asia and Southeast Asia countries including emerging
donors; 2) the roles of State-Owned Enterprises (SOE) in enhancing the state capitalism, and
3) economic integration of ASEAN. These issues have shaped the debates including how it
linked with the events and situations that emerged in Southeast Asia over the time.

196

The Trajectory and Trend

Looking further into the evolution of the political economy discussion, it has been
identified that several related topics and issues have been less discussed in academic papers
based on the structure search that has been conducted. Therefore, the article has proposed
three additional issues that engage closely with the policy and context of political economy in
Southeast Asia. These issues include climate change and the environment, sub-regional
position in ASEAN integration, technology, and digitalization. These issues give alternative
perspectives to the discussion of political economy, as they also engage and interlink with the
roles of the state, market, and society. The research is expected to stimulate further discussion
on the political economy of Southeast Asia. Further, more topics can be identified and
provided as it is also expected that the discussion can provide significant nuances to extend
the debates on the political economy beyond the usual discussion in the context of Southeast
Asia as a dynamic region that is continuously evolving.

Acknowledgement
We want to acknowledge Dr. Moch. Faisal Karim, for his contribution in developing the
structured search of scientific databases and providing significant inputs for this article.

Annex
Annex 1: Methodology and Datasets
The methodology used in the paper refers to the structured research of scientific
databases on the topics or themes related to political economy in Southeast Asia or ASEAN.
The dataset identified as the results of this structure of search are on the number of citation
used, the universities that the writers come including the location of the universities, the
number knowledge products on the topics including number of articles and book produces,
words that associated with the study of political economy of Southeast Asia or ASEAN, and
the fluctuation of themes over the period of specific time from 1990 to 2020, as well as the
graph of topic that become the trend from 2000 to 2020 that being utilised as the trigger points
of discussion for this paper.

About The Authors
Miranda P. Tahalele is a faculty member in the Department of International Relations,
Faculty of Humanities, Bina Nusantara (BINUS) University. She received her PhD in
Anthropology (Development Studies) from the Australian National University (ANU). Her
main research topics are the political economy of international development cooperation and
the globalised world of foreign aid, with a focus on Indonesia’s South–South Cooperation and
North - South Relations. She has previously worked as, among others, consultant for G20

Journal of ASEAN Studies

197

Empower – Indonesia Presidency at the Ministry of Women Empowerment and Child
Protection (2021-2022), development practitioner with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and at the Ministry of National Development Planning (BAPPENAS).
Ahmad Dhiaulhaq is a Senior Researcher at the Research Institute for Humanity and
Nature (RIHN), Kyoto-Japan. He holds a PhD in Natural Resources, Environment and
Development from the Australian National University (ANU). His research interests concern
forest and natural resource governance in Indonesia and broader in Southeast Asia.
Rhevy A. Putra is a lecturer in the Department of International Relations, Bina
Nusantara (BINUS) University, Jakarta. His research focuses on the role of transnational
Corporations (TNC) in development. He graduated from the Faculty of Social and Political
Sciences (FISIP) at Universitas Indonesia (UI) with bachelor’s degree in political science. He
has a master’s degree from Newcastle University, United Kingdom with Indonesian
Education Scholarship (BPI) by the Educational Fund Management Institution (LPDP) of the
Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Indonesia. With the same scholarship funding, he
successfully completed his PhD research in 2022 on the preferences of financing political
parties in newly democratic countries such as Indonesia.
Roseno Aji Affandi is the Subject Content Coordinator of International Political
Economy stream at International Relations Department, Bina Nusantara (BINUS) University.
He holds PhD from Universitas Padjajaran, Bandung - Indonesia. His research interests are
on business strategy and international marketing, global value chain, Para diplomacy, and
regional political economy. He is also the director and owner of Goldengrade Consulting, a
business development specialist, and the creator and developer of the Revolution of Hopes
(RoH) technique, a strategy to establish a company that excels in character to win the market.
He has been consultant and trainer for several national and multinational clients,
including the State Ministry of Co-operatives and Small/Medium Enterprises, Surakarta and
Sukoharjo local government, and International Labour Organization.
Lili Yulyadi Arnakim is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of International Relations,
Bina Nusantara (BINUS) University, Jakarta. He was a visiting professor at Asia Europe
Institute (AEI), University of Malaya, 2016-2019. His current research projects are on China’s
State Capitalism and Economic Development in Southeast Asia (2021), Gender Representation
and Development in Southeast Asia (2020), Regional developmentalism in Southeast Asia
(2019), funded by BINUS University, and a team member of H2020 Global governance
research funded by European Commission. His latest works have published in Intellectual
Discourse, AEI Insights: An International Journal of Asia-Europe Relations, Transylvanian
Review, Revista De Cercetare Si Interventie Sociala, Sejarah, CCPS, and Jati (Journal of
Southeast Asian Studies). Lili Yulyadi Arnakim holds Ph.D from University of Malaya.
Tirta Nugraha Mursitama is a Professor in the Department of International Relations,
Bina Nusantara (BINUS) University, Jakarta. He is currently a Vice Rector of Research and
Technology Transfer - Bina Nusantara University. His works have been published in several
high-ranking journals such as Politics, Environmental Science and Pollution Research,

198

The Trajectory and Trend

Economics and Sociology, International Journal of Energy Sector Management, Global Public
Policy and Governance, and Asia Pacific Journal of Management among others.

References
Acharya, A. (1997). Ideas, identity, and institution‐building: From the ‘ASEAN way’ to the
‘Asia‐Pacific way’?’ Pacific Review, 10(3), 319–346. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09512749708719226
Affandi, R. A., & Mursitama, T. N. (2018). Creating sustainable cities by enhancing social
capital. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 126(1). https://doi.org/
10.1088/1755-1315/126/1/012142
Aggarwal, V. K. & Chow, J. T. (2010). The perils of consensus: How ASEAN’s meta-regime
undermines economic and environmental cooperation. Review of International Political
Economy, 17(2), 262–290. https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290903192962
Al-Fadhat, F. (2020). The internationalisation of capital and the transformation of statehood in
Southeast Asia. In T. Carroll, S. Hameiri, & L. Jones (Eds.), The Political Economy of
Southeast Asia: Politics and Uneven Development under Hyperglobalisation (pp. 177-198).
New York: Springer International Publishing.
Ambashi, M. (2020). ASEAN Development and Innovation Strategy in the Era of New
Industrialisation. Policy Brief No. 2020-06, July ISSN 2086-8154. Economic Research
Institute for ASEAN and East Asia.
Anwar, D. F. (2020). Indonesia and the ASEAN outlook on the Indo-Pacific. International
Affairs, 96(1), 111-129. https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiz223
ASEAN. (2020). ASEAN Statistical Yearbook 2020. In ASEAN Statistics (Vol. 18). Jakarta:
ASEAN Secretariat
ASEAN. (2021). ASEAN State of Climate Change Report: Current status and outlook of the ASEAN
region Toward the ASEAN climate vision 2050. Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat.
https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/ASCCR-e-publication-Correction_
8-June.pdf
Bae, K. H. (2022). Regionalizing development cooperation? Examining Intra-ASEAN
regionalism via IAI. Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism and International
Organizations, 28(1), 103-124.
Balassa, B. (1969). The Theory of Economic Integration. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Baldwin, R. E. (2008). The East Asian noodle bowl syndrome. In D. Hiratsuka, & F. Kimura
(Eds.), East Asia's economic integration: Progress and benefit (pp. 45-81). London: Palgrave
Macmillan UK. https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230227309_3

Journal of ASEAN Studies

199

Banna, H., & Alam, M. R. (2021). Impact of digital financial inclusion on ASEAN banking
stability: implication for the post-Covid 19 era. Studies in Economics and Finance, 18(2).
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1108/SEF-09-2020-0388
Beeson, M. (2009). Hegemonic transition in east asia? The dynamics of Chinese and American
power. Review of International Studies, 35(1), 95-112. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0260210509008341
Beeson, M. (2014). Regionalism and Globalisation in East Asia: Politics, Security and Economic
Development (2nd Ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bernards, N. & Cambel-Verduyn, M. (2019). Understanding technology change in global
finance through infrastructure. Review of International Political Economy, 26(5), 773-789.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2019.1625420
Bi, S. (2021). Cooperation between China and ASEAN under the building of ASEAN Economic
Community. Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies, 10(1), 83-107. https://doi.org/
10.1080/24761028.2021.1888410
Carroll, T. (2020). The political economy of Southeast Asia’s development from independence
to Hyperglobalisation. In T. Carroll, S. Hameiri, & L. Jones (Eds.), The Political Economy
of Southeast Asia: Politics and Uneven Development under Hyperglobalisation (pp. 35-84).
New York: Springer International Publishing.
Cheema, G. S. & Rondinelli, D. A. (Eds.). (2007). Decentralizing Governance Emerging Concepts
and Practices. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Chen, C. (2016). Solving the puzzle of corporate governance of state-owned enterprises: The
path of the temasek model in Singapore and lessons for China. Northwestern Journal of
International Law and Business, 36(2), 303-370.
Chen, L., Urata, S., Nakagawa, J., & Ambashi, M. (Ed.). (2018). Emerging global trade governance:
Mega free trade agreements and implications for ASEAN (1st ed.) New York: Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351051309
Cheng-Chwee, K. (2018). Power transitions threaten ASEAN’s hedging role. East Asia Forum
Quarterly, 10(1), 22-23.
Choiruzzad, S. A. B. (2019). Save palm oil, save the nation: Palm oil companies and the shaping
of Indonesia's national interest. Asian Politics & Policy, 11(1), 8-26. https://doi.org/
10.1111/aspp.12431
Choiruzzad, S. A. B. (2020). The confluence of the two seas: The rise of the Indo-Pacific region
and ASEAN Centrality. In C. Ergenç (Ed.), ASEAN as a Method: Re-Centering Processes
and Institutions in Contemporary Southeast Asian Regionalism (pp. 52-70). New York:
Routledge.
Cramb, R. A. & McCarthy, J. F. (Eds.). (2016). The oil palm complex: Smallholders, agribusiness,
and the state in Indonesia and Malaysia. Singapore: NUS Press.
Duchacek, I. D. (2019). The Territorial Dimension of Politics: Within, Among, and Across Nations.
New York: Routledge.

200

The Trajectory and Trend

Eckstein, D., Winges, M., Künzel, V., & Schäfer, L. (2020). Global Climate Risk Index 2020 Who
Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events? Weather-Related Loss Events in 2018 and 1999
to 2018. Germanwatch Nord-Süd Initiative e.V.
Einzenberger, R. & Schaffar, W. (2018). The political economy of new authoritarianism in
Southeast Asia. Austrian Journal of South-East Asian Studies, 11(1), 1-12.
Elias, J. & Rethel, L. (2016). Southeast Asia and everyday political economy. In J. Elias & L.
Rethel (Eds.), The Everyday Political Economy of Southeast Asia (pp. 3-24). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Elliott, L. M. & Caballero-Anthony, M. (Eds.). (2013). Human Security and Climate Change in
Southeast Asia. New York: Routledge.
Engel, S. (2019). South–South cooperation in Southeast Asia: From Bandung and solidarity to
norms and rivalry. Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs, 38(2), 218-242.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1868103419840456
Enzmann, P. & Moesli, M. (2022). Seizing opportunities: ASEAN country cluster readiness in
light of the fourth industrial revolution. Asia and the Global Economy, 2(1).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aglobe.2021.100021
Ergenç, C. (2020). Introduction: ASEAN after 50: Historical, theoretical, and regional
perspectives. In C. Ergenç (Ed.), ASEAN as a Method: Re-Centering Processes and
Institutions in Contemporary Southeast Asian Regionalism (pp. 1-11). New York:
Routledge.
Ermeydan, B. (2020). Financial cooperation in ASEAN: An inquiry into its place in East Asian
financial regionalism. In C. Ergenç (Ed.), ASEAN as a Method: Re-Centering Processes and
Institutions in Contemporary Southeast Asian Regionalism (pp. 35-51). New York:
Routledge.
Frost, S. (2004). Chinese outward direct investment in Southeast Asia: How big are the flows
and what does it mean for the region? The Pacific Review, 17(3), 323-340. https://doi.org
/10.1080/0551274042000261489
Fujita, M. (2021). Can ASEAN retain centrality in Indo-Pacific region? - from a GVC point of
view. Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies, 10(1), 108-122. https://doi.org/10.1080
/24761028.2021.1892964
Fünfgeld, A. (2019). Just energy? Structures of energy (in)justice and the Indonesian coal
sector. In T. Jafry, M. Mikulewicz, & K. Helwig (Eds.), Routledge handbook of climate
justice. New York: Routledge.
Gellert, P. K. (2020). The political economy of environmental degradation and climate disaster
in Southeast Asia. In T. Carroll, S. Hameiri, & L. Jones (Eds.), The Political Economy of
Southeast Asia: Politics and Uneven Development under Hyperglobalisation (pp. 367–387).
New York: Springer International Publishing.

Journal of ASEAN Studies

201

Gloria, E. V. (2021). Of benevolence and unity: Unpacking China’s foreign policy discourses
toward Southeast Asia. Journal of ASEAN Studies, 9(1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.21512/
jas.v9i1.7037
Google, Temasek, & Bain. (2020). E-Conomy SEA 2020. At full velocity: Resilient and Racing
Ahead. Singapore: Google, Temasek, Bain Southeast Asia’s Internet economic research
program.
https://www.bain.com/globalassets/noindex/2020/e_conomy_sea_—
2020_report.pdf
Huat, C. B. (2016). State-owned enterprises, state capitalism and social distribution in
Singapore. Pacific Review, 29(4), 499-521. https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.
2015.1022587
Jones, D. M. & Jenne, N. (2016). Weak states' regionalism: ASEAN and the limits of security
cooperation in Pacific-Asia. International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 16(2), 209-240.
https://doi.org/10.1093/irap/lcv015
Jones, L. (2010). Still in the “Drivers’ seat”, but for how long? ASEAN's capacity for leadership
in east-asian international relations. Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs, 29(3), 95113. https://doi.org/10.1177/186810341002900305
Jones, C.A.M. (2019). A Value Chain Approach to Support Southeast Asia Economic
Regionalism. Journal of ASEAN Studies, 7(1), 40-57. https://doi.org/10.21512/jas.
v7i1.5009
Jones, L. & Hameiri, S. (2020). Southeast Asian regional governance: Political economy,
regulatory regionalism, and ASEAN integration. In T. Carroll, S. Hameiri, & L. Jones
(Eds.), The political economy of Southeast Asia: Politics and Uneven Development Under
Hybperglobalisation (pp. 199-224). New York: Springer International Publishing.
Juego, B. (2020). IPE scholarship about Southeast Asia: Theories of development and state–
market–society relation. In E. Vivares (ed), The Routledge Handbook to Global Political
Economy (pp. 488-510). New York: Routledge.
Kaplan, R. D. (2019, January, 7). A new cold war has begun. Foreign Policy.
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/01/07/a-new-cold-war-has-begun/
Karim, M. F. (2019). State transformation and cross-border regionalism in Indonesia’s
periphery: Contesting the centre. Third World Quarterly, 40(8), 1554–1570.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2019.1620598
Karim, M. F. (2021). When trade and foreign policy collide: Indonesia in Doha development
round. The Pacific Review, 34(4), 605–632. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09512748.
2020.1724189
Karim, M. F., Irawan, A. P., & Mursitama, T. N. (2021). Regulatory regionalism and the limits
of ASEAN banking integration: The case of Indonesia. Politics. https://doi.org/10.
1177/02633957211061233
Karim, M. F. & Susanto, A. G. (2021). Power transition and the United States-China trade war.
Contemporary Chinese Political Economy and Strategic Relations, 7(1), 531–562.

202

The Trajectory and Trend

Karim, S., Naz, F., Naeem, M. A., & Vigne, S. A. (2022). Is FinTech providing effective solutions
to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in ASEAN countries? Economic Analysis and
Policy, 75, 335 - 344. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eap.2022.05.019
Kilby, P. (2017). China and The United States as Aid Donors: Past and Future Trajectories (Vol. 77).
Washington DC: East-West Center.
Kim, K. (2018). Matchmaking: Establishment of state-owned holding companies in indonesia.
Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies, 5(2), 313-330. https://doi.org/10.1002/app5.238
Kim, K. (2019). Using partially state-owned enterprises for development in Indonesia. Asia
Pacific Business Review, 25(3), 317-337. https://doi.org/10.1080/13602381.2019.1575660
Kim, K. (2021). Indonesia’s restrained state capitalism: Development and policy challenges.
Journal
of
Contemporary
Asia,
51(3),
419-446.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00472336.2019.1675084
Kim, K. & Sumner, A. (2021). Bringing state-owned entities back into the industrial policy
debate: The case of Indonesia. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 59, 496-509.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.strueco.2021.10.002
Kraft, H. J. S. (2017). Great power dynamics and the waning of ASEAN centrality in regional
security. Asian Politics & Policy, 9(4), 597-612. https://doi.org/10.1111/aspp.12350
Krapohl, S. (2017). Two Logics of Regional Integration and the Games Regional Actors Play.
In S. Krapohl (Ed.), Regional Integration in the Global South External Influence on Economic
Cooperation in ASEAN, MERCOSUR and SADC (pp. 31–32). New York: Palgrave
Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-38895-3
Kuswanto, K., Hoen, H. W., & Holzhacker, R. L. (2016). Decentralisation, Foreign Direct
Investment and Development in Indonesia K. Kuswanto, Herman W. Hoen and
Ronald L. Holzhacker. In R. L. Holzhacker, R. Wittek, & J. Woltjer (Eds.),
Decentralization
and
Governance
in
Indonesia.
New
York:
Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22434-3
Lee, C. L., Ahmad, R., Lee, W. S., Khalid, N., & Karim, Z. A. (2022). The financial sustainability
of state-owned enterprises in an emerging economy. Economies, 10(10).
https://doi.org/10.3390/economies10100233
Luttrell, C., Resosudarmo, I. A. P., Muharrom, E., Brockhaus, M., & Seymour, F. (2014). The
political context of REDD+ in Indonesia: constituencies for change. Environmental
Science & Policy, 35, 67-75.
Mawdsley, E. (2012). From Recipients to Donors: Emerging Powers and the Changing Development
Landscape. London: Zed Books.
Manych, N., & Jakob, M. (2021). Why coal? The political economy of the electricity sector in
the Philippines. Energy for Sustainable Development, 62, 113-125.
Marlier, M. E., DeFries, R. S., Kim, P. S., Koplitz, S. N., Jacob, D. J., Mickley, L. J., & Myers, S.
S. (2015). Fire emissions and regional air quality impacts from fires in oil palm, timber,

Journal of ASEAN Studies

203

and logging concessions in Indonesia. Environmental Research Letters, 10(8).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/085005
Matthews, N. & Motta, S. (2015). Chinese state-owned enterprise investment in mekong
hydropower: Political and economic drivers and their implications across the water,
energy, food nexus. Water (Switzerland), 7(11), 6269-6284. https://doi.org/10.3390/
w7116269
Mayer, J. (2006). Transboundary Perspectives on Managing Indonesia’s Fires. The Journal of
Environment
&
Development,
15(2),
202–223.
https://doi.org/10.1177/
1070496506288369
Menon, J. & Ng, T. H. (2017). Do state-owned enterprises crowd out private investment? firm
level evidence from malaysia. Journal of Southeast Asian Economies, 34(3), 507-522.
https://doi.org/10.1355/ae34-3e
Milne, S., Mahanty, S., To, P., Dressler, W., Kanowski, P., & Thavat, M. (2019). Learning from
‘Actually Existing’ REDD+: A synthesis of ethnographic findings. Conservation &
Society, 17(1), 84–95. https://doi.org/10.4103/cs.cs_18_13
Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI). (2022). ASEAN Digital Integration. Singapore: Ministry
of Trade and Industry. https://www.mti.gov.sg/ASEAN/ASEAN-DigitalIntegration.
Mueller, L. M. (2019). ASEAN centrality under threat–the cases of RCEP and connectivity.
Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies, 8(2), 177-198. https://doi.org/10.1080/
24761028.2019.1691703
Mursitama, T. N., Karim, M. F., & Arnakim, L.Y.(2021). ASEAN and Its Relevance amidst
Pandemic. Journal of ASEAN Studies, 9(1), 1-8. https://doi.org/10.21512/jas.v9i1.7648
Oba, M. (2019). Further development of Asian regionalism: Institutional hedging in an
uncertain era. Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies, 8(2), 125-140. https://doi.org/
10.1080/24761028.2019.1688905
Overland, I., Sagbakken, H. F., Chan, H.-Y., Merdekawati, M., Suryadi, B., Utama, N. A., &
Vakulchuk, R. (2021). The ASEAN climate and energy paradox. Energy and Climate
Change, 2, 100019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egycc.2020.100019
Panara, C. (2015). The Sub-national Dimension of the EU A Legal Study of Multilevel Governance.
New York: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14589-1
Pasierbak, P. (2018). Causes, Origins and Possible Effects of the ASEAN Economic
Community (AEC). Journal of ASEAN Studies, 6(1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.21512/
jas.v6i1.3897
Patel, T., Dhiaulhaq, A., Gritten, D., Yasmi, Y., De Bruyn, T., Paudel, N. S., ... & Suzuki, R.
(2013). Predicting future conflict under REDD+ implementation. Forests, 4(2), 343-363.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/f4020343
Permatasari, Y. (2020). Building Indonesia through ASEAN Economic Community. Journal of
ASEAN Studies, 8(1), 81-93. https://doi.org/10.21512/jas.v8i1.6040

204

The Trajectory and Trend

Prado, C. de. (2007). Global Multi-level Governance: European and East Asian Leadership. Tokyo:
United Nations University Press.
Prakash, A. (2018). Asia Africa Growth Corridor Development Cooperation and Connectivity
in the Indo-Pacific. ERIA Policy Brief 2018-03.
Pye, O. (2019). Commodifying sustainability: Development, nature and politics in the palm
oil industry. World Development, 121, 218–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.
2018.02.014
Rabe, W. & Kostka, G. (2022). China’s growing digital reach: Explaining citizens’ high
approval rates of finctech investment in Southeast Asia. Review of International Political
Economy. https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2022.2044884
Ravenhill, J. (2010). The ‘new east asian regionalism’: A political domino effect. Review of
International
Political
Economy,
17(2),
178-208.
https://doi.org/10.1080/
09692290903070887
RCEP. (2022). RCEP agreement enters into force. https://rcepsec.org/2022/01/14/rcepagreement-enters-into-force/
Rosser, A. (2020). The changing aid landscape and the political economy of development in
Southeast Asia. In T. Carroll, S. Hameiri, & L. Jones (Eds.), The Political Economy of
Southeast Asia: Politics and Uneven Development Under Hyperglobalisation (pp. 293-314).
New York: Springer International Publishing.
Shawtari, F. A., Har Sani Mohamad, M., Abdul Rashid, H. M., & Ayedh, A. M. (2017). Board
characteristics and real performance in Malaysian state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, 66(8), 1064-1086.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-12-2015-0188
Shimizu, K. (2021). The ASEAN economic community and the RCEP in the world economy.
Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies, 10(1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.1080/
24761028.2021.1907881
Sikorski, D. (1989). Competitive advantages of state-owned enterprises - comparative case
studies of national and private companies in Singapore. Public Enterprise, 9(1), 65-89.
Soong, J.-J. (2016). The political economy of development between China and the ASEAN
states: Opportunity and challenge. The Chinese Economy, 49(6), 395-399.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10971475.2016.1207972
Tan, B. (2005). The norms that weren’t: ASEAN’s shortcomings in dealing with transboundary
air pollution. International Environmental Politics, Spring 2005.
Tavares, R. (2016). Paradiplomacy: Cities and States as Global Players. London: Oxford University
Press.
Varkkey, H. (2020). The Asean Way and Haze Mitigation Efforts. Journal of International
Studies. https://doi.org/10.32890/jis.8.2012.7927
Varkkey, H., Bahcecik, S. O., & Latif, M. T. (2021). ASEAN in regional environmental
governance: Bright prospects of a hazy future. In C. Ergenc (Ed.), ASEAN as a Method:
Journal of ASEAN Studies

205

Re-centering Processes and Institutions in Contemporary Southeast Asian Regionalism. New
York: Routledge.
Wai, T. C. C. (1995). Industrialization in ASEAN: The Technological Dimension. Singapore:
NUS Libraries.
Whah, C. Y. (2020). State intervention, globalisation and the evolution of Malaysian banks’
identities. Copenhagen Journal of Asian Studies, 37(1), 74-102. https://doi.org/10.
22439/CJAS.V37I1.5907
Williamson, J. (1993). Democracy and the ‘Washington consensus’. World Development, 21(8),
1329-1336. https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-750X(93)90046-C
Wu, D.-Y. (2020). City diplomacy, multilateral networks, and the role of Southeast Asia. Global
Strategis, 14(1), 17-30. https://doi.org/10.20473/jgs.14.1.2020.17-30
Yeung, H. W. (1999). Regulating investment abroad: The political economy of the
regionalization of Singaporean firms. Antipode, 31(3), 245-273. https://doi.org/10.
1111/1467-8330.00103
Yukawa, T. (2018). The ASEAN way as a symbol: An analysis of discourses on the ASEAN
norms. The Pacific Review, 31(3), 298-314. https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.
2017.1371211
Zhang, L., Cui, L., Li, S., & Lu, J. (2018). Who rides the tide of regionalization: Examining the
effect of the china-ASEAN free trade area on the exports of Chinese firms. International
Business Review, 27(3), 501-513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2017.10.002
Zhang, M. (2021). Beyond infrastructure: Re-thinking China's foreign direct investment in
Malaysia. The Pacific Review, 34(6), 1054-1078. https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.
2020.1791237

206

The Trajectory and Trend

