Asian Journal of Peacebuilding Vol. 10 No. 2 (2022): 355-386
doi: 10.18588/202211.00a319

Special Issue – Research Article

Hedging via Institutions: ASEAN-led
Multilateralism in the Age of the Indo-Pacific
Cheng-Chwee Kuik

This article unpacks the dynamics of group hedging in international relations
by examining the Southeast Asian states’ collective efforts to use ASEAN-led
multilateral institutions as a platform to hedge against a range of risks surrounding
intensifying big-power rivalry and increasing global uncertainties. It argues that
ASEAN’s collective hedging is a converged but not necessarily coordinated act.
Despite the states’ diverging attributes and outlooks, they converge on shared
vulnerabilities, collective memories, and disadvantaged positions. Southeast Asian
states thus view ASEAN-based multilateralism as an indispensable, albeit insufficient,
means to engage big powers and manage other challenges. Through the functions
of institutional binding, buffering, and building, ASEAN’s group hedging serves to
mitigate and offset risks while shaping Asian order amid deepening uncertainties in
the age of the Indo-Pacific.
Keywords	Hedging, ASEAN, multilateralism, regional institutions, US-China
rivalry, East Asia

Introduction: Hedging amid Hyper-Uncertainty
Much has been written on hedging by individual states; relatively less on hedging
at the group or collective level in international relations (exceptions include
Pempel 2010; Rüland 2011; Kikuchi 2015; Kuik 2018; Ciorciari 2019; Oba 2019;
Mueller 2021; Sim and Aminjonov 2022). This essay explores the phenomenon of
“group hedging,” focusing on the member states of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and their collective efforts to use the ASEAN-led
multilateral institutions to hedge against a wide array of risks amid growing bigpower rivalry and increasing global uncertainties.
Specifically, the essay addresses how and why a group of self-interested states
with diverse motivations came to pursue collective hedging via the ASEAN-led
multilateralism throughout the post-Cold War decades. It also assesses the impact
of such converged efforts on the evolving regional order in the face of intensifying
© 2022 The Institute for Peace and Unification Studies, Seoul National University
ISSN 2288-2693 Print, ISSN 2288-2707 Online

356 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

US-China rivalry across the Indo-Pacific. Since the focus is the use of regional
institutions as a platform for hedging, this study uses the term “institutional
hedging” interchangeably with “group hedging” and “collective hedging.”
Why focus on group hedging when, some twenty years after “hedging” was
introduced into the study of International Relations (IR), the concept of hedging
remains contested at the individual state level? While there is still no consensus
among IR scholars as to how best to define and operationalize hedging in world
politics (Haacke and Ciorciari 2019; Haacke 2019; Jones and Jenne 2022; Chang
2022), the decades-long conceptual debate on the term has identified several
attributes distinguishing hedging from such alignment behavior as “balancing”
and “bandwagoning.” These attributes—an avoidance of rigid commitment, an
insistence on impartiality (or neutrality), activism for inclusive diversification, as
well as the purposeful pursuing of mutually-counteracting measures—have been
specified and operationalized (albeit unevenly and with different nomenclature)
in the literature on hedging (Goh 2005; 2007; Kuik 2008; 2016a; 2022a; Jackson
2014; Lim and Cooper 2015; Hoo 2016; Korolev 2016; Koga 2018; Kuik and Tso
2022; Jones and Jenne 2022; Heng 2022). Moreover, there are growing scholarly
works demonstrating that ASEAN states have been collectively using regional
institutions to hedge external risks over the past decades (Rüland 2011; Tan 2020;
Anwar 2020; Kuik 2021a; 2022a), as discussed below. These conceptual insights
and empirical realities suggest that the time is ripe for theorizing hedging beyond
and above state level.
Hedging is defined here as insurance-maximizing behavior under highuncertainty and high-stakes conditions, where a rational actor (which may be a
country or a group) mitigates and offsets risks by pursuing active impartiality,
inclusive diversification, and prudent contradictions, with the ultimate goal of
cultivating a fall-back position (Khong 2004; Kuik 2008; 2016b; 2020; 2022a;
Tunsjø 2010; 2013; Kuik, Azizan, and Rahim 2012; Haacke and Ciorciari 2022;
Kuik and Tso 2022). As instinctive human behavior, hedging prevails and persists
as long as the systemic circumstances—particularly big-power relations and
actions—are uncertain. As uncertainty deepens, so does hedging behavior.
The growing US-China rivalry has increasingly made the contemporary era
one of hyper uncertainty. Several interrelated trends indicate that this is likely to
endure. To begin, the antagonism between the US and China is becoming more
open, more intense, and more confrontational (Christensen 2020; Goldstein
2020; Shambaugh 2020; Lampton 2021; Scobell 2021; Wang 2021). The actionreaction between the two contesting powers across the military and non-military
chessboards, coupled with the broadening involvements of second-tier powers
in and out of Asia, have intensified big power tensions and their smaller-state
courtships in the Indo-Pacific region (Kuik 2021b; 2022a; 2022b).
In the face of China’s growing power and increasing assertiveness in the
East and South China Seas, the US, Australia, Japan, and India revived the

Hedging via Institutions 357

Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad) in 2017. Each of these Quad members,
alongside several European powers (France, Germany, and the Netherlands)
and the European Union (EU) as a group, has released their respective IndoPacific documents and strategies. In September 2021, months after launching its
Integrated Review (titled “Global Britain in a Competitive Age”), the post-Brexit
United Kingdom joined Australia and the US to announce the AUKUS pact.
Individual Quad members and European powers have dispatched military assets
to the South China Sea and devised connectivity-development initiatives to push
back China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). The Group of Seven (G7) announced
the Build Back Better World (B3W) initiative in June 2021, and the EU set up the
Global Gateway in November 2021. These initiatives were followed by the launch
of the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment (PGII) by the G7 in
June 2022. In May 2022, the US launched the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework
(IPEF). In November 2022, South Korea announced its Indo-Pacific strategy.
While these schemes are by design global in scope, Southeast Asia is at the center
of courtships.
These geopolitical and geo-economic developments are presenting both
opportunities and challenges to ASEAN countries and other smaller states across
the Indo-Pacific. Since 2020, as the world continues to battle the COVID-19
pandemic, clouds of uncertainty loom larger on the strategic and security fronts.
Observers and officials have warned about the increased likelihood of armed
conflict over such potential hotspots as Taiwan and the South China Sea, as
concerns over the Korean Peninsula endure. The widening sources and stresses
of uncertainty have deepened the smaller states’ inclination to hedge, one way or
another. From Seoul to Wellington, from Singapore to Jakarta, and from Bangkok
to New Delhi, governments across the Indo-Pacific—even close allies and partners
of the US—have sought to mitigate risks by diversifying their strategic and
development bets (Pant and Joshi 2017; Atanassova-Cornelis 2020; Sahashi 2020;
Kim 2021; Köllner 2021). They are insisting on not taking sides, while pursuing
contradictory measures to cultivate fallback positions in the face of growing
uncertainty (Kuik 2020; 2021a; Laksmana 2020).
There are signs that regional groupings, most notably ASEAN and to some
extent the EU (Ringsmose and Webber 2020; Didier 2021), have embraced
hedging as well. Whether at the individual state or group level, hedging is a policy
without pronouncement. Hedgers (both states and regional bodies) typically
pursue hedging without announcing it as such. Doing otherwise would invite
unwanted suspicion from contending big powers, defeating the very purpose of
this deliberately ambiguous act, which include developing robust relationships
to the greatest extent possible with both contending powers (working toward the
best outcome); cultivating as many layers of protection as possible to offset the
risks of uncertainties (preparing for the worst scenarios); and, ultimately, keeping
all options open as long as possible.

358 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

This article argues that ASEAN’s group hedging is a converged but not
necessarily coordinated act. ASEAN states are a group of highly diverse sovereign
states with distinct identities, diverging interests, differing threat perceptions, and
ongoing problems among them. These differences notwithstanding, the smalland medium-sized states are bonded by shared vulnerabilities vis-à-vis traditional
and non-traditional security challenges. They are also bound by the past and
the future: common historical memories of having been victims of Western
colonialization and Cold War big-power politics, as well as a common outlook of
viewing ASEAN-based multilateralism as an essential platform for them to “hang
together” (Acharya 2001; Narine 2002; Ba 2009; Shanmugam 2015; Ciorciari 2017;
Kuik 2022b). Such shared vulnerabilities and relative disadvantaged positions
within the anarchic international system has pushed the Southeast Asian states to
converge on ASEAN and the ASEAN-plus multilateral institutions, viewing them
as indispensable, albeit imperfect and insufficient, means to hedge and offset
external multiple risks (that none of the states can tackle alone), while pursuing
interests aimed at serving the ruling elites’ internal political interests.
The article proceeds as follows. The first part provides a literature overview of
the roles and limitations of regional institutions for smaller states. Next, the article
develops an analytical framework to unpack group hedging in international
relations. It first offers conceptual distinctions between institutional hedging and
institutional balancing, before tracing empirically how ASEAN states have sought
to pursue collective hedging via ASEAN-based institutions to perform the triple
functions of binding, buffering, and building. The third section discusses how
and why secondary states have attempted to leverage the expanding ASEANled multilateralism to shape the evolving regional order and architecture in East
Asia in the ways they have. Group hedging, like hedging at the individual state
level, is driven primarily by the need to mitigate and offset risks (specifically, the
potential dangers of aggression, entrapment, abandonment, polarization, group
marginalization), much more than the desire to maximize returns. The final part
of this article sums up the key findings and suggests directions for future research.

Regional Institutions and Smaller States: Literature Overview
Abundant literature exists on the merits and limitations of international institu­
tions as a tool of statecraft in international relations. This tool has been variously
described as an institutionalist, integrationist, or multilateralist approach (Haas
1964; Keohane and Nye 1977; Keohane 1989; Ruggie 1993; Baldwin 1993), in
which a state forges institutionalized cooperation with other countries who
share similar values and common interests, either at the regional, intra-regional,
or global level (Krasner 1983; Keohane 1990; 2002; Katzenstein 1997; 2005).
International institutions are multilateral institutions, as three or more countries

Hedging via Institutions 359

pursue functional collaboration, economic integration, and/or political and
strategic coordination among themselves (Keohane and Martin 1995). Institutions
typically function in the Lockean and Kantian cultures of “interdependence,
common fate, homogenization, and self-restraint,” which focus primarily on the
possibilities of normatively regulated order and perpetual peace in the interstate
society (Doyle 1997; Wendt 1999, 44, 317).
A state’s attitude toward international institutions is a function of many
factors, most notably its size and strength. All things being equal, the smaller and
weaker states are more likely than the larger powers to rely more on institutions
as their primary instrument. This is discernible in the smaller states’ common
and long-standing practice to turn to global intergovernmental organizations
(IGOs)—the United Nations (UN) and its various specialized agencies—to protect
their sovereignty and security. It is also observable in the actors’ inclination
to use regional mechanisms as key platforms to integrate their resources, augment
their capabilities, and address their shared problems. These tendencies should not
be surprising. As smaller states cannot afford the go-it-alone option, they choose
the go-it-with-others option in order to cope better with the problems they are
incapable of handling alone. Given the purpose of this article, this literature over­
view shall focus on institutions at the regional level.
How do regional institutions help smaller states pursue their interests and
cope with external challenges? What downside does doing so entail? The vast
majority of the literature highlights that, while regional institutions offer a crucial
way for smaller states to pursue economic, diplomatic, and political goals, the
role of regional institutions in tackling military security problems is often limited
(especially when compared to military alliances).
Economically, regional institutions and integration help smaller states com­
pensate for their innate disadvantages in size and limited range of resources. As
free-market liberals have long argued, economic integration with other coun­tries
allows smaller economies to expand their export markets, exploit economies of
scale, enhance efficiency and competitiveness, as well as facilitate two-way flow
of resources, capital, skills, and technology (Balassa 1961; Schiff 2001). These
help enlarge the smaller countries’ economic base, thereby over­coming their
handicaps and enhancing their capabilities to weather external shocks and pursue
growth (Benedict 1967; Payne 1987). Collaborating with other similarly-situated
states is particularly crucial during negotiations on international trade, as the
states’ bargaining positions vis-à-vis the larger economies will be boosted (Downes
2004; Grynberg 2006).
Politically and diplomatically, smaller states are drawn to regional institutions
as they help to ameliorate the problems of power asymmetry. Because of the
sovereign equality norm customarily enshrined (but not consistently enforced)
in multilateral arrangements, smaller states are accorded status and voice equal
to that of much larger states. This contrasts sharply with alliances, where smaller

360 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

actors risk losing their equality and freedom of action because of the hierarchical
nature of big-power-led alliances. In multilateral institutions, smaller states can
often preserve their formal equality with the larger actors; in some circumstances,
they can even influence the major powers’ actions in ways difficult to achieve in
alliance settings. By providing an essential platform for weaker states to come
together and act collectively, institutions enable them to shape and internalize
certain norms, “in ways that are congruent with their interests” (Hurrell 2000,
4; Ingebritsen 2002). To quote Robert Keohane: “The small and middle powers’
leaders realize that although they may be able to do little together, they can do
virtually nothing separately. Through an international organization they can
attempt to promote attitudes favorable to their survival—to develop, as it were,
an international political culture shaped largely by themselves” [emphasis added]
(Keohane 1969, 296).
Roles: Issue-Linkage, Diffuse Reciprocity, and Binding
Multilateral institutions entail several organizational features that make them
norm-based (and thus politically favorable) platforms for small and secondary
states. Three features are most significant, namely issue-linkage, diffuse reciprocity,
and binding.
In multilateral settings, most issues are intertwined, which allow member
countries “to gain additional bargaining leverage by making [their] own behavior
on a given issue contingent on others’ actions toward other issues” (Haas 1980;
Axelrod and Keohane 1993, 99). The feature also contributes partially to what
liberals have described as “diffuse reciprocity,” where actors “contribute [their]
share, or behave well toward others, not because of ensuing rewards from specific
actors, but in the interests of continuing satisfactory overall results for the group
of which [they are] a part, as a whole” (Ruggie 1993, 11-12; Keohane 1986). The
reciprocity is “diffuse” in that countries taking part in multilateral processes would
expect “to yield a rough equivalence of benefits in the aggregate and over time”
[emphasis added] (Ruggie 1993, 11), rather than to maximize benefits on all
issues and at all times. For this reason, member states are more likely to make
concessions on certain issues in exchange for returns on others. This is significant
for smaller states, as it indicates that the multilateral interactions are more often a
continuous, long-term process of give-and-take, rather than a situation where the
strongest takes all. Over time, the process may dilute the major powers’ capability
advantages, while enhancing the weaker states’ bargaining strengths across issueareas, thus mitigating the problems of power asymmetry.
These effects are augmented by the binding function. According to Joseph
Grieco, the institutional arrangements provide the secondary states with
opportunities for having effective “voice opportunities” (Grieco 1993, 331). This
yields what he calls “the binding thesis”: “if states share a common interest and
undertake negotiations on rules constituting a collaborative arrangement, then

Hedging via Institutions 361

the weaker but still influential partners will seek to ensure that the rules so con­
structed will provide for effective voice opportunities for them and will thereby
prevent or at least ameliorate their domination by stronger partners” (ibid., 331).
Daniel Deudney adds that the effects of binding are mutual: that is, the practice
of establishing institutional links between political units actually serves to reduce
each other’s autonomy (Deudney 1996, 213-216). John Ikenberry similarly notes:
“Binding restricts the range of freedom of states—weak or strong—and when
states bind to each other, they jointly reduce the role and consequences of power in
their relationship” (Ikenberry 2001, 64). Randall Schweller describes the binding
strategy as one of the alternate responses to rising powers, noting that binding
serves to achieve three objectives: (a) “satisfy the prestige demands of the rising
power”; (b) give the rising state “a greater opportunity to voice its concerns” and
to co-shape international order; and (c) increase the costs for the rising power
to exercise its might (Schweller 1999, 13). Together, these objectives would
ameliorate “the revisionist elements of a rising power’s behavior” (Johnston and
Ross 1999, 273).
Limitations and Shortcomings
This is not to say that institutions do not have weaknesses. As noted, institutions
are of limited use when tackling military security dangers. In addition, states often
incur political costs because of their participation in institutions, for example,
when transnational policy coordination requires them to relinquish a degree of
state control over an issue.
Some scholars, particularly neorealists, have been skeptical about the role of
institutions in world politics. John Mearsheimer contends that institutions matter
“only on the margins” (Mearsheimer 1995, 7). Grieco maintains that “institutions
are unable to mitigate anarchy’s constraining effects on interstate cooperation”
(Grieco 1988, 116). In their view, there are two major obstacles to international
cooperation: fear of cheating and, more importantly, state concerns about relative
gains (Mearsheimer 1995). Michael Mastanduno adds that “relative position
matters because nation-states exist in anarchy, without a higher governing
authority. Anarchy breeds fear and distrust, leading nation-states to worry, at
the extreme, that they will be conquered or destroyed by their more powerful
counterparts” (Mastanduno 1991, 78).
Neorealists also doubt the efficacy of institutions and international law in
constraining state behavior, contending that, far from restraining big powers, the
creation and functions of institutions are often subject to the actions of dominant
actors in the international system. In Mearsheimer’s words, “institutions are
basically a reflection of the distribution of power in the world. They are based on
the self-interested calculations of the great powers, and they have no independent
effect on state behavior” (Mearsheimer 1995, 7). Such skepticism has been refuted
by liberals, who insist that concerns about relative gains and fear of cheating

362 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

matter only in one-off cooperation, and that diffuse reciprocity, issue-linkage, and
binding matter more in continuous cooperation among states (Keohane 1986;
Ruggie 1993).
For liberals and constructivists, the advantages of institutions are mutually
reinforcing. The effects of functional cooperation and economic integration, for
instance, often spill over into high politics, leading to more political collaboration
among neighboring countries. Intensified and sustained collaboration, in turn,
is likely to cultivate mutual trust, facilitate further integration, deepen complex
interdependence, strengthen collective actions, and even catalyze collective
identity formation. These effects may enhance the smaller states’ capacities to
mitigate security risks at both the intra- and extra-mural levels. Specifically,
institutions may provide smaller states with a norm-based platform to build
consensus, address bilateral disputes, manage intra-regional problems, curb local
power’s aspirations for regional hegemony, and develop a regional identity among
neighbors (Peters 1999; Acharya 2001; Ba 2006; Fennell 2022).
Institutions may also provide smaller states with a common “buffer” mechanism
to cope with the political and security challenges from the extra-regional powers
(Leifer 1996; Khong 2004; Ba 2006; Goh 2007). Insofar as these benefits can be
tapped efficiently, smaller states will be able to reduce the likelihood of bilateral
tensions and regional conflicts, thus reducing the need—and the associated political
costs—of turning to big-power-led alliance for security. Ultimately, these will
enable the state elites to concentrate on their domestic developmental needs and
political legitimacy, while maintaining a degree of state autonomy (Kuik 2022b).
International institutions, however, are not a panacea. They have their down­
sides, most of which are associated with collective action problems (Olson 1971),
such as group size, provision of public goods, heterogeneity, institutional designs,
distribution, defection, and so on (Kahler 1992; Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal
2001; Acharya and Johnston 2007). Very often, some organizations perform better
because of their ability to address these issues. These problems aside, the primary
weakness of institutions is their inability to provide credible measures to smaller
states on the traditional military front, as compared to alliances. This is not to
suggest that alliance is necessarily the first-choice option for smaller states. In
fact, smaller states would turn to alliance only if and when they are confronted
by a direct and imminent military threat. Short of that, weaker states are more
likely to use regional and multilateral institutions as the cornerstone of their
external policies, to be augmented and complemented by diplomacy, some form
of alignments, and other bilateral and multilateral instruments of statecraft.

Institutional Hedging: Mitigating Risks, Not Threats
Institutional hedging, or group hedging, is distinguishable from country-level

Hedging via Institutions 363

hedging primarily in terms of modus operandi, but the two overlap in terms of
policy ends and logic. While they mobilize means and resources at different levels,
both group hedging and country-level hedging aim primarily at mitigating risks
(rather than threats); they are both driven by the imperative of insuring against
potential losses and possible dangers. This goal typically involves concurrent
efforts in pursuing active impartiality, inclusive diversification, and prudent con­
tradictions for cultivating a fall-back position. Such a goal distinguishes hedging
from balancing, which is about pushing back and containing against a specific
threat. As argued by a growing number of IR scholars, hedgers do not hedge
against a single actor per se, but against a range of risks (Kuik 2016b; Ciorciari
2019; Haacke and Ciorciari 2022; Heng 2022). There are multiple sources of risks,
most notably the potential harms surrounding the big-power actions, but also
neighbourhood complexities and non-traditional security challenges (Pempel
2010; Rüland 2011; Tunsjø 2013; Strating 2019; Kuik 2020; Kuik and Tso 2022).
Depending on who the hedger is and what the prevailing risks are, the means
of hedging differ. A sovereign state typically hedges by using a combination of
national- and sub-national-level political, diplomatic, developmental, and defence
tools. A regional organization, on the other hand, predominantly hedges by using
institutional means, organizational arrangements, or group-based actions for
pursuing group ends. The transactions can be diplomatic, economic, and military
in nature. For this reason, collective hedging by a regional group necessarily
manifests in institutional hedging. The word “collective” connotes converged
efforts but not necessarily coordinated acts. Converged efforts encompass indi­
vidual member states’ shared tendency in using their regional grouping as a com­
mon platform to pursue overlapping policy goals (in this case, hedging against
the shared risks). They do not necessarily always involve a concerted group-wide
coordination to synchronize and harmonize their policy elements.
Institutional Hedging versus Institutional Balancing
Institutional hedging is not to be confused with institutional balancing. Both
involve the use of multilateral institutions as an instrument, but they are distin­
guish­able from each other in three respects. First, in terms of policy ends, while
institutional balancing aims to push back and counter threat (He 2008; Seungjoo
Lee 2016; He and Feng 2020), institutional hedging aims to mitigate and offset
a broad range of risks. Risk and threat are related but not identical. They overlap
in terms of exposure to possible harm and potential danger, but diverge in the
certainty and immediacy of such possibilities. That is, while risk refers to diffuse,
fluid, and myriad sources of plausible harm or probable loss, threat refers to a
direct, imminent, and clear-and-present danger (Haftendorn, Keohane, and
Wallander 1999; Corry 2012: Kuik 2022a).
Second, in terms of organizing principles, while institutional hedging involves
impartiality (i.e., not taking sides with any big powers) and inclusivity (i.e.,

364 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

engaging with all key players), institutional balancing often manifests in a
more straightforward alignment against a perceived threat. A good example of
insti­tu­tional balancing is China and Russia’s use of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization vis-à-vis the perceived US threat, which is a contrast to ASEAN
states’ impartial and inclusive approaches to multilateralism. Accordingly, institu­
tional hedging is pursued through multiple indirect, mutually-counteracting
measures (e.g., concurrent adoptions of selective deference and selective defiance)
aimed at mitigating and offsetting perceived risks, whereas institutional balancing
manifests in more direct measures aimed at countervailing a specific threat. Kai
He observes two types of institutional balancing, namely inclusive and exclusive:
the former means “binding the target states in the institutions,” whereas the latter
refers to “keeping the target states out” (He 2008, 493). Seungjoo Lee (2016) uses
the term “inter-institutional balancing” to describe a state’s behavior to create
overlapping or separate institutions to balance against a target state, and the term
“intra-institutional balancing” to denote strategy whereby rivalling states compete
and cooperate within the same institution when the demand for public goods is
high.
Third, in terms of policy approaches, while institutional hedging and institu­
tional balancing both involve the use of institutional means (i.e., inter-state
institutional arrangements and organizational mechanisms, either minilaterally
or multilaterally), they differ in modus operandi. That is, institutional hedging
(driven by its goal of mitigating risks) is practised by the triple efforts of binding,
buffering, and building, whereas institutional balancing (motivated by the
objective of repelling threat) is executed through the concerted coalition-wide
countervailing and containing measures to balance against a target state. These
distinctions are illustrated by Table 1.

ASEAN’s Institutional Hedging: Binding, Buffering, and Building
As a group, the ASEAN states have pursued collective hedging via a cluster of
ASEAN-centric regional multilateral institutions, namely ASEAN and the four
ASEAN-led mechanisms: the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF, established in
1994), the ASEAN Plus Three (APT, i.e., ASEAN plus China, Japan, and South
Korea, established in 1997), the East Asia Summit (EAS, established in 2005), and
the ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus, established in 2010).
Figure 1 illustrates the memberships of each of these mechanisms.
These ASEAN-led mechanisms have provided a unique platform and
institutional space for the small and secondary states to hedge, for several reasons.
First, the memberships of ASEAN-led multilateralism involve all big powers and
key players across the Indo-Pacific region. Second, the institutionalized nature
of these mechanisms makes binding possible. Third, the multilateral setting

Hedging via Institutions 365

Table 1. Institutional Hedging versus Institutional Balancing.
Institutional Hedging

Institutional Balancing

Ends

Mitigating and offsetting risks:
• ‌A wide range of diffused dangers, potential
harms, and probable losses.

Countervailing and counterchecking a specific threat.

Means

The use of institutional means, i.e., inter-state institutional arrangements and
organizational mechanisms, either minilaterally or multilaterally.

Organizing Impartiality (an insistence on not taking sides);
principles Inclusivity (an insistence on engaging all key
players).

Partiality (a tendency in
aligning with one power bloc
against another).

Modus
operandi

Coalition-strengthening
measures aimed at
countervailing and limiting the
influence and capability of a
targeted big power.

Active impartiality, inclusive diversification,
prudent contradictions (e.g., selective defiance
and selective deference) to keep options open:
• ‌binding,
• ‌buffering,
• ‌building.

Source: Author.

Figure 1. ASEAN and the ASEAN-led Mechanisms.
Canada
European Union
Australia

Indonesia
Malaysia
The Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
ASEAN,
1967

Brunei (1984)
Vietnam (1995)
Laos (1997)
Myanmar (1997)
Cambodia (1999)

Papua New Guinea
India

China
Japan

ASEAN PLUS
THREE
(APT), 1997

Republic of Korea

ASEAN REGIONAL
FORUM (ARF),
1994

New Zealand
EAST ASIA
SUMMIT
(EAS), 2005*

ASEAN DEFFENCE
MINISTERS’
MEETING-PLUS
(ADMM+),
2010*

Russia (2010)

Mongolia (1998)
Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
(2000)
Pakistan (2004)

United States (2010)

Bangladesh (2005)
Timor-Leste (2005)
Sri Lanka (2007)

Note: ‌The membership of the eighteen-member ADMM-Plus overlaps with that of the expanded
EAS in 2010. Countries without a year in parentheses next to their names are founding
members of the institution. Otherwise, the year in parentheses next to a country’s name
denotes when it joined the institution.
Source: Kuik and Rahman (forthcoming).

366 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

of the mechanisms makes them a norms-based (as opposed to power-based)
institutional environment. Fourth, the organizational structure of ASEAN-led
multilateralism, which is multi-domain and multi-level, makes issue-linkage and
diffuse reciprocity possible. Fifth, the two-level dynamics (national/individualstate level and regional/group level) of the ASEAN-based institutional ecosystem
accords space to pursue mutually-complementary or mutually-contradictory
measures, depending on need and feasibility. For instance, to hedge against
entrapment and group marginalization in the face of intensifying Indo-Pacific
big-power rivalries, ASEAN member states have taken advantage of the twolevel dynamics to pursue seemingly contradictory measures (Kuik 2022a). On
one hand, ASEAN states have sought to use regional platforms to underscore the
group’s bottom-line principles (e.g., emphasizing inclusivity and other cooperative
security norms in the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific) as a normative way
to preserve autonomy and keep distance from the Quad at the group level. On
the other hand, virtually all ASEAN states have pursued a seemingly opposite
policy at the national level: engaging individual members of the Quad and their
likeminded partners in close and multifaceted partnerships as a pragmatic way to
yield concrete, politically significant interests on the domestic front.
In combination, these unique organizational features have enabled smaller
states to continuously cultivate room for cooperation and negotiation vis-à-vis
the stronger partners, while keeping options open for as long as possible. Without
these features, it would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, for the weaker
states to pursue institutional hedging.
Binding, issue-linkage, and diffuse reciprocity—the institutional features of
multilateralism as discussed in the literature overview above—are all evidenced
in Southeast Asia. Since the early 1990s, the ASEAN states have aimed to engage
and entangle multiple big powers into a web of regional multilateral institutions,
as part of their hedging approach to cope with external uncertainties. Because
of the embedded norms of multilateral institutions, the smaller states attain
considerable political equality with more powerful actors, although they are
unequal in size and strength. In circumstances where smaller states possess
some maneuvering space (because of the great powers’ competing courtships)
to play a major role in shaping the agenda and design of the institutions, they
are even capable of influencing the major powers’ behavior and punching above
their weight in international affairs. Without a norm-regulated and rule-based
multilateral environment, it would be difficult for such smaller states as the
ASEAN states to play a disproportionate role in shaping events in their respective
regions.
All in all, these features have allowed ASEAN states to hedge and insure
against a wide array of perceived risks (elaborated below) by performing three
core functions: binding, buffering, and building. These functions have emerged
not necessarily from the collective strength or cohesion of ASEAN states, but

Hedging via Institutions 367

primarily out of the states’ shared weaknesses and vulnerabilities in facing a
variety of external risks and challenges during critical junctures. These include
the immediate post-Cold War years in the early 1990s, the 1997-1998 East Asian
financial crisis, the mid and late 2000s, and the COVID-19 era, each of which has
compelled the ASEAN states to act as a group (Acharya 2001; Khong 2004; Ba
2006; Dosch and Kliem forthcoming).
Binding
Binding is the institutionalizing of engagement by forging sustained and regu­
larized dialogue mechanisms (as opposed to ad hoc or one-off arrangements)
aimed at keeping open—and perpetuating—channels of communication and col­
laboration with key partners. The ASEAN states have pursued binding inclusively,
i.e. with all sides of power contestation rather than engaging exclusively with one
side against another. Through the various ASEAN-led mechanisms discussed
above, ASEAN as a group has been binding and enmeshing all powers and
partners in constant collaboration, dialogue, and socialization (Ba 2006; Goh
2007; Khong and Nesadurai 2007; Kuik 2008; 2018), thereby hedging against the
risks of becoming irrelevant, self-marginalization, and abandonment.
The ASEAN states’ inclusive binding-engagement is vividly displayed in their
efforts to explore the modalities of the first Asia-Pacific-wide multilateral security
institution, which culminated in the creation of the ARF in the immediate postCold War years. Instead of excluding and isolating non-likeminded actors, the
ASEAN states opted to invite and include all relevant actors of different interests
and ideologies. In addition to engaging China bilaterally and multilaterally, the
ASEAN states also extended olive branches to Russia, Vietnam, and other socialist
countries. Regardless of ideological differences, these countries were enmeshed
in the ASEAN-based multilateral processes (Leifer 1996; Khong 1997), alongside
ASEAN’s longstanding partners from the West and other developed nations.
The binding-engagement function has been particularly effective in the
case of the APT. Since establishing the APT in 1997, the Southeast Asian states
have bound the three Northeast Asian states in virtually all East Asian-wide
regional cooperation and integration efforts across levels (summit, ministerial,
and working) and across domains (finance and currency swap to public
health, security, and transport, and to education, energy, and environment).
The continued participation of the three Northeast Asian powers as founding
members in all the ASEAN-led institutions (i.e., ARF, APT, EAS, ADMM-Plus)
have accorded ASEAN considerable leverage to bargain and bind other powers
beyond East Asia into ASEAN-based multilateralism.
Buffering
Buffering is creating space to maneuver by maintaining balance of power through
institutional means. Unlike binding-engagement, which aims to forge closer ties

368 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

with stronger partners, buffering does the opposite by keeping distance from the
big powers, limiting their influence, as well as checking and constraining their
actions. For ASEAN states, buffering involves leveraging the presence and partici­
pation of multiple competing powers as mutually constraining and countervailing
forces for the purposes of denying dominance, diversifying partnerships, as well as
ensuring room for bargaining and competitive cooperation (Leifer 1996; Emmers
2003; Koga 2022). For secondary states, the buffering processes serve as an insti­
tutional shield and shock absorber to mitigate and offset multiple risks: losing
autonomy, becoming dependent, and being subservient to a dominant hegemon
(Paul 2005; He 2008; Pempel 2010; Sook Jong Lee 2016).
Buffering, in short, is an act of dominance-denial. Examples abound: (a) the
2005 efforts to broaden the inaugural East Asia Summit (EAS) from the thirteen
APT countries to a sixteen-member mechanism, by including India, Australia,
and New Zealand, even though these three countries are not typically regarded
as East Asian countries. Their inclusions into the EAS were thus widely viewed
as a geopolitically-driven move to limit and offset China’s growing influence;
(b) expanding the EAS into an eighteen-member entity by including the US and
Russia in 2010; (c) establishing the ADMM-Plus in 2010 with the same member
states as the EAS (i.e., ASEAN plus eight); and (d) simultaneously upgrading
ASEAN’s relations with both China and Australia to “comprehensive strategic
partnerships” in 2021, a move aimed at avoiding privileging one power over
another. ASEAN and the United States upgraded their relations to “comprehensive
strategic partnership” in 2022.
Building
Building is the constructing of cooperation and expanding of collaboration among
ASEAN member states and with key partners near and far. Unlike buffering which
aims to reduce loss and avoid possible harms, building aims to create values,
inject momentum and continuously increase layers of cooperation to maximize
potential gains. While binding is about establishing connectivity, building is about
adding mechanisms and utilities to the established connectivity. In combination,
the institutional binding, buffering, and building processes serve to hedge and
mitigate the ever-evolving and ever-expanding risks at multiple levels.
Numerous scholarly works have examined the building functions of ASEAN
and ASEAN-led mechanisms, highlighting various forms of multilateral utility or
hedging utility of the small state-led institutions in the wider context of regional
integration and global governance (Rüland 2011; Pitakdumrongkit 2015; 2019a;
Ciorciari 2019; Mueller 2021; Koga 2022). The building utility is especially
significant in areas where the demand for regional public goods is high (Sook
Jong Lee 2016; Seungjoo Lee 2016; Quah 2019; Kuik 2021a). Building typically
manifests in a gradual transformation of group-wide consensus into sustained
regional cooperation (Fennell 2022). Continuous building is key to avoid the

Hedging via Institutions 369

risks of failing to cope with emerging challenges and region-wide problems, and
in turn, losing the relevancy and centrality role in regional affairs.
Far from being predetermined, the building function is responsive, accumu­
la­tive, and adaptive. Layers of cooperative mechanisms are gradually added to
each ASEAN-led institutions, mostly in response to emerging crises and shared
challenges throughout the post-Cold War decades. The APT, for example, was
established by ASEAN states and the three Northeast Asian economies of China,
Japan, and South Korea in response to the 1997 East Asian financial crisis (Stubbs
2002; Terada 2003). Under the APT framework, the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI),
a network of bilateral currency swap arrangements among the thirteen states, was
established in 2000 to provide mutual support for participant countries in times
of liquidity need (Beeson 2014; Dent 2016). Ten years later, the APT members
multilateralized the initiative by creating the CMI Multilateralization (CMIM) to
establish a common decision-making mechanism (Ciorciari 2011; Pitakdumrongkit
2015; Sook Jong Lee 2016). Since the early 2000s, the APT has gradually evolved
into a multi-sector, multilevel East Asian-wide cooperative platform, as the
thirteen countries expand their coordination in non-finance sectors, including
public health (after the SARS outbreak in 2003), transnational crime, environment,
energy, education, information, transport, etc. The APT cooperative processes set
the stage for the creation and institutionalization of the EAS in 2005 (Emmers,
Liow, and Tan 2010; Camroux 2012; Cook and Bisley 2016).
All in all, the above examples indicate that the ASEAN states have sought
to pursue collective-building by three pathways. First, proposing and promoting
ASEAN-based initiative (e.g., establishing the respective ASEAN-plus-One dialogue
partnerships one after another; building EAS on the basis of APT; building ADMMPlus on the basis of ADMM) (Mukherjee 2013; Tan 2016; Tang 2016; Ba 2017;
Pitakdumrongkit 2019a). Second, enlarging or upgrading existing cooperation
(e.g., enlarging ASEAN-6 into ASEAN-10; building CMIM on the basis of CMI;
expanding Masterplan on ASEAN Connectivity [MPAC] 2010 into MPAC 2025).
Third, encouraging the big powers to “compete to cooperate”, to court regional
countries, to complement strengths, cultivate relational networks, actualize
opportunities, and enlarge partnerships in a mutually reinforcing and mutually
beneficial manner, in due course institutionalizing ASEAN centrality (Dosch
and Mols 1998; Haacke 2009; Kim 2014). Examples are plentiful: the signings
of the respective ASEAN-plus-one free trade agreements (FTAs) since 2002, the
accessions by dialogue partners to ASEAN’s non-aggression pact, the Treaty of
Amity and Cooperation (TAC) since 2003, as well as the continuous substantiation
of the respective dialogue partnerships over the past decades. A more recent
example is the November 2020 conclusion of the fifteen-member Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), an ASEAN-initiated free trade
agreement that also includes China, Japan, South Korea, Australia, and New
Zealand. The RCEP was built out of the EAS cooperation (Pitakdumrongkit

370 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

Table 2. ASEAN’s Dialogue Partnerships, Strategic Partnerships, and Comprehensive Strategic
Partnerships.
DIALOGUE PARTNERSHIPS

STRATEGIC
PARTNERSHIPS

COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGIC
PARTNERSHIPS

Australia

1974

2014

2021

New Zealand

1975

2015

-

Japan

1977

2005

-

US

1977

2015

2022

European Union

1977

2020

-

Canada

1977

2020

-

South Korea

1991

2010

-

India

1995

2012

2022

China

1996

2003

2021

Russia

1996

2018

-

United Kingdom

2021

-

-

Source: Adapted from Kuik and Rahman (forthcoming).

2019b; Terada 2018).
The gradual, adaptive, and path-dependence nature of ASEAN-based multi­
lateralism is well reflected in the multi-phase developments of ASEAN’s dialogue
mechanisms and “strategic partnerships” (see Table 2).
As the scope of ASEAN-based dialogue partnerships and region-wide co­
oper­ative activities evolves and expands, so do their functions (Kuik and Rahman
forthcoming). In its earlier decades, ASEAN evolved from an ideologically-based
“diplomatic community” (Leifer 1989) preoccupied with regime security at home
and regional security in the immediate neighborhood during the Cold War
(Darby 1973; Van der Kroef 1978; Buszynski 1987) to a more confident regional
actor capable of promoting regionalism and providing an inclusive institutional
hub for cultivating multi-domain partnerships with countries across and beyond
Southeast Asia in the post-Cold War era (Dosch and Mols 1998; Friedrichs 2012;
Ba 2009; 2016). Subsequently, since the 1990s, additional institutional roles for
ASEAN-based mechanisms have been developed and expanded. These include:
cooperating with wider partners in confronting common external challenges,
while legitimizing its regional role (Kurus 1993), enhancing regional resilience
(Anwar 1997; Da Cunha 2000; Katsumata 2003), coping with strategic uncertainty
(Khong 2004; Emmers 2014), constructing Asian multilateralism and regional
architecture (Simon 2008; Tow and Taylor 2010; Tan 2015; Taylor 2016; Mahbubani
and Sng 2017; Natalegawa 2018), localizing inter-state norms (Acharya 1997;

Hedging via Institutions 371

2004; Jones 2010; Koga 2016; Rüland 2022), managing non-traditional security
governance (Caballero-Anthony 2014; Arase 2010; Caballero-Anthony and Gong
2021), facilitating connectivity-building (Mueller 2021; Valockova 2021), etc.
In a nutshell, ASEAN’s group hedging (implemented through institutional
binding, buffering, and building) has helped Southeast Asian states to mitigate
and offset a wide range of risks, most notably the dangers of big-power entrap­
ment, interference, subservience, intra-ASEAN tensions, regional instability,
and also of becoming irrelevant in regional affairs. By leveraging on the multilayered ASEAN-based institutions, the small and medium-sized states have been
able to actively cultivate the space to pursue continuous engagement, enlarge
cooperation, and bridge interests, thereby keeping options open for all in the long
run.

Implications for Asian Order and Peace
As a collective hedging platform for mitigating shared risks not only for ASEAN
states but also their dialogue partners, the ASEAN-led multilateralism has func­
tioned as one of the core pillars of Asian order-making and peace-maintenance.
It coexists and complements the other pillars, i.e., the US-led hub-and-spokes
military alliances, the China-led developmentalist networks, and to some extent,
the Indo-Pacific likeminded partnerships.
Each pillar carries promises and risks: contributing to regional stability
and prosperity but also bringing uncertainties. The US-led pillar contributes by
ensuring credible military deterrence against strategic adventurism, but its threatbased approach, if overdone, may lead to the self-fulfilling prophecy of turning a
potential security concern into an actual security threat and provoking military
confrontation. The Chinese-led pillar contributes by providing the ingredients
for shared prosperity and shared stability, but its contradictory maritime asserti­
veness and near-mercantilist economic statecraft, if unchecked, constitute the
dangers of power aggression, economic over-dependence, political backlash,
and financial unsustainability. The Indo-Pacific pillar contributes by introducing
more options and opportunities for like-minded partners, but its value-based
approach, if over-emphasized, runs the risks of regional bifurcation and group
marginalization (that is, undermining such non-Quad institutions as ASEAN and
ASEAN-based mechanisms).
Of the four pillars of Asian order, ASEAN-led multilateralism (and, by
extension, ASEAN-based institutional hedging) makes a uniquely significant
contribution to Asian peace. While it is true that ASEAN-led institutions are
ineffective (in tackling such sovereignty-related problems as the Myanmar
crisis) and inadequate (in handling such traditional security issues as the South
China Sea disputes), they are indispensable. They possess several advantages

372 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

not found in other pillars. These include: (a) wider scope of memberships and
institutionalized partnerships (covering all big powers and key players), unlike
other pillars which have a smaller group of members or a looser network of
partners; (b) broader layers of partnerships, i.e., multi-domain and multi-level
cooperation, unlike other pillars which only concentrate on certain realms; and,
most importantly, (c) higher peace-perpetuating potential, i.e., its impartial,
inclusive, and prudent approaches mitigate risks, while promising greater space
for coexistence, continuous dialogue, and competitive cooperation among all big
powers and smaller states in the region.
We now analyze how and why each of the ASEAN-based institutional
hedging approaches—activist impartiality, inclusive diversification, and prudent
contradictions—have helped contribute to order-making and peace-maintenance
in Asia.
Active Neutrality
ASEAN states—collectively and individually—have repeatedly stressed their
stance of not taking sides vis-à-vis the competing powers. Such neutrality (or
impartiality) is not passive, but proactive and pre-emptive. ASEAN activism is
discernible from the group’s efforts in persistently reaching out to big powers
of different ideologies, proposing cooperation, making progress, and providing
public goods for all, in due course making ASEAN-led multilateralism acceptable
to all. Such activism creates space for continuous cooperation while facilitating
the initiation and expansion of ASEAN-plus regional cooperation across domains
(e.g., CMI and CMIM, various ASEAN-plus-one FTAs, RCEP) as noted above,
side-by-side with individual powers’ initiatives. ASEAN neutrality provides the
essential foundation for institutional binding, buffering, and building, in turn
helping to perpetuate peace and stability in the wider region. If ASEAN states
depart from neutrality and begin to take sides with either power, the resultant bigpower action-reaction will perpetuate the vicious cycles of regional polarization,
leading to intensifying tensions and conflicts.
ASEAN’s activist neutrality is a positive synthesis of norms and power
within a multilateralized environment. The norm-based ASEAN-led forums are
less threatening to the participating powers as they are led by weaker actors and
not another power(s). This avoids leadership struggle among the big powers,
mitigates power asymmetry, and encourages the powers to woo Southeast Asian
countries in the diplomatic, defense, and development domains. These, in effect,
have allowed ASEAN states to diversify their external linkages.
Inclusive Diversification
ASEAN’s institutional hedging also entails efforts at diversifying dialogue and
cooperation in an inclusive manner. Such inclusive diversification is manifested in
both strategic and development links, culminating in multi-layered partnerships.

Hedging via Institutions 373

Hence, while Southeast Asian states have continuously embraced and enhanced
the multi-domain ASEAN-China partnership (e.g., elevating it to “Strategic
Partnership” in 2003 and “Comprehensive Strategic Partnership” in 2021), they
have simultaneously expanded their institutional links with the other powers one
after another (see Table 2). ASEAN’s inclusive diversification approach is also
evidenced in the grouping’s counter-COVID-19 and post-pandemic cooperation.
The approach helps mitigate the risks of becoming over-dependent on any single
power, while cultivating cooperative possibilities for all sides.
ASEAN’s inclusive diversification encourages the major powers to compete
to cooperate with Southeast Asian states, while enabling institutional checks and
balances among the powerful actors. This increases the weaker states’ leverage
to extract benefits from different powers, while denying the emergence of any
dominant power. These effects help to cultivate space for the ASEAN-centric
institutions to grow when conditions are ripe (e.g., the expansion of the CMI to
CMIM, the eventual conclusion of RCEP after an eight-year negotiation process,
and the possible enlargement of the EAS and ADMM-Plus). Such a virtuous
cycle is likely to deepen, in light of the intensifying US-China rivalry and the
growing activism of the second-tier powers in Asian affairs over the past decades.
The Quad’s Blue Dot Network, EU’s Global Gateway, and G7’s PGII, for instance,
have all identified ASEAN as a prioritized region. Ditto China’s newly announced
Global Development Initiative (GDI) and Global Security Initiative (GSI).
Prudent Contradictions
ASEAN’s collective hedging, like country-level hedging by individual states,
involves concurrent adoption of seemingly contradictory measures: binding and
buffering, selective deference and selective defiance, etc. ASEAN states selectively
please and displease China (and all other powers) (Kuik 2020; 2022a). Completely
pleasing China risks becoming subservient, whereas completely displeasing
China risks alienating and provoking the proximate giant. Pursuing selective
and mutually counteracting measures thus preserves ASEAN autonomy without
completely alienating any big power. The approach also prevents the emergence of
a predominant power, thereby maintaining ASEAN centrality while simultaneously
offsetting multiple risks under conditions of uncertainty. For instance, while
binding process mitigates marginalization and alienation by ensuring the con­
tinuous involvement of all powers, buffering process serves to minimize subser­
vience, maximize independence and avoid overdependence by ensuring a check
and balance among the competing powers. These are opposite approaches:
Binding uses institutional interactions to engage and forge increasingly close ties
with all powers, while buffering involves the contradictory action of constraining
the powers by using the same ASEAN-based institutions. Binding-engagement
and buffering (dominance-denial) are two sides of ASEAN’s institutional coin.
ASEAN’s prudent contradictions makes it possible for the weaker actors to

374 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

take advantage of the multilateral-bilateral nexus to better complement, augment,
and offset multilateral diplomacy with individual countries’ bilateral endeavors,
and vice versa. Hence, policy goals that could not be attained at multilateral
forums are pursued through separate bilateral channels, the degree and form of
which depend on the individual countries’ threat perceptions and benefactor ties.
For instance, while most ASEAN states have not confronted China at ASEAN-led
forums, some of the states (e.g., Vietnam, the Philippines, Indonesia)—depending
on their risk perceptions and interests in the disputed areas of the South China Sea
and regional order—have actively explored, cultivated, and stepped-up bilateral
partnerships with actors who share their interests and worldviews. Although most
regional states do not openly defy China, outside the forums, they are developing
cooperative ties and strategic ties with other powers (e.g., initiating and institu­
tionalizing 2+2 foreign and defence ministerial meetings with selected Western
powers and regional partners), thereby keeping their long-term options open.
Contradictions may not be a bad thing. This is so if and when the contra­
dict­ory elements are more about approaches, ways, and means, rather than
principles. In the real world, contradictions are almost inevitable, not least to
accommodate competing interests, address diverging expectations, as well as
accept differences and diversities within and across boundaries. In fact, under the
current conditions of ultra-uncertainty, contradictions are a necessity required
to serve such risk-mitigating purposes as avoiding being entrapped into others’
possible conflict, avoiding being abandoned by allies or partners, and, perhaps
most important, avoiding prematurely creating or edging closer to a self-fulfilling
prophecy (exclusive alliance and excessive armament directly targeted at one
power risks turning a potential security problem into an immediate threat).
When the situation is highly uncertain and the reality is messy (e.g., each of the
competing powers presents both problems and solutions to all smaller states),
clear-cut consistency (e.g., completely aligning with one power against another)
is rigid and unrealistic at best, and dangerously counter-productive at worst (Kuik
2021a; 2021b).
Indeed, when structural circumstances are less than straightforward and
domestic challenges more pressing, prudent contradictory actions on an inclusive,
impartial basis are imperative. This is because such approaches, although
im­per­fect, are indispensable to create space for maneuverability, mutual accom­
moda­tion, and continuous collaboration for all, thereby serving the principles
of survival and coexistence. Coexistence need not be passive; it can be dynamic,
interactive, and constructive. This may occur when there is room for the big
powers to compete, court, and cooperate with the smaller states, without
escalating into armed conflicts; and when the big powers’ prudent strategic acts
serve effective mutual deterrence, without mounting to escalation and outright
compulsion. Dynamic coexistence will not eliminate risks or disagreements.
No mechanism can do these in the real world. However, by avoiding direct

Hedging via Institutions 375

confrontation and averting open conflict, dynamic coexistence serves to keep
space open for continuous negotiation and collaboration, despite (and precisely
because) differences, competition, and diverging values will always remain.
ASEAN-led multilateralism has not only allowed ASEAN states to hedge
collectively, but it has also accorded them centrality in shaping and reshaping
the evolving regional order in post-Cold War Asia (Caballero-Anthony 2014; Ba
2016; Acharya 2017).
ASEAN’s Institutional Hedging in the Indo-Pacific Era
These three attributes of institutional hedging are most evidenced in ASEAN’s
response to the Indo-Pacific and its institutional expression, the Quad. As a
group, ASEAN is ambivalent about the Quad and the Quad members’ IndoPacific visions. On the one hand, ASEAN sees the Quad’s activism since its revival
in 2017 as a force contributing to regional balance of power, including in counterchecking and constraining an increasingly assertive China. On the other hand,
ASEAN is concerned that the Quad’s constrainment might escalate into Cold
War-style containment, exposing the small and medium-sized Southeast Asian
states to the danger of being entrapped into big-power conflict.
Such ambivalent perception and mixed concerns underpinned ASEAN’s
move to announce the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP) in June 2019
(Anwar 2020; Laksmana 2020). The AOIP, as an initiative that reinforces the
ASEAN-centered regional architecture, outlines ASEAN’s vision of the AsiaPacific and Indian Ocean regions. The AOIP provides an avenue for ASEAN
to strike a balance between the group- and individual country-level dynamics:
collectively emphasizing ASEAN’s commitment to the openness, transparency,
inclusivity, equality, mutual respect, good governance, sovereignty, and other
principles and norms associated with the rules-based arrangements (a conver­
gence between ASEAN and the Indo-Pacific powers) yet keeping distance from
the Quad as a group. This creates space for individual ASEAN states to engage
individual members of the Quad and Quad partners at the bilateral level, on a
selective basis. Hence, most individual ASEAN states have collaborated with
individual Quad members on concrete, readily achievable areas crucial to their
respective elite’s governance functions, most notably pandemic assistance, de­
velop­mental opportunities (in connectivity-building, supply chains, digital economy,
etc.), and less-sensitive areas of defense cooperation (capacity-building, asset
transfer, and in some cases, policy exchanges and joint exercises. However, all
ASEAN states have avoided areas that might lead to strategic bifurcation. ASEAN
states, as a group and individually, have stayed away from the idea of Quad-Plus.
By pursuing such seemingly contradictory actions, ASEAN states underscore
their impartiality and inclusivity while creating space for buffering, middling
manoeuvrability and continuous cooperation for all regional states and their
partners. The bottom line is to avoid burning bridges and avoid putting all eggs

376 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

in any single power’s basket. The net effects are continuously expanding multilayered partnerships. The greater the layers of cooperation created on an inclusive
basis, the greater the space for cross-issue bargaining, mutual accommodation
and institutionalized coexistence among the partnering countries.
ASEAN’s institutional hedging, accordingly, has provided a focal point for
mitigating external risks while enabling its member states to concentrate on
their respective domestic priorities. The AOIP, which emphasizes the inclusive
principle and impartial stance vis-à-vis the big powers, helps to uphold ASEAN
neutrality and centrality in regional affairs. These serve to hedge and mitigate
a range of external risks (i.e., the dangers of entrapment, polarization, and
marginalization), while contributing to regional peace and stability.

Conclusions
This essay illuminated the modes and logic underpinning how and why hedging
is practiced at the group and collective level (beyond and above individual states),
with empirical examination of the use and limits of ASEAN-based multilateral
institutions in post-Cold War Asia. Its findings are threefold. First, group-level
hedging, like national-level hedging, is driven primarily by the goal of mitigating
and offsetting risks, rather than countering threats. Second, institutional
hedging and institutional balancing overlap in terms of means (i.e., institutional
arrangements as the primary tool), but they are distinguishable from each other
in terms of policy ends, organizing principles, and modus operandi. Third,
ASEAN’s collective hedging, which has been driven by the member states’
shared vulnerabilities, collective memories, and disadvantageous positions, is
a converged but not necessarily coordinated act. The convergences have led
ASEAN states to view ASEAN-based institutions as an indispensable—albeit
insufficient—means to engage big powers and manage other challenges by the
mutually reinforcing binding, buffering, and building processes.
These findings are significant for both theoretical and policy reasons.
Theoretically, they contribute to the ongoing debate on hedging in international
relations by highlighting risk and risk-mitigation as the primary driver of
hedging behavior at the international level. They also unpack the role and limits
of regional institutions as a smaller-state foreign policy tool in managing such
external risks as big-power rivalry and other challenges. Policy wise, the findings
shed light on how and to what extent ASEAN-led multilateralism in specific and
group hedging in particular can be seen as a source of regional peace and stability
at a time of hyper uncertainty.
ASEAN’s institutional hedging and smaller state-led multilateralism are
central to pursuing the “second best” option for the secondary states and com­
peting powers amid hyper uncertainty. Under the current circumstances, a

Hedging via Institutions 377

stable and sustained regional peace and prosperity is desired by all but not easily
achieved. A more feasible and relatively attainable scenario is maintaining the
status quo of an imperfect but peaceful order. Despite growing competition
and tension, inter-state differences are managed by diplomatic means, while
region-wide cooperation (e.g., RCEP) is explored and actualized. Multi-layered
partnerships evolve, enabling regional actors to coexist and collaborate across
domains and sectors. Armed conflict is avoided, while concrete cooperation is
actualized. ASEAN-led multilateral institutions, albeit inadequate and imperfect,
are the indispensable avenues that make these possible throughout the post-Cold
War decade. They have allowed the secondary states to hedge against the risks
associated with US-China competition, the rise of China, and other structural
uncertainties.
Therefore, although it may sound counter-intuitive, hedging at both group
and individual levels is good not only for the smaller states but also for all powers
and actors. Understandably, this is not an ideal situation for any of the competing
powers. But precisely because this is not the best scenario for any of the rivalling
powers, it is a more acceptable scenario for all the powers. Fundamentally,
hedging means that smaller states prefer to avoid aligning with one power
against another under the current circumstances. This ensures Southeast Asian
neutrality, prevents regional polarization, and enables countries of diverse
interests and identities to continue forging inclusive, region-wide cooperation,
thereby preserving regional peace and prosperity, even in the face of growing
power rivalries and the ongoing pandemic crisis (Kuik 2021a). Arthur Romano,
Jacob Werblow, and Audrey Williams (2022, 17) observe in these pages, “peace
is ever-evolving and ever-expanding.” Future studies should further explore
how the ever-evolving multi-level hedging can contribute to peace and why
the ever-expanding multi-layered partnerships may provide greater space for
assertive states to prioritize coexistence and cooperation over competition that is
increasingly excessive and disruptive.

Acknowledgments
This research was financially supported by the Institute for Peace and Unification
Studies (IPUS) at Seoul National University under the project of “Laying the
Groundwork for Unification.” I am grateful to Lee Jaehyon, Lee Seungjoo, Beth
W. Stewart, Fong Chin Wei, and the two anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments and inputs during the various stages of drafting this paper. I also thank
Zikri Rosli, Fikry A. Rahman, and Izyan Hay for superb research assistantship.
All shortcomings are my own.

378 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

References
Acharya, Amitav. 1997. “Ideas, Identity, and Institution‐building: From the ‘ASEAN Way’
to the ‘Asia‐Pacific Way’?” The Pacific Review 10 (3): 319-46.
Acharya, Amitav. 2001. Constructing a Security Community in Southeast Asia: ASEAN and
the Problem of Regional Order. New York: Routledge.
Acharya, Amitav. 2004. “How Ideas Spread: Whose Norms Matter? Norm Localization and
Institutional Change in Asian Regionalism.” International Organization 58 (2): 23975.
Acharya, Amitav. 2017. “The Myth of ASEAN Centrality?” Contemporary Southeast Asia
39 (2): 273-79.
Acharya, Amitav, and Alastair Iain Johnston, eds. 2007. Crafting Cooperation: Regional
International Institutions in Comparative Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Anwar, Dewi Fortuna. 1997. “ASEAN and Indonesia: Some Reflections.” Asian Journal of
Political Science 5 (1): 20-34.
Anwar, Dewi Fortuna. 2020. “Indonesia and the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific.”
International Affairs 96 (1): 111-29.
Arase, David. 2010. “Non-Traditional Security in China-ASEAN Cooperation: The
Institutionalization of Regional Security Cooperation and the Evolution of East Asian
Regionalism.” Asian Survey 50 (4): 808-33.
Atanassova-Cornelis, Elena. 2020. “Alignment Cooperation and Regional Security
Architecture in the Indo-Pacific.” The International Spectator: Italian Journal of
International Affairs 55 (1): 18-33.
Axelrod, Robert, and Robert O. Keohane. 1993. “Achieving Cooperation Under Anarchy:
Strategies and Institutions.” In Neorealism and Neoliberalism: The Contemporary
Debate, ed. David A. Baldwin, 85-115. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ba, Alice D. 2006. “Who’s Socializing Whom? Complex Engagement in Sino-ASEAN
Relations.” The Pacific Review 19 (2): 157-79.
Ba, Alice D. 2009. [Re]Negotiating East and Southeast Asia: Region, Regionalism, and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Ba, Alice D. 2016. “The Institutionalization of Southeast Asia: ASEAN and ASEAN
Centrality.” In Institutionalizing East Asia: Mapping and Reconfiguring Regional
Cooperation, eds. Alice D. Ba, Kuik Cheng-Chwee, and Sueo Sudo, 11-34. Oxon:
Routledge.
Ba, Alice D. 2017. “ASEAN and the Changing Regional Order: The ARF, ADMM, and
ADMM-Plus.” In Building ASEAN Community: Political–Security and Socio-cultural
Reflections ASEAN@50, Volume 4, eds. Aileen Baviera and Larry Maramis, 146-57.
Jakarta: Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia.
Balassa, Bela. 1961. The Theory of Economic Integration. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Baldwin, David A. 1993. “Neoliberalism, Neorealism, and World Politics.” In Neorealism
and Neoliberalism, ed. David A. Baldwin, 3-25. New York: Columbia University Press.
Beeson, Mark. 2014. Regionalism and Globalization in East Asia: Politics, Security and
Economic Development. 2nd ed. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Benedict, Burton, ed. 1967. Problems of Smaller Territories. London: Athlone Press for the

Hedging via Institutions 379

Institute of Commonwealth Studies.
Buszynski, Leszek. 1987. “ASEAN: A Changing Regional Role.” Asian Survey 27 (7): 764-86.
Caballero-Anthony, Mely. 2014. “Understanding ASEAN’s Centrality: Bases and Prospects
in an Evolving Regional Architecture.” The Pacific Review 27 (4): 563-84.
Caballero-Anthony, Mely, and Lina Gong. 2021. “Security Governance in East Asia and
China’s Response to COVID-19.” Fudan Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences
(14): 153-72.
Camroux, David. 2012. “Regionalism in Asia as Disguised Multilateralism: A Critical
Analysis of the East Asia Summit and the Trans-Pacific Partnership.” The International
Spectator Italian Journal of International Affairs 47 (1): 97-15.
Chang, Jun Yan. 2022. “Not between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea: Singapore’s
Hedging.” International Studies Quarterly 66 (3): 1-12.
Christensen, Thomas J. 2020. “No New Cold War: Why US-China Strategic Competition
Will Not be like the US-Soviet Cold War.” ASAN Institute for Policy Studies. September
2020.
Ciorciari, John D. 2011. “Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization.” Asian Survey 51 (5):
926-52.
Ciorciari, John D. 2017. “ASEAN and the Great Powers.” Contemporary Southeast Asia 39
(2): 252-58.
Ciorciari, John D. 2019. “The Variable Effectiveness of Hedging Strategies.” International
Relations of the Asia-Pacific 19 (3): 523-55.
Corry, Olaf. 2012. “Securitisation and ‘Riskification’: Second-Order Security and the
Politics of Climate Change.” Millennium: Journal of International Studies 40 (2): 23558.
Cook, Malcolm, and Nick Bisley. 2016. “Contested Asia and the East Asia Summit.” ISEAS
Perspective (46): 1-8.
Da Cunha, Derek, ed. 2000. Southeast Asian Perspectives on Security. Singapore: Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies.
Darby, Phillip. 1973. “Stability Mechanisms in South-East Asia: I. Prospects for Regionalism.”
International Affairs 49 (1): 23-34.
Dent, Christopher M. 2016. East Asian Regionalism. 2nd ed. London: Routledge.
Deudney, Daniel. 1996. “Binding Sovereigns: Authorities, Structures, and Geopolitics in
Philadelphian System.” In State Sovereignty as Social Construct, eds. Thomas Biersteker
and Cynthia Weber. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Didier, Brice. 2021. “The European Union and the Liberal International Order in the Age
of ‘America First’: Attempted Hedging and the Willingness-Capacity Gap.” Journal of
Contemporary European Research 17 (1): 23-42.
Dosch, Jörn, and Manfred Mols. 1998. “Thirty Years of ASEAN: Achievements and
Challenges.” The Pacific Review 11 (2): 167-82.
Dosch, Jörn, and Frederick Kliem, eds. Forthcoming. The Elgar Companion to ASEAN.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Downes, Andrew S. 2004. “The Trade Environment and Small Countries.” World Trade
Review 3 (3): 416-21.
Doyle, Michael W. 1997. Ways of War and Peace: Realism, Liberalism, and Socialism. New
York, NY: Norton & Company.
Emmers, Ralf. 2003. Cooperative Security and the Balance of Power in ASEAN and ARF.

380 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

London: Routledge.
Emmers, Ralf. 2014. “ASEAN’s Search for Neutrality in the South China Sea.” Asian Journal
of Peacebuilding 2 (1): 61-77.
Emmers, Ralf, Joseph Chinyong Liow, and Tan See Seng. 2010. The East Asia Summit and
the Regional Security Architecture. Baltimore, Maryland: Maryland School of Law.
Fennell, Shailaja. 2022. “Building on Bandung: What Does Cooperation Do for Regional
Engagement?” Asian Journal of Peacebuilding 10 (1): 87-105.
Friedrichs, Jorg. 2012. “East Asian Regional Security.” Asian Survey 52 (4): 754-76.
Goh, Evelyn. 2005. Meeting the China Challenge. Washington, D.C.: East West Center
Washington.
Goh, Evelyn. 2007. “Great Powers and Hierarchical Order in Southeast Asia: Analyzing
Regional Security Strategies.” International Security 32 (3): 113-57.
Goldstein, Avery. 2020. “US–China Rivalry in the Twenty-First Century: Déjà Vu and Cold
War II.” China International Strategy Review (2): 48-62.
Grieco, Joseph M. 1988. “Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation: Realist Critique of the
Newest Liberal Institutionalism.” International Organization 42 (3): 485-507.
Grieco, Joseph M. 1993. “Understanding the Problem of International Cooperation: The
Limits of Liberal Institutionalism and the Future of Realist Theory.” In Neorealism and
Neoliberalism, ed. David A. Baldwin. New York: Columbia University Press.
Grynberg, Roman, ed. 2006. WTO at the Margins: Small States and the Multilateral Trading
System. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Haacke, Jürgen. 2009. “The ASEAN Regional Forum: From Dialogue to Practical Security
Cooperation?” Cambridge Review of International Affairs 22 (3): 427-49.
Haacke, Jürgen. 2019. “The Concept of Hedging and Its Application to Southeast Asia: A
Critique and a Proposal for a Modified Conceptual and Methodological Framework.”
International Relations of the Asia-Pacific 19 (3): 375-417.
Haacke, Jürgen, and John D. Ciorciari. 2019. “Hedging in International Relations: An Intro
Jürgen duction.” International Relations of the Asia-Pacific 19 (3): 367-74.
Haacke, Jürgen, and John D. Ciorciari. 2022. “Hedging as Risk Management: Insights from
Works on Alignment, Riskification, and Strategy.” 124. IPC Working Paper Series.
Haas, Ernst B. 1964. Beyond the Nation State: Functionalism and International Organization.
Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Haas, Ernst B. 1980. “Why Collaborate: Issue-Linkage and International Regimes.” World
Politics 32 (3): 357-405.
Haftendorn, Helga, Robert O. Keohane, and Celeste A. Wallander, eds. 1999. Imperfect
Unions: Security Institutions Over Time and Space. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
He, Kai. 2008. “Institutional Balancing and International Relans Theory: Economic
Interdependence and Balance of Power Strategies in Southeast Asia.” European
Journal of International Relations 14 (3): 489-518.
He, Kai, and Huiyun Feng. 2020. “International Institutions, Institutional Balancing, and
Peaceful Order Transition.” Ethics and International Affairs 34 (4): 487-501.
Heng, Yee-Kuang. 2022. “Japan in the Gulf: Hedging between Washington and Tehran?”
The International Spectator, 1-15.
Hoo, Tiang Boon. 2016. “The Hedging Prong in India’s Evolving China Strategy.” Journal of
Contemporary China 25 (101): 792-804.
Hurrell, Andrew. 2000. “Some Reflections on the Role of Intermediate Powers in

Hedging via Institutions 381

International Institutions.” In Paths to Power: Foreign Policy Strategies of Intermediate
States, eds. Andrew Hurrell, Andrew F. Cooper, Guadalupe González González,
Ricardo Ubiraci Sennes, and Srini Sitaraman, 3-4. Washington, DC: The Woodrow
Wilson International Center for Scholars.
Ikenberry, G. John. 2001. After Victory: Institutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding
of Order After Major Wars. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ingebritsen, Christine. 2002. “Norm Entrepreneurs: Scandinavia’s Role in World Politics.”
Cooperation and Conflict 37 (1): 11-23.
Jackson, Van. 2014. “Power, Trust, and Network Complexity: Three Logics of Hedging in
Asian Security.” International Relations of the Asia-Pacific 14 (3): 331-56.
Johnston, Alastair Iain, and Robert S. Ross. 1999. “Conclusion.” In Engaging China: The
Management of an Emerging Power, eds. Alastair Iain Johnston and Robert S. Ross.
279-302. London: Routledge.
Jones, David Martin, and Nicole Jenne. 2022. “Hedging and Grand Strategy in Southeast
Asian Foreign Policy.” International Relations of the Asia-Pacific 22 (2): 205-35.
Jones, Lee. 2010. “ASEAN’s Unchanged Melody? The Theory and Practice of ‘NonInterference’ in Southeast Asia.” The Pacific Review 23 (4): 479-502.
Kahler, Miles. 1992. “Multilateralism with Small and Large Numbers.” International
Organization 46 (3): 681-708.
Katsumata, Hiro. 2003. “Reconstruction of Diplomatic Norms in Southeast Asia: The Case
for Strict Adherence to the “ASEAN Way.”” Contemporary Southeast Asia 25 (1): 10421.
Katzenstein, Peter J. 1997. “Introduction: Asian Regionalism in Comparative Perspective.”
In Network Power: Japan and Asia, eds. Peter J. Katzenstein and Takashi Shiraishi.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Katzenstein, Peter J. 2005. A World of Regions. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Keohane, Robert O. 1969. “Lilliputians’ Dilemmas: Small States in International Politics.”
International Organization 23 (2): 291-310.
Keohane, Robert O. 1986. “Reciprocity in International Relations.” International
Organization 40 (1): 1-27.
Keohane, Robert O. 1989. International Institutions and State Power: Essays in International
Relations Theory. New York: Routledge.
Keohane, Robert O. 1990. “Multilateralism: An Agenda for Research.” International
Journal: Canada’s Journal of Global Policy Analysis 45 (4): 731-64.
Keohane, Robert O., ed. 2002. Power and Governance in a Partially Globalized World.
London and New York: Routledge.
Keohane, Robert O., and Joseph S. Nye. 1977. Power and Interdependence: World Politics in
Transition. Boston: Little, Brown & Co.
Keohane, Robert O., and Lisa L. Martin. 1995. “The Promise of Institutionalist Theory.”
International Security 20 (1): 39-51.
Khong, Yuen Foong. 1997. “Making Bricks without Straw in the Asia Pacific?” The Pacific
Review 10 (2): 289-300.
Khong, Yuen Foong. 2004. “Coping with Strategic Uncertainty: The Role of Institutions
and Soft Balancing in Southeast Asia’s Post-Cold War Strategy.” In Rethinking Security
in East Asia: Identity, Power, and Efficiency, eds. J. J. Suh, Peter J. Katzenstein, and
Allen Carlson, 172-208. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

382 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

Khong, Yuen Foong, and Helen Nesadurai. 2007. “Hanging Together, Institutional Design,
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia: AFTA and the ARF.” In Crafting Cooperation:
Regional International Institutions in Comparative Perspective, 32-82. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kikuchi, Tsutomu. 2015. “Collective Hedging: What Drives Regional Institution-Building
in the Asia Pacific?” Asian Leadership in Policy and Governance (24): 45-67.
Kim, Min-hyung. 2021. “Hedging between the US and China? South Korea’s IdeologyDriven Behavior and Its Implications for National Security.” International Relations of
the Asia-Pacific. https://doi.org/10.1093/irap/lcab020.
Kim, Sangbae. 2014. Roles of Middle Power in East Asia: A Korean Perspective. Seoul: East
Asia Institute.
Koga, Kei. 2016. Reinventing Regional Security Institutions in Asia and Africa: Power Shifts,
Ideas, and Institutional Change. New York: Routledge.
Koga, Kei. 2018. “The Concept of ‘Hedging’ Revisited: The Case of Japan’s Foreign Policy
Strategy in East Asia’s Power Shift.” International Studies Review 20 (4): 633-60.
Koga, Kei. 2022. Managing Great Power Politics: ASEAN, Institutional Strategy, and the
South China Sea. Global Political Transitions. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan.
Köllner, Patrick. 2021. “Australia and New Zealand Recalibrate Their China Policies:
Convergence and Divergence.” The Pacific Review 34 (3): 405-36.
Koremenos, Barbara, Charles Lipson, and Duncan Snidal. 2001. “The Rational Design of
International Institutions.” International Organization 55 (4): 761-99.
Korolev, Alexander. 2016. “Systemic Balancing and Regional Hedging: China–Russia
Relations.” The Chinese Journal of International Politics 9 (4): 375-97.
Krasner, Stephen D., ed. 1983. International Regimes. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2008. “The Essence of Hedging: Malaysia and Singapore’s Response to
a Rising China.” Contemporary Southeast Asia 30 (2): 159-85.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2016a. “How Do Weaker States Hedge? Unpacking ASEAN States’
Alignment Behavior towards China.” Journal of Contemporary China 25 (100): 500514.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2016b. “Malaysia Between the US and China: What Do Weaker States
Hedge Against?” Asian Politics & Policy 8 (1): 155-77.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2018. “Power Transitions Threaten ASEAN’s Hedging Role.” East Asia
Forum Quarterly 10 (2): 22-23.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2020. “Hedging in Post-Pandemic Asia: What, How, and Why?” The
Asan Forum, June 6. https://theasanforum.org/hedging-in-post-pandemic-asia-whathow-and-why/ (accessed June 6, 2020).
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2021a. “Getting Hedging Right: A Small-State Perspective.” China
International Strategy Review 3: 300-315.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2021b. “The Twin Chessboards of US-China Rivalry: Impact on the
Geostrategic Supply and Demand in Post-Pandemic Asia.” Asian Perspective 45 (1):
157-76.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2022a. “Shades of Grey: Riskification and Hedging in the IndoPacific.” The Pacific Review: 1-34.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee. 2022b. “Southeast Asian States and ASEAN: A Center of Courtships
and Cooperation.” In International Relations of Asia, edited by David Shambaugh, 3rd
ed., 189-227. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

Hedging via Institutions 383

Kuik, Cheng-Chwee, Nor Azizan Idris, and Abd Rahim Md Nor. 2012. “The China Factor
in the US ‘Reengagement’ With Southeast Asia: Drivers and Limits of Converged
Hedging.” Asian Politics & Policy 4 (3): 315-44.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee, and Chen-Dong Tso. 2022. “Hedging in Non-Traditional Security:
The Case of Vietnam’s Disaster Response Cooperation.” The Chinese Journal of
International Politics: 1-21.
Kuik, Cheng-Chwee and Fikry A. Rahman. Forthcoming. “ASEAN’s Dialogue Mechanisms:
Institutionalizing the Quest for ASEAN Centrality.” In The Elgar Companion to
ASEAN, eds. Jörn Dosch and Frederick Kliem. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Kurus, Bilson. 1993. “Understanding ASEAN: Benefits and Raison D’être.” Asian Survey 33
(8): 819-31.
Laksmana, Evan. 2020. “Whose Centrality? ASEAN and the Quad in the Indo-Pacific.” The
Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs 3 (5): 1-13.
Lampton, David M. 2021. “Engagement with China: A Eulogy and Reflections on a
Gathering Storm.” In Engaging China: Fifty Years of Sino-American Relations, ed.
Anne Thurston, 391-422. New York: Columbia University Press.
Lee, Seungjoo. 2016. “Institutional Balancing and the Politics of Mega-FTAs in East Asia.”
Asian Survey 56 (6): 1055-76.
Lee, Sook Jong, ed. 2016. Transforming Global Governance with Middle Power Diplomacy:
South Korea’s Role in the 21st Century. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Leifer, Michael. 1989. ASEAN and the Security of Southeast Asia. London: Routledge.
Leifer, Michael. 1996. The ASEAN Regional Forum: Extending ASEAN’s Model of Regional
Security. Adelphi Paper no. 302. London: Oxford University Press for IISS.
Lim, Darren J., and Zack Cooper. 2015. “Reassessing Hedging: The Logic of Alignment in
East Asia.” Security Studies 24 (4): 696-27.
Mahbubani, Kishore, and Jeffery Sng. 2017. The ASEAN Miracle: A Catalyst for Peace.
Singapore: NUS Press.
Mastanduno, Michael. 1991. “Do Relative Gains Matter? America’s Response to Japanese
Industrial Policy.” International Security 16 (1): 73-113.
Mearsheimer, John J. 1995. “The False Promise of International Institutions.” International
Security 19 (3): 5-49.
Mukherjee, Anit. 2013. “ADMM-Plus: Talk Shop or Key to Asia-Pacific Security.” The
Diplomat, August 22, https://thediplomat.com/2013/08/admm-plus-talk-shop-orkey-to-asia-pacific-security/ (accessed January 28, 2022).
Mueller, Lukas Maximilian. 2021. “Challenges to ASEAN Centrality and Hedging in
Connectivity Governance—Regional and National Pressure Points.” The Pacific Review
34 (5): 747-77.
Narine, Shaun. 2002. Explaining ASEAN: Regionalism in Southeast Asia. Colorado: Lynne
Rienner Publishers.
Natalegawa, Marty. 2018. Does ASEAN Matter? A View from Within. Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing.
Oba, Mie. 2019. “Further Development of Asian Regionalism: Institutional Hedging in an
Uncertain Era.” Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies 8 (2): 125-40.
Olson, Mancur. 1971. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

384 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

Pant, Harsh V., and Yogesh Joshi. 2017. “Indo-US Relations under Modi: The Strategic
Logic Underlying the Embrace.” International Affairs 93 (1): 133-46.
Paul, T. V. 2005. “Soft Balancing in the Age of U.S. Primacy.” International Security 30 (1):
46-71.
Payne, Tony. 1987. “Economic Issues.” In Politics, Security and Development in Small States,
eds. Colin Clarke and Tony Payne, 50-62. London: Allen and Unwin.
Pempel, T. J. 2010. “Soft Balancing, Hedging, and Institutional Darwinism: The EconomicSecurity Nexus and East Asian Regionalism.” Journal of East Asian Studies 10 (2): 20938.
Peters, Ingo. 1999. “The OCSE and German Policy: A Study in How Institutions Matter.”
In Imperfect Unions: Security Institutions over Space and Time, eds. Haftendorn, R.
Keohane, and Celeste A. Wallander. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pitakdumrongkit, Kaewkamol. 2015. “Co-chairing International Negotiations: The Case of
the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization.” The Pacific Review 28 (4): 577-605.
Pitakdumrongkit, Kaewkamol. 2019a. “Co-chairing Asia-Pacific Defence Diplomacy: The
Case ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus.” Australian Journal of International
Affairs 73 (1): 64-81.
Pitakdumrongkit, Kaewkamol. 2019b. “RCEP: The Deal That Must Not Fail.” RSIS
Commentary (225): 1-3.
Quah, Danny. 2019. “Great Power Competition in the Marketplace for World Order.” Lee
Kuan Yew, School of Public Policy Working Paper. www.DannyQuah.com/Quilled/
Output/Quah-D-2019-Great-Power-CompetitionMarketplace-World-Order.pdf
(accessed September 6, 2020).
Ringsmose, Jens, and Mark Webber. 2020. “Hedging their Bets? The Case for a European
Pillar in NATO.” Defence Studies 20 (4): 295-317.
Romano, Arthur, Jacob Werblow, and Audrey Williams. 2022. “Evolving Conceptualizations
of Peace Education in Hiroshima, Japan.” Asian Journal of Peacebuilding 10 (2): 1-24.
Ruggie, John Gerard, ed. 1993. Multilateralism Matters: The Theory and Praxis of an
Institutional Form. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rüland, Anchalee. 2022. Norms in Conflict: Southeast Asia’s Response to Human Rights
Violations in Myanmar. Kentucky: The University Press of Kentucky.
Rüland, Jürgen. 2011. “Southeast Asian Regionalism and Global Governance: ‘Multilateral
Utility’ or ‘Hedging Utility’?” Contemporary Southeast Asia 33 (1): 83-112.
Sahashi, Ryo. 2020. “Japan’s Strategy amid US-China Confrontation.” China International
Strategy Review 2: 232-45.
Schiff, Maurice. 2001. Regional Integration and Development in Small States. Policy
Research Working Paper No. WPS 2797. Washington, DC: Development Research
Group, World Bank.
Schweller, Randall L. 1999. “Managing the Rise of Great Powers: History and Theory.” In
Engaging China: The Management of an Emerging Power, eds. A. Johnston and R.
Ross. 1-32. New York: Routledge.
Scobell, Andrew. 2021. “Constructing a U.S.-China Rivalry in the Indo-Pacific and
Beyond.” Journal of Contemporary China 30 (127): 69-84.
Shambaugh, David. 2020. Where Great Powers Meet: America and China in Southeast Asia.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Shanmugam, K. 2015. “ASEAN and its Place in the Global Architecture.” Horizons: Journal

Hedging via Institutions 385

of International Relations and Sustainable Development 2: 116-25.
Sim, Li-Chen, and Farkhod Aminjonov. 2022. “Statecraft in the Steppes: Central Asia’s
Relations with China.” Journal of Contemporary China: 1-16.
Simon, Sheldon W. 2008. “ASEAN and Multilateralism: The Long, Bumpy Road to
Community.” Contemporary Southeast Asia 30 (2): 264-92.
Strating, Rebecca. 2019. “Small Power Hedging in an Era of Great-power Politics: Southeast
Asian Responses to China’s Pursuit of Energy Security.” Asian Studies Review 44 (1):
97-116.
Stubbs, Richard. 2002. “ASEAN Plus Three: Emerging East Asian Regionalism?” Asian
Survey 42 (3): 440-55.
Tan, See Seng. 2015. Multilateral Asian Security Architecture: Non-ASEAN Stakeholders.
London: Routledge.
Tan, See Seng. 2016. “The ADMM-Plus: Regionalism That Works?” Asia Policy (22): 70-75.
Tan, See Seng. 2020. “Consigned to Hedge: South-East Asia and America’s ‘Free and Open
Indo- Pacific’ Strategy.” International Affairs 96 (1): 131-48.
Tang, Siew Mun. 2016. “ASEAN and the ADMM-Plus: Balancing between Strategic
Imperatives and Functionality.” Asia Policy (22): 76-82.
Taylor, Brendan. 2016. “A Pragmatic Partner: Australia and the ADMM-Plus.” Asia Policy
(22): 83-88.
Terada, Takashi. 2003. “Constructing an ‘East Asian’ Concept and Growing Regional
Identity: From EAEC to ASEAN+3.” The Pacific Review 16 (2): 251-77.
Terada, Takashi. 2018. “RCEP Negotiations and the Implications for the US.” NBR
Commentary, December 18. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Takashi-Terada/
publication/330090815_RCEP_Negotiations_and_the_Implications_for_the_
United_States/links/5c2ce2f6299bf12be3a84100/RCEP-Negotiations-and-theImplications-for-the-United-States.pdf (accessed December 10, 2021).
Tow, William T., and Brendan Taylor. 2010. “What is Asian Security Architecture?” Review
of International Studies 36 (1): 95-116.
Tunsjø, Øystein. 2010. “Hedging Against Oil Dependency: New Perspectives on China’s
Energy Security Policy.” International Relations 24 (1): 25-45.
Tunsjø, Øystein. 2013. Security and Profit in China’s Energy Policy: Hedging against Risk.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Van der Kroef, Justus M. 1978. “ASEAN Security and Development: Some Paradoxes and
Symbols.” Asian Affairs 9 (2): 143-60.
Valockova, Barbora. 2021. “ASEAN’s Limited Centrality in Connectivity: Managing
Infrastructure Competition between China and Japan.” Asia Policy 28 (1): 129-53.
Wang, Jisi. 2021. “The Plot against China? How Beijing Sees the New Washington
Consensus.” Foreign Affairs 100 (4): 48-57.
Wendt, Alexander. 1999. Social Theory of International Politics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Cheng-Chwee Kuik is Professor and Head of the Centre for Asian Studies, Institute of Malaysian and
International Studies, National University of Malaysia. He is concurrently a Non-Resident Fellow at
Johns Hopkins’ Foreign Policy Institute. Dr. Kuik’s research focuses on small-state alignment behavior,

386 Cheng-Chwee Kuik

ASEAN-based multilateralism, and Asian security. Cheng-Chwee is guest editor of “Southeast Asian
Responses to China’s Belt and Road Initiative” (Asian Perspective, 2021) and co-author of Rivers of
Iron: Railroads and Chinese Power in Southeast Asia (2020). Email: cckuik@gmail.com
Submitted: July 29, 2022; Revised: October 11, 2022; Accepted: October 13, 2022

