Research Article

Challenges Toward a
Rule-based Order in
the South China Sea

Journal of Asian Security
and International Affairs
10(2) 169–189, 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
in.sagepub.com/journals-permissions-india
DOI: 10.1177/23477970231173539
journals.sagepub.com/home/aia

Ai Nhan Ho1
Abstract
This article discusses and analyses the various challenges that countries are facing
in maintaining a rules-based order as an important condition for the direction of
peace, stability, and development of the South China Sea area. Within the scope
of the article, the challenges identified and discussed are (a) China’s assertive
actions and behaviours; (b) negative international practices; (c) the ambiguity of
international law provisions, particularly the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea; (d) ineffective international law enforcement; and (e) challenges
from the counterbalance and competition for international influence among great
powers. Given these challenges and the increasingly complex situation of the region,
the research demonstrates that the future of any rules-based order in the South
China Sea will be increasingly contested, in which the efforts and determination of
a few individual regional countries are far from enough.
Keywords
Rule-based order, South China Sea, the UNCLOS, China, the United States,
ASEAN

Introduction
Maintaining a peaceful, stable, and developing South China Sea is what many
countries, both inside and outside the region, are seeking. With the favourable
geographical position and natural features of the South China Sea, the peace and
stability of the region will bring many socio-economic benefits to countries in the
region as well as the prosperity and development of the world. To that end, one
of the critical factors is to effectively develop and maintain a rules-based order in
the South China Sea. An order in which states behave towards each other based
1

Department of International Law, University of Law—Hue University, Hue City, Vietnam

Corresponding author:
Ai Nhan Ho, Department of International Law, University of Law—Hue University, Vo Van Kiet
Road, Hue City 49100, Vietnam.
E-mail: hnhanai@hueuni.edu.vn

170		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

on progressive principles and standards widely recognised in international law and
practice. An order that does not recognise and tolerate acts of hegemony, threats to
use force, and violations of justice. An order that allows states to equally enjoy their
legitimate rights and interests within the framework of international law and norms.
In recent years, however, the dispute situation in the South China Sea has
changed in a complicated direction with a series of unilateral actions by the
countries involved. Notably, with its growing economic and military power, China
has continuously demonstrated its hegemonic role in illegally encroaching,
reclamation, and militarising many geographical features in the South China Sea,
in order to strengthen its position in the region (Strating, 2020, p. 5). In addition,
this country also regularly threatens and obstructs other regional countries’ rights
to use the sea and ocean (Lye & Ha, 2018, pp. 2–3; Kuok, 2019, pp. 4–5), makes
illegal claims to its sovereignty and jurisdiction in the South China Sea, and
imposes laws contrary to international law and norms (Nguyen, 2021; McLaughlin,
2020). These have threatened the rule of law, justice, and the international legal
order of the today civilised and progressive world.
Besides China with growing ambitions and expansion plans, the ambiguity of
international law provisions and the ineffectiveness of the current international law
enforcement mechanism have hindered the development of a rules-based order in
the South China Sea. In addition, the practice of negative relations between great
powers and smaller states in solving global problems and strategic competition for
international influence among great powers have also created difficulties and
obstacles to maintaining a rules-based order in the South China Sea.
The article discusses and analyses the various challenges that countries are
facing in maintaining a rules-based order as an essential condition for the direction
of peace, stability, and development of the South China Sea area. Within the scope
of the article, the challenges identified and discussed are (a) China’s assertive
actions and behaviours; (b) negative international practices; (c) the ambiguity of
international law provisions; (d) ineffective international law enforcement; and
(e) challenges from the counterbalance and competition for international influence
among great powers. Given these challenges, the research demonstrates that the
future of any rules-based order in the South China Sea will be increasingly
contested, in which the efforts and determination of a few individual regional
countries is far from enough.

Overview of South China Sea Disputes and
the Settlement Process
Considered a place rich in natural resources and trade, the South China Sea has
been a strategically significant area for countries inside and outside the region.
In addition to an estimation of approximately $5 trillion in global trade flows
through the region each year (Cordesman et al., 2019), the South China Sea
has been known as an area of abundant natural gas and hydrocarbon reserves
(Hayton, 2015, p. 149). Countries including China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei,
the Philippines, and Taiwan have been involved in various complex disputes over

Ho

171

islands, rocks, reefs, and archipelagos in the South China Sea (Strating, 2020,
pp. 5–8). The South China Sea disputes are complex, as they cover different aspects
of maritime conflicts and arguments, including territory sovereignty, overlapping
territories, and the interpretation and application of international law, notably the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (the UNCLOS).
The disputes over the South China Sea have become increasingly complicated
that have led to tensions that threaten the peace and prosperity of the region,
especially since the legal proceedings initiated by the Philippines in 2013 to
challenge China’s unreasonable claims and illegal activities in the South China
Sea (The South China Sea Arbitration, 2016). The Arbitral Award in 2016 rejected
almost all claims made by China in the South China Sea. It brought hope to
countries in the region in managing conflicts, reducing tensions, and settling
disputes. However, after six years since the Award, while Vietnam and ASEAN
are patiently negotiating with China to find a solution to the disputes, China has
increased its encroachment and reclamation activities and militarisation of
maritime features (Strating, 2020, p. 5), provocation and obstruction of other
states’ rights to use the sea (Lye & Ha, 2018, pp. 2–3; Nguyen, 2021). That amount
of time has also witnessed a strong reaction from the international community to
China’s unreasonable and illegal claims, of which the ‘battle of diplomatic notes
in 2020’ (Odom, 2020; Nguyen, 2022) calling China to respect and implement the
Arbitral Award, was a typical example. In addition, the United States—the country
that most strongly opposes China’s claims—has continued to strengthen its
presence in the South China Sea with the ‘Freedom of Navigation Operations’
campaign (FONOPs) (United States Ocean Policy, 1983) to contest and challenge
China’s claims that are believed to impede the right of ‘freedom of navigation’.
For nearly three decades, a Code of Conduct (COC) has often been considered
an appropriate approach for China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) to manage conflicts, deescalate tensions, and maintain peace and
security in the South China Sea (Hayton, 2021). However, despite being started
more than 25 years ago, the COC negotiation process has taken place slowly, with
different positions and motivations of countries involved (Chang, 2020). In 2002,
China and ASEAN could not agree on many important issues; therefore, they
came to accept the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea
and agreed to continue the negotiations for a COC in the future (Nguyen &
Nguyen, 2015). After years of delay and hesitation, in 2013, China unexpectedly
agreed to begin formal consultations on a COC. Furthermore, it took nearly four
years for Chinese and ASEAN officials to agree on a framework for a COC that
would serve as the basis for negotiations. However, it was not until 2018 that the
parties agreed on the single draft negotiating text of the COC in the South China
Sea (the ‘single draft’) as the foundation for the ongoing negotiation process for
concluding a COC (Thayer, 2018). A few more years have passed since the single
draft was introduced, but no substantial negotiation progress has been made, and
the future of the COC still remains uncertain.
Regionally, keeping peace and stability has been seen as critically significant
for the development and prosperity of the South China Sea. To that end,
maintaining and strengthening a rule-based order might contribute to managing

172		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

conflicts, deescalating tensions, and building peace for the region. Nevertheless,
first, what is a rule-based order?

On the Concept of a Rule-based Order
The term ‘rule-based order’ is believed to be traced back to the post-World War
II world order with the advent of the United Nations and related institutions
(Basu, 2021). The rule-based order is based on a framework of liberal political
and economic rules embodied in a network of international organisations and
regulations and shaped and enforced by the most powerful nations (Chatham
House—The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2015). This is a term
associated with the United States’ view of the international order, including the
liberal international order and the international rule of law (Basu, 2021), in which
the United Nations is considered to be the centre of this order (Stefan, 2019). So,
how is the concept of ‘rules-based order’ understood?
At its most basic, the rules-based order (RBO) refers to the rules, standards,
and institutions that govern and shape the behaviours and interactions of sovereign
states and other actors in the global system (Jorgensen, 2018, p. 6). In the
international community, countless principles, regulations, and practices have
been formed and recognised to regulate the multifaceted relations between states
and other subjects of international law. The implementation and observance of
these principles and rules will create an order toward which states and other
international community actors work and cooperate. In an RBO, countries commit
to acting according to agreed rules and standards. It is an order that is agreed upon
and changed only through multilateral institutions and diplomacy (Layton, 2021)
aiming at more progressive values and norms.
In general, RBO is a concept that covers different areas of international
relations, including international law, regional security arrangements, trade
agreements, immigration protocols, cultural arrangements, transnational crime
issues, challenges to non-traditional security, or the problem of responding to
natural disasters on a global scale (United Nations Association of Australia, 2017).
The formation of an RBO is primarily aimed at the interests of the international
community, such as creating cooperative relationships between countries to
ensure security, stability, and welfare for all. Therefore, the ultimate goal of the
RBO in today’s world is to ensure that all nations can share in the benefits of
peace and prosperity (Jorgensen, 2018, pp. 6–7). To that end, states and other
actors must act in unison according to recognised and agreed international
principles and standards. For example, within the context of maritime disputes,
the concept of RBO is simplified by late Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan in
his 2014 Shangri-La Dialogue remarks: (a) states shall make their claims based on
international law; (b) states shall not use force or coercion in advancing their
claims; and (c) states shall seek to settle disputes by peaceful means (Shinzo
Abe’s Keynote, 2014). In other words, they must limit themselves to an ‘order’ for
their interests and the common benefits of the international community. More
importantly, those behaviours and actions must gradually become countries’

Ho

173

habits (Alexandra, 2021), rather than binding rules, so they can effectively help
form and maintain an RBO.
In short, it can be understood that RBO is an international order developed
from the observance of international rules, principles, and practices by states and
other subjects widely agreed upon in the international community. An RBO
usually aims at the common interests of the international community common
interests, protects the country’s legitimate interests, maintains peace and security,
and promotes the rule of law and justice.

Challenges to a Rules-based Order in the
South China Sea
Challenges Coming from China’s Assertive Actions and Behaviours
Want it or not, China is an important player in the dispute situation as well as in
maintaining an RBO in the South China Sea. In recent decades, however, China
has regularly violated and undermined the law and threatened the international
legal order in consolidating its power and influence in the South China Sea (Kuok,
2019). In fact, China ignores and even opposes an RBO in the South China Sea
and instead calls for building a common future for mankind (Alexander, 2021)—a
general, vague, and propaganda-laden goal.
The international practice has shown that many countries tend to comply with
and apply international law when it benefits them and ignore it when they feel it
is disadvantageous (Guzman, 2002; Koh, 1997). China may be a prime example
of this phenomenon. For example, research reveals that since 1973, China has
gradually moved from supporting the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to solid opposition to the application of the rules and
regulations enshrined in this global document (Beeson & Chubb, 2019). This
stems mainly from the fact that China has regularly claims to sovereignty that are
contrary to the provisions and standards of the UNCLOS, such as the ‘nine-dash
line’ claim (Nguyen & Nguyen, 2012; Wang, 2015), the ‘four-sha’ claim (Julian
& Chris, 2017) or drawing an ‘archipelagic baseline’ (United State Department of
States, 2020) for the Paracel Islands. Therefore, supporting the UNCLOS also
means going against these claims, which is seen to undermine the realisation of
China’s ambitions in the South China Sea.
On the other hand, by challenging international law, China is also threatening
an RBO in the South China Sea. For example, China has misinterpreted and
misused the provisions of the UNCLOS when conducting the reclamation and
construction of artificial islands and militarising these areas. This is challenging
to international law and norms that have been widely developed, agreed, and
applied by the international community, thereby leading to the risk of disrupting
an existing international order (Alexander, 2021). However, studies have also
shown that China’s illegal claims and actions are not aimed at reversing the entire
international legal system but only at areas closely related to its strategic security
and interests (Jacobson & Medcalf, 2015). But China’s claims and behaviour in

174		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

the South China Sea are undermining the basic foundation of international law on
peace and security (Basu, 2021), and causing negative impacts on the legitimate
rights and interests of other countries in the region.
In the South China Sea, perhaps realising that it would not be beneficial to
maintain an RBO, China sought to break out of this order and gradually work
towards forming another. For example, China seeks to exclude the involvement of
a third party, primarily the United States and its allies, from the South China Sea
issues. This will allow China to build a new order—probably an order that is based
on the power of political and economic influence. Quite often, China presents itself
as a champion of open trade and multilateralism while suggesting an evolution of
the existing system to reflect a different configuration of the relationship between
order and justice at the global level (Sharma, 2020, p. 2). It is understandable for
rising powers like China and India to bring pressure to change some rules and their
interpretation of their perceived interests (Graham et al., 2018, p. 6). However, in
practice, it is almost unlikely that China will succeed in establishing a competitive
world order because it does not often have the necessary level of goodwill and
international support (Jacobson & Medcalf, 2015). Further, in the context of the
South China Sea, there might not be a better and more acceptable alternative order
than the current one built on the foundation of the UNCLOS—a globally regconised
instrument, and other relevant international agreements.
Nevertheless, China’s intention to prevent third-party participation in the
South China Sea is often expressed through diplomatic statements (Blanchard &
Rajagopalan, 2016). In addition, in the process of negotiating a COC in the South
China Sea with the Association of Southeast Asia Nations (ASEAN), China also
made no secret of its intention to exclude third-party involvement in the South
China Sea, both in terms of economic development and military presence and
exercises (Thayer, 2018). Therefore, the employment of military, financial, and
economic influence to undermine the RBO is a dangerous development for the
South China Sea in particular and the Indo-Pacific region in general. Then,
international law, norms, standards, and principles are in danger of being pushed
aside to give way to hegemonic and violated acts (Alexander, 2021). Given the
current enhanced strategic competition in the region, the South China Sea without
the participation and involvement of third parties would probably mean the
absence of rule of law and justice.
As China consolidates its military power to match its economic growth over
the past several decades, it has grown increasingly assertive in the South China
Sea. China’s behaviour over the past several decades in the South China Sea has
tended to be repetitive and increasing in intensity and frequency. However, they
all have one thing in common: they show disobedience to the law and disregard
for international public opinion (Odom, 2020; Singh, 2020, pp. 2–3). One example
of this fact is China’s reaction and attitude towards the South China Sea Arbitration
and Award. China’s rejection of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction and refusion to
enforce the Award has set an unfavourable and dangerous precedent for an RBO
in the South China Sea. Further, after the Arbitral ruling, China has continued to
block Filipinos from accessing fishing grounds within the Philippines Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ), sent its fishing boats into Indonesia’s EEZ, and regularly

Ho

175

harassed United States navy vessels passing its artificial islands (Greg et al., 2017,
p. 4). China’s response and behaviour have demonstrated the ability of larger
powers to ignore international rules and institutions when it is not in their
perceived interests, which in turn indirectly undermines the role of international
law in establishing maritime order (Strating, 2020, p. 37). More dangerously, this
practice will cause injustice to other countries in the region, as they will encounter
powerful obstacles to exercising their legitimate rights recognised and permitted
by international law over the exploitation and use of the ocean.
In summary, China’s behaviour and ambitions in the South China Sea,
particularly its unchecked aggression in the littorals (Singh, 2020, p. 7), have
posed significant challenges to effectively maintaining an RBO. It not only
adversely affects the legitimate rights and interests of other regional actors but
also threatens the legal values and norms established and protected by the
international community.

International Practice Creates Negative Effects on the
Maintenance of a Rules-based Order in the South China Sea
Internationally, the RBO is based on a set of rules and principles widely recognised
and agreed upon by the international community. For a system based on rules to
have an effect, these rules must be visibly observed by all countries, including
their principal and most powerful advocates (Chatham House, 2015, p. 1). The
fact that many countries worldwide do not strictly comply with international law
has also created dangerous precedents that negatively affect the maintenance of an
RBO. As studies have revealed, the United States—one of the strongest supporters
of an RBO—often pursues unilateralism and behaves in contrary to international
law (Singh, 2020, p. 7). For example, the US intervention in the Yugoslavia and
Iraq wars without the consent of the United Nations has set negative precedents
in international relations and indirectly affected the maintenance of an RBO
(Clark, 2021). Similarly, the United States under President Donald Trump’s
administration launching a trade war against China has also raised concerns about
infringing on international trade orders. In some ways, the US trade war against
China has good reasons, is understandable (mostly from Chinese violations), and
brings positive values to world trade relations. However, from a legal perspective,
the US’s imposition of tariffs on Chinese imports has violated the principles and
standards established by the World Trade Organisation and indirectly undermines
the international rules-based trade order recognised and supported by most world
economies.
Another country that actively supports an RBO is Australia, which has negative
precedents in international law compliance. For example, in 2001, following the
9/11 terrorist attacks, the Australian government under Prime Minister John Howard
announced the controversial ‘maritime identification zone’ extending up to 1,000
nautical miles from Australia’s coast, in which the government will establish a
‘surveillance or interception zone’ (Donald & Cameron, 2009, p. 43). It is worth
mentioning that the application of this maritime identification zone will affect the

176		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

waters of neighbouring states. More importantly, this is not consistent with the
UNCLOS to which Australia is a member. In addition, Australia has a claim to an
EEZ of up to four million square miles, which many countries consider exceeds the
limits allowed by the UNCLOS and has the potential to negatively affect the order
that determines the maritime jurisdiction of other states (Strating, 2020, p. 38).
In addition, Australia’s pressure on East Timor to gain advantages in resolving
overlapping maritime disputes is a damaging practice that affects the legal order
at sea in general. The dispute settlement relationship between Australia and East
Timor has been compared with China’s behaviour in the South China Sea toward
Southeast Asian countries (Beeson & Chubb, 2019). After announcing its
withdrawal from the international arbitration mechanism for compulsory dispute
settlement, Australia forced East Timor to choose bilateral negotiations with
economic and trade ‘threats’ and a strong ‘pressing-tone’ voice of the big country
(Strating, 2017, p. 22). Australia’s behaviour towards East Timor casts doubt on
the international community as to whether Australia is a country that supports and
is committed to defending an RBO (Beeson & Chubb, 2019, p. 21). Ultimately, as
a status-quo middle power, Australia relies heavily on a solid RBO yet still
disregards it in its perceived sphere of influence (Timor-Leste), suggesting a
dangerous double standard could become the norm.
Japan, another strong supporter of an RBO, also has maritime claims that exceed
the limits of international law. For example, Japan’s straight baselines are found to
be inconsistent with the UNCLOS, and the United States has employed the Freedom
of Navigation Operations (FONOPs) to challenge this claim (Strating, 2020, p. 39).
In addition, the fact that Japan has for many years conducted whaling in the South
Pacific for commercial purposes but in the name of scientific research is also an
issue condemned by the international community. It is interesting that Australia is
one of the pioneer countries to oppose Japanese whale hunting and has the strongest
action to fight (Kindleysides, 2019). However, it seems that Japan is still ignoring
international opinion to continue commercial whaling.
More recently, Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 violates its commitments
to the Budapest Memorandum (Chatham House, 2015). Its invasion of Ukraine in
February 2022 is a clear violation of Article 2(4) of the United Nations Charter and
a clear example of illegal the use of force and aggression that threatens the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. As a widely recognised document in the international
community, the United Nations Charter has established an international legal
foundation for countries to protect their sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
Charter emphasised that the global order was based on the sovereignty of states
(Article 2(1)) and outlawed the use of force by one state against another (Article
2(4)) (Bellinger, 2022). In essence, Russia’s annexation and invasion are bullying
behaviours imposed by a great power on a smaller country without considering
international law or justice. This has once again raised the question of how
international law will protect smaller countries when they are bullied and pressed by
a great power. More importantly, Russia’s behaviours in 2014 and 2022 have
seriously violated international law and are considered to be a direct ‘threat’ to the
rules-based international order (G7 Joint Statement, G7 Foreign and Development
Ministers’ Meeting: Communiqué, May 2021, Para. 7), thereby undermining the
international rule of law and justice (Powell, 2022; Steedman, 2022).

Ho

177

These are examples of countries’ non-compliance with international law and
rules that negatively affect the international legal order. In general, many countries
tend to choose to comply with international law to their advantage but ignore or
even violate the laws that are likely to harm them (Greg et al., 2017, p. 13). This
is a massive challenge for building and maintaining an RBO on a global scale in
general and in the South China Sea in particular. The danger here is that it may
create situations in which states will invoke the wrongs of others to justify their
own. For example, when conducting wrongful and illegal acts and claims in the
South China Sea, China will be confident because it sees that other countries
themselves have also acted contrary to international law and standards. Further,
this fact also prompts China to continue the misinterpretation and misapplication
of international law in its favour.
Importantly, for countries outside the region, such as the United States, Australia,
Japan, India, or South Korea, it is difficult for them to voice their objections to
China as they themselves have claims, policies, and behaviours contrary to the
standards of international law. Here, the international community will question
these states’ ‘issue of legitimacy’ in promoting an RBO. How can they continue to
defend the RBO and oppose China’s behaviour in the South China Sea when these
countries themselves have ‘problems’ (Strating, 2020, p. 39)? This is a big challenge
not only for the effective establishment and maintenance of an RBO in the South
China Sea but also for legal values and the rule of law worldwide.

Challenges from the Ambiguity of International Law
In many cases, the ambiguity of international law has also created conditions for
countries to ‘evade the law’ or deliberately interpret and misapply the law for selfinterest, adversely affecting the maintenance of an RBO. The development of an
RBO is greatly challenged when the rules themselves are sometimes the reason
states are in dispute, primarily because those rules are often vague and open to
different interpretations (Greg et al., 2017, p. 11). In the South China Sea, these
issues include the exercise of freedom of navigation and the right of transit, the
right of innocent passage of foreign vessels in the territorial sea, and the legal
status of geographical features.
Right for Innocent Passage
In the UNCLOS, the right of innocent passage is not sufficiently provided and
detailed, and this has led to disputes between countries over the issue of ‘prior
authorisation’ or ‘prior notification’ when exercising this right. For example, as
interpreted and explained by the United States and many other countries such
as Australia, France, and Germany, the right of innocent passage is granted to
all types of ships, including military ships, without prior notification or prior
authorisation (Samiotis & Grekos, 2015, p. 52). Therefore, the fact that coastal
states require prior notification or authorisation when passing the territorial sea is
illegally hindering the exercise of this right (Ian, 2014). This is one of the reasons
that the United States conducts the FONOPs to challenge coastal states’ provisions
contrary to the UNCLOS.

178		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

However, China and several other countries in the region interpret the right of
innocent passage differently. For example, under China’s 1992 Law on Territorial
Sea and Contiguous Zone, ‘To enter the territorial sea of the People’s Republic of
China, foreign military ships must obtain permission from the Government of the
People’s Republic of China’ (People’s Republic of China, 1992). Such permission
is usually accompanied by conditions and prior notification procedures that
foreign vessels must comply with in order to pass through China’s territorial
waters. Similarly, the requirements for prior notification or authorisation when
exercising the right of innocent passage can also be found in the legislation of
other countries such as Vietnam, the Philippines, Myanmar, and Cambodia (Kaye,
1978, p. 583; Nguyen & Nguyen, 2012, pp. 12–13).
This is further recognised by China’s revised Maritime Traffic Safety Law 2021,
which sets out a prior notification for foreign vessels entering China’s territorial
waters. Specifically, submarines, nuclear-powered ships, ships carrying radioactive
materials, ships carrying bulk oil, chemicals, liquefied petroleum gas, or other
hazardous substances, or ships that may pose a danger to China’s maritime traffic
safety must provide detailed information to state agencies when entering China’s
territorial waters (People’s Republic of China, 2021). Especially recently, China
enacted the Coast Guard Law of 2021, which allows its Coast Guard to open fire on
foreign ships if they enter Chinese waters illegally (Okada, 2021). The fact that the
law does not specify what ‘Chinese waters’ are, has created an ambiguity in the
regulation, and more dangerously, this may lead to arbitrariness in the use of force
or the threat to use force at sea. This is contrary to international law and norms and
seriously affects the rule of law and the maintenance of an RBO.
Freedom of Navigation
The freedom of navigation, a long-established right in international customary
law, has also been interpreted and applied differently among countries. For
example, the United States considers freedom of navigation to include freedom
of the high seas for warships within 200 nautical miles of coastal state EEZ. Only
when military ships pass through the 12-nautical-mile territorial sea are they
subject to the right of innocent passage, which of course, does not involve prior
notification or authorisation (Singh, 2020, p. 8). This is perhaps the most common
and acceptable interpretation of freedom of navigation in international practice.
However, this is not the case with China. To this country, foreign military ships
must obtain coastal state prior authorisation before entering the EEZ. Therefore,
from China’s point of view, the FONOPs conducted by the United States in the
South China Sea are inconsistent with international law and show aggression
towards China (Singh, 2020, p. 9).
Even India, one of America’s allies in Asia, has different views on freedom of
navigation. During the UNCLOS negotiations, India objected to several foreign
military vessels’ activities in the coastal state territorial sea and EEZ (Strating,
2020, p. 23). When ratifying UNCLOS in 1995, India expressed its position on
limited freedom of navigation in the exclusive economic zone with the provision
that ships entering India’s EEZ carry dangerous goods, hazards and chemicals,
oils, toxic liquids, and harmful substances, and radioactive materials must be
provided with at least 24 hours prior notification (United States Navy Judge

179

Ho

Advocate General’s Corp, 2019). Thus, despite declaring support for freedom of
navigation and overflight in international waters, India still has reservations about
FONOPs conducted by the United States. In India’s general view, the freedom of
navigation in the EEZ should be limited to ensure coastal state security and
sovereignty. Moreover, India is concerned that other countries could take
advantage of the freedom of navigation in the EEZ to launch unannounced attacks
against the coastal states (Singh, 2016, pp. 14–20). This is clearly a far cry from
the US position on freedom of navigation, which is free and open.
The Issue of Conducting Military Exercises at Sea
One of the issues that often cause controversy among the countries involved
is the issue of ‘conducting military exercises’ at sea. This is also an important
issue related to the formation and maintenance of an RBO in the South China
Sea. It can be seen that the UNCLOS itself does not explicitly regulate this
issue; therefore, countries have an even greater opportunity to interpret
relevant provisions in their favour. The United States, for example, maintains
that international law provides all states with an extended right to conduct
military exercises at sea. This country believes that Article 87 of the UNCLOS
concerning freedom of navigation on the high seas has suggested exercising this
right for countries (Kuok, 2016). However, since the UNCLOS does not clarify
the relationship between the exercise of freedom of navigation between the high
seas and the EEZ, it has created gaps for controversy and differences in law
application (Strating, 2020, p. 17). China, on the other hand, has a different view
from the United States about the legality of foreign states conducting military
intelligence activities in the EEZ of a coastal state (Kaye, 2005, pp. 103–104).
It considers military activities sensitive because intelligent information could be
used in conflict (Kaye, 2005, p. 103). On this foundation, China believes that US
military activities violated China’s sovereignty, undermined the international
peace and security of the EEZ, and complicated the situation in the South China
Sea (Kaye, 2005, pp. 103–104).
Meanwhile, India’s position on conducting military activities in the sea seems
to be closer to China’s. Specifically, in the Declaration accompanying the
ratification of the UNCLOS in 1995, India emphasised:
The Government of the Republic of India understands that the provisions of the convention do not permit other countries to conduct exercises or military operations in the exclusive economic zone and continental shelf, especially those involving the use of weapons
or explosives, without the consent of the coastal state. (The Republic of India, 1995)

Similar to China, India has also sought to limit the freedom of navigation of
military vessels within its EEZ. For example, India stipulates a ‘prior authorisation’
for military activities and exercises in its EEZ, which is seen to be contrary to
international law (Strating, 2020, p. 23).
The Ambiguity of the Article 121 of UNCLOS
The ambiguity of Article 121 of UNCLOS has also led to different interpretations
and applications among states in the region. Taking advantage of this, many

180		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

countries have taken actions that benefit them but harm the legal order in the
South China Sea. Prior to the 2016 South China Sea Award, there were no
official interpretations of relevant aspects of Article 121, such as the distinction
between rocks and islands, the legal status of low-tide elevations, or artificial
island construction. Under the UNCLOS, these distinctions may have different
legal outcomes and interests. For example, the UNCLOS allows states to define a
12-nautical-mile territorial sea and a 200-nautical-mile EEZ around islands, while
rocks can only generate a territorial sea. On the other hand, islands and rocks
can be acquired to claim sovereignty, while low-tide elevations or submerged
features are not subject to sovereignty. However, since the UNCLOS does not
have specific criteria to distinguish these features clearly, controversy, disputes,
or even arbitrary occur in the practice of application among states (Basu, 2019).
Fortunately, in the 2016 South China Sea Award, the international Tribunal
formally interpreted many of the ambiguities of Article 121 of the UNCLOS.
Looking into the maritime practice among countries on the foundation of the 2016
Award, we can see that countries have often misinterpreted and applied Article
121. For example, the ways countries interpreted and applied Article 121 of the
UNCLOS on the settlement of the Kuril Islands dispute between Japan and Russia,
the Dokdo Islands dispute between South Korea and Japan, and the Diaoyu
Islands dispute between Japan and China are fundamentally inconsistent with the
interpretation by the Tribunal in the South China Sea Award (Strating, 2020,
pp. 42–47). These particular cases reflect a common practice of the interpretation
and application of international law on a global scale.
In summary, differences persist among countries in interpreting and applying
international law, partly because the provisions themselves are not clear or specific
enough. Quite often, this creates different standards between countries regarding
the issues of law application. Therefore, it is critical and essential to define
uniform standards of international law and norms widely recognised and supported
by the international community when considering an RBO. In the South China
Sea currently, the fact that the United States and China are pursuing two different
and even contradictory systems of ‘order’ can lead to conflicts of interest
and legal standards (Yamaguchi, 2017). For whatever reason, inconsistent
understanding and application of international law can lead to unclear right and
wrong, thereby threatening to disrupt an RBO in the South China Sea.

Challenges from the Ineffective International
Law Enforcement Mechanism
The maintenance of an RBO must be accompanied by an effective law
enforcement mechanism. Unfortunately, this is lacking in the current international
legal system. In the South China Sea, in the face of China’s behaviours that go
against international laws and standards, the international community does not
have a strong enough mechanism to prevent or deal with it. ASEAN itself cannot
create the necessary counterweights with China, so the rule of law in the South
China Sea is violated, and hegemonic actions bend justice. The culmination of

Ho

181

the problem was China’s objection to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and
refusal to implement the 2016 South China Sea Award. This clearly demonstrates
the ineffectiveness of the current international law enforcement mechanism
(Basu, 2019). Public opinion and international pressure are important, but in
many cases, they are not enough to ensure that the law is obeyed and enforced.
Although countries such as the United States, Australia, Japan, Great Britain,
France, Germany, and others have made efforts to call on China to observe and
comply with the South China Sea Award, this country still shows its contempt
and refuses to execute the Award. Not only that, China continues to intensify its
reclamation and militarisation activities in the South China Sea, thereby indirectly
threatening an RBO in the region.
Globally, the limitation of the international law enforcement mechanism is not
a new problem in international relations. Enforcement has always been seen to be
the weakest part of the international law system (Richard, 1990), so the question
‘is international law really law’ is frequently asked (Amato, 2001). The practice
of international relations shows that it is rare for a collective of states to act against
another, especially if that state has significant economic influence or military
capabilities and the violation of international law is not crudely provocative
(Odom, 2020). Quite often, the international community can only depend on
sending diplomatic notes to protest the violations of that country. Therefore, the
implementation of international law tends to rely on the efforts of individual
countries with the military, political, and economic potential and strength. This is
risky because great powers’ will and determination to enforce international law
are often driven by national motivations and interests and not always showing
fairness and objectivity. In the South China Sea arbitration, the fact that the United
States did not want to enforce the Award and the Philippines under President
Duterte since 2016 did not promote the implementation of the Award (instead
preferring to pursue bilateral development negotiations) has obstructed the
Arbitral Tribunal’s contribution to the rule of law and justice (Strating, 2020,
p. 37), thereby indirectly negatively affecting the maintenance of an RBO in the
South China Sea.
Practically, China is not the first country to violate international law.
International relations practice shows that other countries that are permanent
members of the United Nations Security Council, such as Russia, Great Britain,
France, and the United States, have also repeatedly violated international law
(Chellaney, 2019). It is worth noting that these countries have economic and
military capabilities and are primary actors in maintaining international peace and
security and protecting the international legal order. Therefore, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to enforce international law to ensure international legal order. On the
other hand, China is not the only country that has objected jurisdiction of
international courts and refused to exercise the ruling. Great powers like the
United States (Sabine, 1985, pp. 183–185), Russia (Berg, 2019; Rieter, 2014),
France (Mackay, 1995, pp. 1864–1865), or Britain (Rrecaj, 2020, pp. 50–55) have
done the same thing several times when facing a lawsuit against them. In those
circumstances, the international community, including the United Nations, has
failed to take adequate measures to protect the international rule of law and justice.

182		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

This practice has shown that the world lacks an effective law enforcement
mechanism, and because of this, the values of the rule of law and justice are not always
guaranteed and protected to the highest degree. Furthermore, the absence of an
effective mechanism to enforce international law, rules, and norms makes it even
more difficult to maintain an RBO, especially when the actors challenging that order
are countries with strong economic, political, and military strengths and influences.
This reality is happening in the South China Sea, where the maintenance of an RBO
is being fiercely challenged by China’s hegemonic ambitions and assertive behaviours.

Challenges from Counterbalance and Competition
for Influence Among Great Powers
Counterbalance and competition for international influence between great powers
is also a challenge for maintaining an RBO in the South China Sea. China’s
relationship with the United States and its allies has been a regional concern for
decades. The rapid growth of China and becoming a rival of the United States
has made international relations change in the direction of more competition
and tension (Ian & Michael, 2017, p.4). The United States is also increasingly
concerned about dealing with China, and the South China Sea seems to be a
reasonable battleground for it to contain China’s rise.
In fact, the United States has assembled alliances to strengthen its force against
China in the Indo-Pacific region. First of all, the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue
group (the QUAD), consisting of four countries, namely the United States, Japan,
Australia, and India, has taken steps to tighten security issues and strategic
competition, whose purpose is believed to be counterbalancing China’s economic,
technological and military development (Bhim, 2021). Indeed, QUAD countries
have interests and concerns in the South China Sea, which creates a great impetus
for their involvement in this area (Graham et al., 2018). More recently, another
security alliance has also been formed—the AUKUS alliance, which includes the
United States, Australia, and the United Kingdom. One of the notable security
cooperation contents of AUKUS is the agreement in which the United States and the
United Kingdom assist Australia in nuclear submarine-building technology in order
to enhance its defence and security capabilities (Barbara, 2021). More importantly,
in the longer term, the AUKUS alliance may involve a lot of technology sharing in
Quantum and Artificial Intelligence space, as well as interoperability between forces
and fleets. Strategically, perhaps this alliance is also aimed at competing with and
containing China as a threat to the peace and security of the region.
Positively, this restraint and balance is necessary and can be beneficial to the
security and peace of the region, as well as contributing to the maintenance of an
RBO in the South China Sea. To some extent, the presence of a third party,
particularly a great power like the United States, in the South China Sea can help
limit China’s illegal actions and assertive behaviours and gradually force this
country to adhere to widely recognised international law, principles, and standards.
This is even more important because ASEAN has proven to be relatively helpless
in managing conflicts and maintaining peace and security in the South China Sea.

Ho

183

However, viewed negatively, the presence of the United States and its allies in
the South China Sea can also cause tensions and instability. Perhaps due to
concerns about the intervention of the United States and its allies in the South
China Sea, China will intensify and accelerate the encroachment, reclamation,
construction, and militarisation activities in the South China Sea, which negatively
affect the security and sovereignty of other countries in the region. Moreover,
China has even more reasons to increase its military and defence activities in the
South China Sea. This could lead to an arms race between the great powers. To
make it worse, tensions would escalate, which could lead to military clashes, and
that could disrupt the legal order in the South China Sea.
In summary, challenges to an RBO in the South China Sea are relatively
prominent and worrisome. If the countries involved do not have adequate and
goodwill cooperation, the prospect of an RBO in the South China Sea will hardly
come true. Consequently, disputes over the sovereignty and jurisdictions of
resources in the South China Sea are likely to become complex, which may result
in conflicts and military confrontation among concerned countries.

Conclusion
Maintaining and strengthening a RBO is expected to ensure peace, security, and
development of the South China Sea. Countries inside and outside the region are
making efforts to build and protect such an order for the common interest of the
international community. However, the practice shows that various challenges
are hindering the process of forming and maintaining an RBO in the South
China Sea. On the one hand, China’s rapid growth with increasing ambitions and
expansion plans, coupled with illegal claims and actions in the South China Sea,
has created significant challenges for maintaining an RBO. On the other hand, due
to the inadequate international law enforcement mechanism and the ambiguity of
different UNCLOS provisions, countries have had disagreements in interpreting
and applying international law. This has consequently contributed to the obstacles
and barriers to the development of the RBO in the region. Further, counterbalance and competition for influence among major powers, to some extent, have
also put the RBO in the South China Sea in a precarious and fragile situation.
These challenges have made the prospect of an RBO in the South China Sea
uncertain and unclear. Countries’ different interests and positions have shown that
the efforts of a few individual countries are far from enough for the effective
maintenance of an RBO in the South China Sea. In particular, perhaps the biggest
obstacle comes from China when it cannot find a common ground of understanding
with countries inside and outside the region. Therefore, it is necessary to take an
integrated approach, including deterrence measures combined with incentives, to
gradually bring China into legal frameworks and standards widely agreed upon
and recognised by the international community. More importantly, efforts should be
made to identify areas of common interest that China can share with countries in
the region, thereby encouraging China’s contribution to the construction and
maintenance of an RBO in the region (Moynihan, 2019, pp. 50–51). Evaluating

184		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

China’s legitimate interests in the region and the boundaries that meet those interests
based on international standards plays a vital role in the solutions that countries aim
to build and maintain an RBO in the South China Sea (Mohan, 2012, p. 257). In
addition, it is believed that the success of developing a RBO in the region will
depend on the extent to which regional states can find common ground to negotiate
between China and the United States (Greg et al., 2017, p. 12).
Besides, given the region’s current situation, the participation and efforts of
countries outside the region, particularly those with motivations and interests, can
also significantly contribute to maintaining an RBO in the South China Sea. The
effective maintenance of an RBO in the South China Sea will not depend solely
on the efforts and determination of some individual countries. Similarly, the
assumption of US dominance in preserving an RBO is misconceived and could
foster a dangerous resistance and inflexibility to change (Greg et al., 2017, p. 7).
A practical and sustainable RBO in the South China Sea should be built collectively
by concerned countries, and it, in turn, benefits themselves first of all and the
international community as a whole.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of
this article.

ORCID iD
Ai Nhan Ho

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1075-0150

References
Alexander, N. (2021, 28 May). China abhors the rules-based order but what does it want
instead? Nikkei Asia. https://asia.nikkei.com/Opinion/China-abhors-the-rules-basedorder-but-what-does-it-want-instead
Alexandra, A. L. (2021). Perspectives: Rules-based order—More than words. AsianLink.
https://asialink.unimelb.edu.au/stories/rules-based-order-more-than-words
Amato, D. A. (2001). Is international law really ‘law’? In S. Gerry (Ed.), The nature of
international law (pp. 137–158). Routledge Publisher.
Barbara, Y. (2021, 17 September). AUKUS: Is an arms race with China the price of ‘Global
Britain’? The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/aukus-is-an-arms-race-withchina-the-price-of-global-britain-168107
Basu, P. (2019, 22 November). High tide in the South China Sea: Why the maritime rulesbased order is consequential. Observer Research Foundation. https://www.orfonline.
org/research/high-tide-in-the-south-china-sea-why-the-maritime-rules-based-order-isconsequential-58052/
Basu, P. (2021, 1 September). Beijing vs. Washington: Fundamental departures vis-à-vis a
‘rules-based order’. Observer Research Foundation. https://www.orfonline.org/expertspeak/beijing-washington-fundamental-departures-vis-a-vis-rules-based-order/

Ho

185

Beeson, M., & Chubb, A. (2019). Australia, China and the maritime ‘rules-based
international order’: Comparing the South China Sea and Timor Sea disputes.
International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 21(2), 1–32. https://doi.org/10.1093/irap/
lcz022
Bellinger, B. J. III. (2022, 28 February). How Russia’s invasion of Ukraine violates
international law. Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/article/howrussias-invasion-ukraine-violates-international-law
Berg, V. D. S. (2019, 8 November). In Ukraine victory, top U.N. court rejects Moscow’s
bid to block case. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-ukraine-worldcourt-idUSKBN1XI1DJ
Bhim, B. (2021, 17 March). Quad lacks moral authority in South China Sea. AsiaTimes.
https://asiatimes.com/2021/03/quad-lacks-moral-authority-in-south-china-sea/
Blanchard, B., & Rajagopalan, M. (2016, 5 July). China says wants peace after paper warns
on South China Sea clash. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinaseachina-idUSKCN0ZL030
Chang, K. F. (2020, 6 October). Uncertain prospects: South China Sea code of conduct.
Foreign Policy Research Institute. https://www.fpri.org/article/2020/10/uncertainprospects-south-china-sea-code-of-conduct-negotiations/
Chatham House—The Royal Institute of International Affairs. (2015). Challenges to the
rule-based international order. The London Conference. https://www.chathamhouse.
org/sites/default/files/London%20Conference%202015%20-%20Background%20
Papers.pdf
Chellaney, B. (2019, 23 December). The illusion of a rules-based global order. The
Strategist. https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/the-illusion-of-a-rules-based-globalorder/
Clark, B. (2021, 25 June). It’s not just Russia and China who flout the rules-based order.
The National Interest. https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/it%E2%80%99s-not-justrussia-and-china-who-flout-rules-based-order-188562
Cordesman, A. H., Burke, A. A., & Molot, M. (Eds). (2019). The critical role of Chinese
trade in the South China Sea. In China and the U.S.: Cooperation, competition and/
or conflict an experimental assessment (pp. 336–343). Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS).
Donald, R. R., & Cameron, M. (2009). Australia’s traditional maritime security concerns
and post-9/11 perspectives. In N. Klein, J. Mossop & D. R. Rothwell (Eds), Maritime
security: International law and policy perspectives from Australia and New Zealand
(pp. 37–53). Routledge Publisher.
G7 Joint Statement, G7 Foreign and Development Ministers’ Meeting: Communiqué,
May 2021, Para. 7. https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/g7-foreign-and-developmentministers%E2%80%99-meeting-communiqu%C3%A9_en
Graham, E., Pan, C., Ian, H., Kersten, R., Zala, B., & Percy, S. (2018). Debating the Quad,
Strategic & Defence Studies Centre ANU College of Asia & the Pacific, 6. https://
bellschool.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/uploads/2018-03/cog_39_web_-_debating_
the_quad.pdf
Greg, R., Nasu, H., Tan, S. S., & McLaughlin, R. (2017, November). Prospects for the
rules-based global order. Strategic & Defence Studies Centre ANU College of Asia
& the Pacific. http://bellschool.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/uploads/2017-06/cog_
34_global_rules_based_order.pdf
Guzman, T. A. (2002). A compliance-based theory of international law. California Law
Review 90(6), 1823–1887. https://doi.org/10.2307/3481436
Hayton, B. (2015). The South China Sea. The struggle for power in Asia. Yale University
Press.

186		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

Hayton, B. (2021, 21 July). After 25 years, there’s still no South China Sea Code of
Conduct—China’s reluctance has stifled diplomatic efforts—but they haven’t been futile.
FP. https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/07/21/south-china-sea-code-of-conduct-asean/
Ian, H., & Michael, H. (2017). The rule-based order in the Indo-Pacific: Opportunities and
challenges for Australia, India and Japan [Regional Outlook Paper No. 50]. Griffith
Asian Institute.
Ian, T.-G. (2014). The ‘territorialisation’ of the exclusive economic zone: A requiem for
the remnants of the freedom of the seas? In C. Schofield, S. Lee & M.-S. Kwon (Eds),
Limits of Maritime Jurisdiction (pp. 65–76). Nijhoff.
Jacobson, L., & Medcalf, R. (2015). The perception gap: Reading China’s Maritime
Objectives in Indo-Pacific Asia. Lowy Institute Report. https://www.lowyinstitute.org/
publications/perception-gap-reading-chinas-maritime-objectives-indo-pacific-asia
Jonathan, G. O. (2020, 11 December). The 2020 ‘Battle’ of diplomatic notes opens
the door to a possible solution for South China Sea. Modern Diplomacy. https://
moderndiplomacy.eu/2020/12/11/the-2020-%CB%8Bbattle-of-diplomatic-notesopens-the-door-to-a-possible-solution-for-the-south-china-sea-disputes/
Jorgensen, M. (2018). Equilibrium & fragmentation in the international rule of law:
The rising Chinese Geolegal Order [KFG Working Paper No. 21]. Berlin Potsdam
Research Group.
Julian, K., & Chris, M. (2017, 25 September). The South China Sea and China’s ‘Four Sha’
claim: New legal theory, same bad argument. LawFare. https://www.lawfareblog.com/
south-china-sea-and-chinas-four-sha-claim-new-legal-theory-same-bad-argument
Kaye L. W. (1978). The innocent passage of warships in foreign Teritorial Sea:
A threatened freedom. San Diego Law Review, 15, 573–602. https://digital.sandiego.
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1928&context=sdlr
Kaye, S. (2005). Freedom of navigation, surveillance and security: Legal issues surrounding
the collection of intelligence from beyond littoral. Australian Year Book of International
Law, 24, 93–105. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2744984
Keynote address by Shinzo Abe, late Prime Minister of Japan at the 13th IISS Asian
Security Summit—The Shangri-La Dialogue. (2014). http://www.mofa.go.jp/fp/nsp/
page4e_000086.html
Kindleysides, D. (2019, 2 April). Japan’s war on whales isn’t over—The Australian
government must keep fighting. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/
environment/2019/apr/02/japans-war-on-whales-isnt-over-the-australian-governmentmust-keep-fighting
Koh, H. H. (1997). Review: Why do nations obey international law? The Yale Law
Journal, 106(8). Symposium: Group Conflict and the Constitution: Race, Sexuality,
and Religion, 2599–2659. https://doi.org/10.2307/797228
Kuok, L. (2016). The U.S. FON Program in the South China Sea: A lawful and necessary
response to China’s strategic ambiguity [East Asia Policy Paper No. 9]. https://www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/the-us-fon-program-in-the-south-chinasea.pdf
Kuok, L. (2019). How China’s reaction in the South China Sea undermine the rule of
law. Global China Research Paper March 2019, 4–5. https://www.brookings.edu/
wp-content/uploads/2019/11/FP_ 20191118_china_scs_law_kuok.pdf
Layton, P. (2018, 3 April). An alternative to the rules-based order? Australian Outlook.
https://www.internationalaffairs.org.au/australianoutlook/alternative-rules-based-order/

Ho

187

Lye, L. F., & Ha, H. H. (2018). Vietnam’s responses to China’s maritime assertiveness in
the South China Sea. Yusof Ishak Institute Analyse Current Event, 2018(50). https://
www.iseas.edu.sg/images/pdf/ISEAS_Perspective_2018_50@50.pdf
MacKay, D. (1995). Nuclear testing: New Zealand and France in the International Court
of Justice. Fordham International Law Journal, 19(5), 1864–1865. https://ir.lawnet.
fordham.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1483&context=ilj
McLaughlin, M. (2020). Perspective—US strategy in South China Sea 2020. American
Security Project.
Mohan, C. R. (2012). SamudraManthan: Sino-Indian Rivalry in the Indo-Pacific.
Brookings Institution Press.
Moynihan, H. (2019, 12 June). Engage China to uphold multilateralism: But not at any
cost. Chatham House—The Royal Institute of International Affairs. https://www.
chathamhouse.org/2019/06/engage-china-uphold-multilateralism-not-any-cost
Nguyen, B. D., & Nguyen, H. C. (2012). Right of innocent passage of foreign military
ships in the Territorial Sea under International Law and Vietnamese Law. Hanoi
National University Journal of Science—Law, 8(16), 8–16.
Nguyen, D. T., & Nguyen, H. T. (2015). China’s nine dotted lines in the South China Sea:
The 2011 exchange of diplomatic notes between the Philippines and China. Ocean
Development & International Law, 43(1), 35–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/00908320.
2012.647490
Nguyen, H. T. (2022, 4 August). South China Sea: The battle of the diplomatic notes
continues. The Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2020/08/south-china-sea-the-battleof-the-diplomatic-notes-continues/
Nguyen, T. T. (2021, 7 July). China’s plan for the South China Sea: A mixture of pressure
and legal approaches. Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. https://amti.csis.org/
chinas-plan-for-the-south-china-sea-a-mixture-of-pressure-and-legal-approaches/
Nguyen, T. T. H., & Nguyen, D. T. (2015). Some thought on the South China Sea code of
conduct. In D. D. Quy (Ed.), Seeking solutions for peace and justice in the South China
Sea (pp. 179–203). World Publisher
Odom, J. G. (2020, 8 May). Protecting the rules-based order at the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea. LawFare. https://www.lawfareblog.com/protecting-rulesbased-order-international-tribunal-law-sea
Okada, W. (2021, 28 April). China’s coast guard law challenges rule-based order the
international community must respond to China’s maritime coercion. The Diplomat.
https://thediplomat.com/2021/04/chinas-coast-guard-law-challenges-rule-based-order/
People’s Republic of China. (1992). Law on territorial sea and contiguous zone 1992.
Article 6, https://www.un.org/depts/los/LEGISLATIONANDTREATIES/PDFFILES/
CHN_1992_Law.pdf
People’s Republic of China. (2021). Maritime traffic safety law of the revised in 2021.
Article 54. https://www.piclub.or.jp/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Maritime-TrafficSafety-Law-of-the-Peoples-Republic-of-China_Revised-in-2021-1.pdf
Powell, C. (2022, 16 March). Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is illegal under international
law: Suggesting it’s not is dangerous. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/
russias-invasion-of-ukraine-is-illegal-under-international-law-suggesting-its-not-isdangerous-179203
Richard, A. M. (1990). Problems in international law enforcement. Fordham International
Law Journal, 14(3), 519–539. https://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/ilj/vol14/iss3/1/

188		

Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs 10(2)

Rieter, E. (2014). Introductory note to the ‘Arctic Sunrise’ case (Netherland/Russia)
(ITLOS). International Legal Materials, 53(4), 603–619. https://doi.org/10.5305/
intelegamate.53.4.0603
Rrecaj, B. T. (2020). Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965. Utrecht Journal of International and European Law, 35(1), 50–55.
doi:10.5334/ujiel.492
Sabine, L. (1985). Jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice: Admissibility of
Nicaragua’s application in case concerning military and paramilitary activities in and
against Nicaragua. The Cambridge Law Journal, 44(2), 183–188. https://www.jstor.
org/stable/4506728
Samiotis, G., & Grekos, D. (2015). Carriage of hazardous materials (HM) by sea and the right
of innocent passage: States disputes and environmental concerns. Journal of Economics
and Business, 65(1/2), 47–66. https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/169167
Sharma, S. (2020, July). The ‘Crisis’ in the rules-based international order (RBIO):
Recommendations for Canadian Engagement. Policy Brief, Defense and Security
Foresight Group. https://uwaterloo.ca/defence-security-foresight-group/sites/ca.defencesecurity-foresight-group/files/uploads/files/dsfg_policybrief_sharma_rbio.pdf
Singh, A. (2016). India’s strategic stakes in the South China Sea. Asia Policy, 21, 14–20.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24905084
Singh, A. (2020). Rules-based maritime security in Asia: A view from New Delhi [ORF
Occasional Paper No. 266]. https://www.orfonline.org/research/rules-based-maritimesecurity-in-asia-a-view-from-new-delhi/
Steedman, D. (2022, 24 February). Russia’s invasion of Ukraine another blow to the rulesbased order. The Strategist. https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/russias-invasion-ofukraine-another-blow-to-the-rules-based-order/
Stefan, T. (2019, 20 January). Rules-based order v. international law? German Practice
in International Law. https://gpil.jura.uni-bonn.de/2019/01/rules-based-order-vinternational-law/
Strating, R. (2017). Timor-Leste’s foreign policy approach to the Timor Sea disputes:
Pipeline or pipe dream? Australian Journal of International Affairs, 71(3), 259–283.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2016.1258689
Strating, R. (2020). Defending the maritime rules-based order: Regional responses to
the South China Sea disputes. East West Center Policy Studies, 80. https://www.
eastwestcenter.org/publications/defending-the-maritime-rules-based-order-regionalresponses-the-south-china-sea
Thayer, C. (2018, 8 August). A closer look at the ASEAN-China single draft South China
Sea code of conduct. The Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2018/08/a-closer-look-atthe-asean-china-single-draft-south-china-sea-code-of-conduct/
The Republic of India. (1995). Declaration upon ratification of the United Nations
convention on the law of the sea. https://www.marineregions.org/documents/
Declarations%20or%20Statements%20upon%20UNCLOS%20ratification.pdf
The South China Sea Arbitration. (2016). The 2016 Arbitral Tribunal Award. https://pcacpa.org/en/cases/7/
The United States Ocean Policy. (1983). Ocean policy. https://policy.defense.gov/
Portals/11/Documents/gsa/cwmd/DoD%20FON%20Program%20--%20Fact%20
Sheet%20(March%202015).pdf
United Nations Association of Australia. (2017). The United Nations and the rule-based
international order. https://www.unaa.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/UNAA_
RulesBasedOrder_ARTweb3.pdf

Ho

189

United States Department of States. (2020). Limits of the sea. No. 117. Straight baselines
claim: China. https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/LIS-117.pdf
United States Navy Judge Advocate General’s Corp. (2019). Maritime claims reference
manual. https://www.jag.navy.mil/organization/code_10_mcrm.htm
Wang, Z. (2015). Chinese discourse on the ‘Nine-Dashed Line’. Asian Survey, 55(3),
502–524.
Yamaguchi, S. (2017, 17 April). Creating facts on the sea: China’s plan to establish Sansha
city. Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. https://amti.csis.org/chinas-plan-establishsansha-city/

