Indonesian Journal of International Law
Volume 21

Number 1

Article 1

October 2023

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea
Yoshinori Kodama
The Mission of Japan to ASEAN, Jakarta, yoshinori.kodama@mofa.go.jp

Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarhub.ui.ac.id/ijil
Part of the International Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Kodama, Yoshinori (2023) "Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea," Indonesian Journal of
International Law: Vol. 21: No. 1, Article 1.
DOI: 10.17304/ijil.vol21.1.6
Available at: https://scholarhub.ui.ac.id/ijil/vol21/iss1/1

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty of Law at UI Scholars Hub. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Indonesian Journal of International Law by an authorized editor of UI Scholars Hub.

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea
Cover Page Footnote
The views expressed in this article are personal to the author.

This article is available in Indonesian Journal of International Law: https://scholarhub.ui.ac.id/ijil/vol21/iss1/1

Indonesian Journal of International Law (2023), Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. 149-210
https://doi.org/10.17304/ijil.vol21.1.6

JUDICIALIZATION IN AND AROUND
THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
Yoshinori Kodama
The Mission of Japan to ASEAN (Jakarta), Indonesia
Correspondence: yoshinori.kodama@mofa.go.jp

Abstract
This article examines why international legal dispute settlement procedures are traditionally less
frequently resorted to in Southeast Asia, compared to other regions. It also analyzes why and
how, since the beginning of this century, international legal cases, both judicial and arbitral,
have been consistently used for settling maritime disputes in and around the South China Sea.
Then, it presents prescriptive suggestions for further use of judicial and arbitral procedures. The
method of analysis is based upon the examination and scrutiny of factual materials, including
relevant international cases regarding the region, as well as interviews engaged by the author
with officials and experts in the region. Universal trends and experience of judicial procedures
will be deductively analyzed. The article first summarizes conditions and characteristics in the
Asian region, particularly Southeast Asia, where the South China Sea is located. It, secondly,
examines the factual basis for international legal cases involving the region, especially from
the viewpoint as to how relevant States decided to resort to legal processes, as well as how
judgments and awards affect ex post relations between parties. Finally, the article will examine
more universal dimensions for the use of judicial or arbitral procedures, particularly factors and
elements which encourage the State to resort to such procedures.
Keywords: dispute settlement, legal methods of resolution, maritime demarcation, South China
Sea, territorial disputes

Submitted: 23 May 2023 | Revised: 8 June 2023 | Accepted: 18 August 2023
		

I. INTRODUCTION
This article examines why international legal dispute settlement
procedures are traditionally less frequently resorted to in Southeast Asia, as
compared to other regions. It also analyzes why and how, since the beginning
of this century, international legal cases, both judicial and arbitral, have been
consistently used for settling maritime disputes in and around the South China
Sea. This article presents prescriptive suggestions for further use of judicial
and arbitral procedures, on the assumption that legally-binding clear-cut
settlements can bring about positive outcomes for international disputes and
discrepancies.
The method of analysis is based upon the examination and scrutiny of
factual materials, including relevant international cases regarding the region,
Copyright © 2023 – Yoshinori Kodama
Published by Lembaga Pengkajian Hukum Internasional

Yoshinori Kodama

as well as interviews engaged by the author with officials and experts in
the region. Universal trends and experience of judicial procedures will be
deductively analyzed. Their application to the region will be examined, where
traditional reticence remains on legal dispute settlement.
Southeast Asia has recorded relatively fewer numbers in using international
third-party judicial processes, compared to other regions, as a general trend.
Rough estimates based upon the record of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) reveals that cases initiated by States in the Southeast Asia region in 1947
to 2020 account for four, including the 1962 and 2013 Preah Vihear Temple
cases (counted as one), as well as two territorial cases regarding islands
(2002 Ligitan Sipadan and 2008 Pedra Branca cases), and the 2014 Seizure
and Detention of Certain Documents and Data case (provisional measure)
instituted by Timor-Leste against Australia.1 The scarcity of such cases in the
region was notable in the last century. This is, however, followed by the steady
increase of litigation cases in the region. On the same calculating formula,
Europe has 37, Africa 18, Latin America 24, and Pacific Oceania six.2 North
America has nine, and Middle East nine.3
Along with ICJ cases, Southeast Asian countries instituted cases under
the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) with
a variety of usages.4 These are the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) case
for Malaysia/Singapore Land Reclamation in and around the Strait of Johor
in 2005 (Land Reclamation Case), the PCA case for the South China Sea
legal issues between Singapore and the People’s Republic of China in 2016
(South China Sea arbitration), as well as then compulsory conciliation for
Timor maritime demarcation in 2018 (Timor Sea Conciliation).5 Meanwhile,
a PCA case was instituted by Singapore and Malaysia through a submission
agreement in the matter of Railway Land arbitration, leading to the award in
International Court of Justice, “List of All Cases,” accessed 15 May 2023, https://www.
icj-cij.org/en/list-of-all-cases. International Court of Justice, The International Court of
Justice: Handbook (United Nations, 2014), 63. Temple of Preah Vihear, ICJ Reports 1961,
at 6. Sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan, ICJ Reports 2002, 625. Sovereignty
over Pedra Branca/Pulau Batu Puteh, Middle Rocks and South Ledge, ICJ Reports 2008, 12.
Questions relating to the Seizure and Detention of Certain Documents and Data, Provisional
Measures, ICJ Reports 2014, 147.
2
Ibid.
3
Ibid.
4
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), opened for signature 10
December 1982, 1833 UNTS 397 (entered into force 14 November 1994).
5
Land Reclamation by Singapore in and around the Straits of Johor (2005), Reports of
International Arbitral Awards (RIAA), XXVII, 135. The South China Sea Arbitration, PCA
2013-1. Timor Sea Conciliation, PCA 2016-10.
1

150

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

2014.6
In the 2016 South China Sea arbitration, a politically and militarily less
resourced State used the legally binding dispute settlement process in order to
counter military land occupation and maritime intrusion engaged by a larger
and more resourced State.7 This was proof of the effective use of arbitral
process as a legally binding third-party settlement, as a fair and equitable
method for States with different strengths and resources. It had analogous
characteristics with the 1962 and 2013 Preah Vihear Temple cases, where
military occupation was held back by the submission from the relatively less
resourced State.8
Against these factual backgrounds, the article first summarizes conditions
and characteristics in the Asian region, particularly Southeast Asia, where the
South China Sea is located. This will be a basis for examining perspectives for
further use of international legal procedures. Secondly, it examines the factual
basis for international legal cases involving the region, especially from the
viewpoint as to how relevant States decided to resort to legal processes, as well
as how judgments and awards affect ex-post relations between parties. Finally,
the article will examine more universal dimensions for the use of judicial or
arbitral procedures, particularly factors and elements which encourage the
State to resort to such procedures. This is expected to promote more use of
legal procedures as a constructive tool for dispute settlement in the region.

II. GEOGRAPHICAL AND POLITICAL CONDITIONS IN AND
AROUND THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
This section examines the contexts and backgrounds regarding disputes
and their resolutions in Southeast Asia, focusing upon maritime and land areas
in and around the South China Sea.

A. GEOGRAPHICAL CHARACTERISTICS IN AND AROUND THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA
Southeast Asia has distinguished geographical characteristics, composed
of the South China Sea in its center as a semi-enclosed sea, encircled by the
continent and peninsulas from the north and west, as well as by various sizes
and forms of islands from the east and west.9 Islands to the east and west
6
7
8
9

Railway Land Arbitration, PCA 2012-01.
PCA, South China Sea.
ICJ, Preah Vihear.
UNCLOS, art.122.

151

Yoshinori Kodama

are composed of relatively large islands, generally forming the main islands
of each State, such as Luzon, Borneo, Java, and Sumatra, as well as groups
of relatively small islands, creating archipelagic features. (Table 1 describes
schematically the geographical formations of and around the South China
Sea).
The complexity of geographical allocations in the South China Sea can
inherently cause territorial and maritime demarcation disputes. However, its
size with the diameter more than 400 nautical miles could result in a relatively
simple demarcation solution.10 If maritime zone demarcations, particularly
for exclusive economic zones (EEZs), are measured from adjacent continental
States, following the recent trend of international jurisprudence, the South
China Sea will hold a high-sea spot in its center.11 This will ensure the freedom
of navigation and overflight in the Sea.
The South China Sea and surrounding waters have narrow “outlets”
connected to the outer oceans.12 Such narrow outlets act as chokepoints in
maritime lines of transport and communications, with commercial and strategic
importance.13 Chokepoints grant distinctive status to States encompassing
high-staked straits and transit ports within their territories. Such States include
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore, acting as vocal promoters of a stable
maritime order in the region.
There are six main chokepoints for the South China Sea, with commercially
and strategically distinct relevance.14 They are located in a clockwise manner
from the north, as follows: (Table 2 plots these chokepoints on the schematic
description of areas in and around the South China Sea.)

Ian Storey and Cheng-yi Lin, eds., The South China Sea Dispute: Navigating Diplomatic
and Strategic Tensions (Singapore: Yusof Ishak Institute, 2016), 21. Clive Schofield, “What’s at
Stake in the South China Sea?” in Beyond Territorial Disputes in the South China Sea, Robert
Beckman, Ian Townsend-Gault, Clive Schofield, Tara Davenport, and Leonardo Bernard, eds.
(Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, University of Wollongong, 2013), 12. UNCLOS, arts. 57 et 67.
11
Robert C. Beckman and Leonardo Bernard, “Disputed Area in the South China Sea,” in
The South China Sea, A Crucible of Regional Cooperation or Conflict-Making Sovereignty
Claims, C. J. Jenner and Truong Thuy, eds., (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016),
202. UNCLOS, art. 87.
12
UNCLOS, art.122.
13
United States Energy Information Administration, “The South China Sea is an important
world energy trade route, Major Crude Oil Trade Flows in the South China Sea (2011),”
Today in Energy, 4 April 2013, accessed 15 May 2023, https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/
detail.php?id=10671#:~:text=Almost%20a%20third%20of%20global,Gulf%20suppliers%20
and%20Asian%20consumers.
14
Ibid.
10

152

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

(I) Taiwan Strait: The north end of the South China Sea faces Taiwan, a
potential flash point in the region. In the case of an emergency related to
Taiwan, the northern part of the South China Sea will become a frontline
as well as a logistic supporting zone, together with the sea facing the east
side of Taiwan.
(II) Luzon Strait: This strait, composed of the Bashi, Balintang, and
Babuyan Channels, is an entry/way-out between Taiwan and the
Philippines, forming another potential frontline facing Taiwan, as well as
an access point to the North Pacific. For Chinese navy vessels stationed
in Hainan, the Luzon Strait can become an essential outlet to the North
Pacific and beyond.
(III) Balabac Strait: This strait between the Philippines and Malaysia
can act as another entry/way-out to the North Pacific, partially due
to the secluding archipelagic waters established by the Philippines,
with archipelagic baselines connecting islands.15 Thus, the Philippine
archipelagic waters act as a shield on the eastern edge of the South China
Sea. It is also a way-out to the Lombok Strait southwards, through the
Sulu Sea, the Celebes Sea, and the Makassar Strait, providing transport
lanes towards Australia.
(IV) Lombok Strait: This strait acts as an outlet for Australia. It is also a
port of transit for transport to and from the Indian Ocean, then the Middle
East, as a secondary line after the Malacca/Singapore Straits. The Lombok
Strait is preferred by large-scale tankers for its ample width and depth,
compared to the Sunda Strait.16
(V) Sunda Strait: This strait also provides a strategic and commercial point
of transit to and from the Indian Ocean, but less preferred to Lombok, due
to its relatively shallow depth.17 It is an alternative route for the Malacca/
Singapore and the Lombok Straits.
(VI) Malacca/Singapore Straits: This combination of straits accounts for
80 per cent of the region’s crude oil transport, making it the second most
important global strait after the Hormuz.18 Sea lanes and transit ports
are concentrated throughout the straits. States in the vicinity, namely
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore, have particular interests and stakes
in the stability and security of the straits.

UNCLOS, art.47.
Pratnashree Basu, “The Eastern Corridor and the Law of the Sea,” ORF Occasional Papers,
November 2020.
17
Ibid.
18
Martin D. Mitchel, “The South China Sea, A Geographical Analysis,” Journal of Geography
and Geology 8, no.3 (2016): 1.2.
15
16

153

Yoshinori Kodama

On top of these straits, the Flores and Banda Seas to the east of Borneo and
Sulawesi towards New Guinea may potentially become another outlet, with
the future increase of natural resources transport from Papua New Guinea to
the region, such as liquefied natural gas and fishery products.
Within the South China Sea, islands and other geographical figures may
offer strategic and commercial interests to surrounding States. Hainan Island
in the north is China’s southern end-post. The Paracel Islands, occupied by
China since 1974, are located on the route from Hainan to the center of the
South China Sea. The Spratly Islands with overlapping territorial claims are
located just on or close to sea lanes for transport and communications, bearing
upon navigation and overflight in the South China Sea.
Based upon these geographical characteristics, States in the region can
be categorized into several groups, depending upon main interests staked in
maritime affairs, with duplications:
a. Continental coastal States, including those with peninsulas, hold
preoccupations as coastal States, including inclination towards the
seawards extension of continental shelves. Such States include China,
Vietnam, Thailand, Myanmar, Cambodia, and Malaysia, with varying
intensity;
b. Archipelagic States, with interests and consciousness as island
nations, including the Philippines and Indonesia, tend to act as proponents
for island nations’ interests against the land-dominates-sea principle;
c. Then, there are States with distinctive interests in straits and transit
ports, including Malaysia and Singapore, as well as, to a lesser and
overlapping extent, Indonesia. Such “strait/transit States” maintain
special interests in the freedom of navigation/overflight, as the source
of commercial benefits, as well as effective maritime regulations and
management for promoting their geographical advantages;
d. In Southeast Asia, there is also a land-locked State, Laos, and States
with land-based preoccupations, like Thailand and Myanmar. Such States
are, in some cases, linked to the main sea by trans-frontier rivers, like the
Mekong River in Indochina, thus sharing coastal States’ interests in safe
and stable maritime navigation.
These types of States with varying maritime interests with duplications
may promote aspirations for stable, predictable, and stable maritime regimes,
as a tool to coordinate and settle varying interests. This may create room for a
rules-based maritime order as well as peaceful dispute settlement procedures
in the region.
154

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

B. HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL BACKGROUND IN THE
REGION
Southeast Asia is a region of complex historical diversity, composed
of Malay, Hindu/Buddhist, and Chinese cultural bases with multi-layered
duplications.19 Malay cultural tradition covers mainly southern areas
encompassing islands and peninsulas, like Indonesia, Singapore, and
Malaysia. A larger Hindu/Buddhist basis lies in Indochina. Chinese influence
has expanded through ethnic Chinese, mainly in Malaysia and Singapore.
These different historical backgrounds, however, share common features,
including the weak spatial territorial conception, and, accordingly, the
importance attached to personal-based administrative control.20 Traditionally,
Malay sub-regions were composed of scattered local kingdoms, later
sultanates, with administration focusing upon persons as subordinates,
rather than territorial domination.21 Hindu tradition focused upon kings and
its direct linkage with divinity, rather than subjects.22 The king’s influence
was like expanding circle with diminishing effects, thus territorial nexus was
not consciously recognized.23 Chinese perspectives on inter-State relations
were historically based upon the tributary system, with indirect control from
metropolitan China upon local suzerains.24
With the progress of Western colonization in the region from around
the 16th century onwards, these traditional bases were gradually converted
into territorial-based administrative management, with the incipient port-toport control towards the expansion of hinterlands, then growing into spatial
territorial control by colonial administrative institutions.25 In the course of that
process, local territorial control was sometimes acquired by military coercion,
and by treaties or contracts with local sultanates in some other cases.26
Katherine Hui-Yi Tseng, Rethinking South China Sea Dispute (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2017), 52.
20
Ibid. This aspect was raised and examined in the ICJ 2008 Pedra Branca case between
Malaysia and Singapore. The Court generally disqualified pre-colonial and colonial
administrative authorities as evidence and basis for spatial territorial control.
21
Tseng, Rethinking South China Sea, i.
22
Harry J. Benda, “The Structure of Southeast Asian History,” Journal of Southeast Asian
History 3, no.3 (1962):106.
23
Robert Heine-Geldern, “Conception of State and Kingship in Southeast Asia,” Data Paper,
no.18 (Cornell University, 1956), 6.
24
Tseng, Rethinking South China Sea, 101.
25
Guy J. Pauker, F. H. Golay, and C. H. Enloe, Diversity and Development in Southeast Asia
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977), 54.
26
J. M. Pluvier, Southeast Asia from Colonialism to Independence (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1974), 14.
19

155

Yoshinori Kodama

Colonial boundary demarcations were not necessarily compatible with
ethnic or cultural distributions, as in the cases of Borneo and New Guinea.
Administrative districts within a colony were generally corresponding to
cultural boundaries, though lacking precisions in some case, like in Indochina
and Malaysia/Singapore with complex colonial administrative arrangements.27
This is the background for the region’s vague and unclear demarcations and
their legal bases, prone to territorial disputes amongst inheritor States, after
their independence later in the 20th century.

C. SECURITY AND POLITICAL ELEMENTS IN DISPUTES IN
THE REGION
Southeast Asia is historically full of potential conflicts and disputes,
originating from its colonial divisions as well as political and ethnic
diversities.28 Since their independence after the Second World War, most
States have been making consistent efforts to avoid military conflicts, seeking
for peace and stability in the region, with the experience of wars which took
place in the region as an arena and one-off military conflicts as well as internal
civil strife.
In 1967, five countries in the region belonging to the capitalist camp, at
that time, formed the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) as a
loose inter-governmental group.29 ASEAN later expanded to cover the whole
Southeast Asia region, growing into an institutional basis for regional policy
coordination.30 At its foundation, ASEAN perceived two regional security
issues as serious disruptive factors in the way of peace building in the region:
namely the Philippines’ territorial claim to the Sarawak region in the north
of Borneo, as well as low-intensity insurgencies within Indonesia allegedly
engaged by Malaysia and Singapore.31
Along with the Vietnam War (-1975) and its expansion to larger Indochina,
ASEAN’s stance towards these potentially explosive security problems was
manifested by the proclaimed principle of non-intervention, refraining from
interfering with internal security issues and bilateral military conflicts.32
The non-intervention principle originally derived from the Non-Alignment
ICJ, Pedra Branca.
Pauker, Diversity and Development, 10.
29
Chong Ja Ian, “ASEAN’s Non-Intervention and the Myanmar Conundrum,” ASEAN Focus
(Jakarta, 2021): 6.
30
Marty Natalegawa, Does ASEAN Matters? A View From Within (Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing, 2018), 239.
31
Chong, “Non-intervention,” 2.
32
Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, 2624 UNTS 223 (entered into force
15 December 2008), art. 2.
27
28

156

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Movement, stemming intervention by external powers, then converted to an
intra-regional principle.33 ASEAN chose to advance region-wide economic
construction as its main task in an attempt to pursue stability in the region.
ASEAN has had, from its onset, a limited mandate, not being involved with
settlement of territorial and maritime demarcation disputes amongst States in
the region.34
This lack of regional institutional dispute settlement mechanism may
allegedly have become one factor in favor of several States’ resort to thirdparty judicial or arbitral dispute settlement procedures.35 Prior to ASEAN’s
foundation, there occurred an early judicial case involving States in the region,
as the 1962 ICJ Preah Vihear case between Cambodia and Thailand.36 The
resort to judicial settlement was presumably motivated by the lack of any form
of regional institutional framework for amicable dispute settlement.37
The increase of legal cases, especially maritime territorial disputes, in
the current century may have been promoted by ASEAN’s hesitancy about
bilateral disputes and discrepancies. However, if one sees ASEAN’s current
progress of institutionalization and community-building endeavors in a steady
and irreversible manner, confidence built amongst decision-makers and
officials fostered by ASEAN integration have been contributing to peaceful
dispute settlement including judicial and arbitral procedures.
ASEAN has formed layered consultation frameworks at all levels of
States, including leaders, ministers, senior officials, working-levels, as
well as experts and technical levels.38 Officials and stakeholders routinely
interact in various areas at all levels. The ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta with
approximately 400 personnel has become a gathering site for member States’
seconded officials.39 In order to resort to litigation tolerated by the contestant,
confidence amongst States is crucially required, with long-lasting relations
and transactions. ASEAN has been successfully fostering such confidence
amongst States in the region.

Toru Yano, Japan Southeast Asia Policy (Tokyo: Simul International, 1978), 76.
Chong, “Non-intervention,” 2.
35
Nicole Jenne, “Managing Territorial Disputes in Southeast Asia,” Journal of Current
Southeast Asia Affair 3 (2017): 35.
36
ICJ, Preah Vihear.
37
Jenne, “Managing Territorial Disputes,” 38.
38
Natalegawa, ASEAN Matters, 241.
39
ASEAN Charter, art.11.
33
34

157

Yoshinori Kodama

III. JUDICIAL AND ARBITRAL CASES IN AND AROUND THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA
This section examines judicial or arbitral cases, concerning the Southeast
Asia region, thereby analyzing general trends and conditions for accepting
compulsory third-party dispute settlement procedures in the region. It first
looks into the ICJ Temple of Preah Vihear cases (1962 and 2013), as a unique
pioneering example treating land boundaries. The other cases relate maritime
disputes, including territorial sovereignty on islands as well as maritime
demarcation. The section is to explore the backgrounds for the recent increase
of judicial and arbitral cases regarding maritime disputes in the region.

A. THE TEMPLE OF PREAH VIHEAR CASES (1962/2013)
1. BACKGROUNDS FOR THE RESORT TO JUDICIAL PROCEDURES
The Temple of Preah Vihear case in 1962 (“Preah Vihear I”) was unique, as
it was an early judicial dispute settlement case initiated by a newly independent
State in the region. It settled a military conflict deriving from territorial
sovereignty contestations.40 The case dealt with the attribution of a Buddhist
temple and its immediate surrounding area on borders between Cambodia and
Thailand. The temple area had been originally owned by Thailand.41
The Preah Vihear I was settled without engagement by international or
regional organisations or frameworks.42 The United Nations (UN) was not
involved, and ASEAN did not yet exist.43 Following Thai’s military occupation
over the area in 1958, bilateral consultations took place without solutions.44
Cambodia resorted to the ICJ in 1959.45 A governmental official in a relevant
State reflected that the ICJ had been the sole possible tool for Cambodia,
which was obliged to use a third-party procedure.46
Thailand submitted preliminary objections against the court’s jurisdiction
by denying the effect of its 1950 and 1957 compulsory jurisdiction declarations,
which Thailand claimed void following the disbanding of the Permanent Court
of Justice in 1946.47 The 1950 declaration had referred to the 1929 and 1940
compulsory jurisdiction declarations.48 The court did not accept the Thailand’s
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

ICJ, Preah Vihear.
Ibid., Separate Opinion of Sir Gerald Fitzmaurice.
Chong, “Non-Intervention,”2
Ibid.
ICJ, Preah Vihear, at 8.
Application, Pleadings (1959).
Interview with a governmental official, 20 February 2021 (file with the author).
Preliminary Objections of the Government of Thailand (1960).
Ibid..

158

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

argument by defining Thailand’s intention in the 1950 declaration to commit
to the ICJ.49 This objection by Thailand seems not to have been seriously
engaged, since clear commitment was made by Thailand to the international
court in 1950 when the PCIJ had been disbanded.50
Thailand was apparently confident about its substantive basis for territorial
ownership as provided under the 1904 Treaty. This self-confidence was a main
impetus for this early judicial case.51 The first application by Cambodia was
scarce in justifications, compared to the Thailand’s counter-memoir, which
resorted to treaty provisions and subsequent effective administrative functions
by the Thai authorities.52 Cambodia’s first submission mainly was based upon
the 1907 Treaty of boundary demarcation which addressed the remaining
lands. This was denied by the court as a legitimate basis for replacing the
1904 Treaty.53
The Temple of Preah Vihear case in 2013 (“Preah Vihear II”) was also a
unique case where Cambodia resorted to the request for the interpretation of
the 1962 Preah Vihear I judgment. Its aim was, equally to Preah Viear I, to
eliminate Thailand’s military occupation following Cambodia’s inscription of
the Temple and its surrounding areas for a UNESCO World Heritage in 2008.54
Its difference from Preah Vihear I was the engagement of the United
Nations Security Council and ASEAN, following the military conflict.55 The
Chair of the Security Council issued a statement on 14 February 2011 following
the Council meeting calling for permanent ceasefire and expressing support
for ASEAN’s mediation role.56 The ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ meeting on
22 February 2011 decided the dispatch of the Indonesian Foreign Minister as
special envoy to the two countries and the dispute areas for reconciliation.57 A
government official in the region accounted that the Cambodian government
ultimately chose the resort to the ICJ, because it considered the dispute to be
not “ASEAN matters”, thus seeking for third party settlement.58
Ibid., Preliminary Objections Judgment (1961).
ICJ, Preah Vihear, at 6.
51
Ibid, at 4. Counter Memorial of the Royal Government of Thailand (1961).
52
Ibid., Merits, at 27.
53
Ibid., Merits, at 14.
54
Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June 1962 in the Case concerning the
Temple of Preah Vihear (2013), ICJ Reports 2013, 281, at 293.
55
Ibid., at 294.
56
“Security Council urges permanent ceasefire after recent Thai-Cambodia clashes,” UN
News, 14 February 2011, accessed 15 May 2023, https://news.un.org/en/story/2011/02/366652.
57
ASEAN Secretariat, ASEAN welcomes Cambodia-Thai firm commitment to avoid further
clashes (Jakarta, 22 February 2011).
58
Interview with a governmental official, 20 February 2021 (file with the author).
49
50

159

Yoshinori Kodama

The involvement by the UN Security Council and ASEAN elevated the
transparency of the issue, contributing to the constructive handling as well
as enforcement of the ICJ judgment. This was an example of combined
endeavors towards dispute resolutions, including political and judicial
frameworks. Whether this precedent offers encouragement for third-party
dispute settlement in the region remains to be seen. However, the case has
been studied and analyzed by decision-makers and practitioners in the region
as a successfully-settled case.
2. PREAH VIHEAR I: ACQUIESCENCE AS A “TREATY SETTLEMENT”
AND SUBSEQUENT CONDUCTS
The distinctive feature of the Preah Vihear I judgment was the denial of
the 1904 Boundary Treaty provision, which had assigned the “watershed line”
as border, by Thailand’s subsequent conducts, including failure to protest.59
The court attached importance to the diplomatic communication in 1908
from the French authorities to the Thai Minister, as head of mission in Paris,
including maps completed by French members of the 1907 Mix Commission,
as requested by Thailand due to its lack of topographic expertise.60
The map, alias the “Annex I map”, drew dotted lines as boundary north to
the geographical cliff line, separating mountain hill regions from Cambodian
plains, thus positioning the temple in the French territory.61 The Thai act of
receiving the map with appreciation as well as its request for further copies for
their internal references, was evaluated by the court as acquiescence, meaning
tacit recognition, thus a form of consent, as formulated subsequently in the
ICJ Gulf of Maine judgment.62
As was elaborated in the Thai memorial, the country had no intention
to accept a border other than the “watershed lines” under the 1904 Treaty,
claiming an error in perception at the timing of its reception.63 It is presumed
that French officials did not mention nor pointed out the new borderline drawn
in the map, anticipating reactions or lack of reaction by its Thai counterpart.
This might have been regarded as “skillful inducement” in positive terms, or
a “diplomatic sneaky plot” in maximally negative terms.
The accumulation of jurisprudence on acquiescence indicates the need
for designating it as consent, consisting of the knowledge of presented facts
59
60
61
62
63

ICJ, Preah Vihear, at 16.
Ibid., at 17.
Ibid., at 18.
Gulf of Maine, ICJ Reports 1984, 246, at 305.
ICJ, Preah Vihear, at 22.

160

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

(in this case, the map with the new borderlines); a certain level of duty or
expectation to react as “called for under the circumstances; and a certain
duration of time as deadline for protest.64
There has been an argument whether the court resorted to the AngloAmerican concept of “estoppel” in this case.65 Amongst diversity of
conceptual categories of “estoppel” in the common law tradition, “estoppel
in representation” as procedural rule and “promissory estoppel” require the
reliance in good faith on the side of party exposed to the other’s representation
or promise, causing damage inflicted on the former party or, otherwise,
advantages for the latter party engaged in the first action or conduct.66
The court used this reasoning in an incomplete manner, while using the
term of “preclusion” as associated concept for estoppel67 It set out Thailand’s
advantage as stability and durability by the fixed border as well as saving its
administrative burden in remote periphery areas.68 This is a fictitious argument.
The loss of territory was a significant disadvantage for Thailand. The logic by
the court was thus acquiescence without requiring clear detrimental reliance
by the French side.
The court seemingly considered that its reasoning based upon acquiescence
was insufficient. It thus presented at least six subsequent conducts as
supplementary evidence for Thai recognition, following the 1908 diplomatic
communication.69 These are the use of a map based upon Annex I map by the
Thai Commission of Transcription in 1909; the Thai Prince’s visit to the area
received by a French resident with hoisting a French flag in 1930; Thai survey
of the region using the Annex I map in 1934-1935; the production of a map by
the Siamese Royal Survey Department including a map putting the temple on
the Cambodian side in 1937; the meeting of the French-Siamese Conciliation
Commission in 1947 where the Thai side had no mentioning of Preah Vihear;
and the sending of French note verbales for clarification in 1949 and 1954
Etienne Henry, “Alleged Acquiescence of the International Community to Revisionist
Claims of International Customary Law,” Melbourne Journal of International Law 18, no.2
(2017). Sophia Loperla, “The Legal Value of Silence as State Conduct in the Jurisprudence of
International Tribunal,” Australian Year Book of International Law 29 (2011): 87.
65
Anthony D’Amato, “Consent, Estoppel, and Reasonableness,” Virginia Journal of
International Law 10 (1969):1. Alexander Ovchar, “Estoppel in the Jurisprudence of the ICJ,”
Bond Law Review 21 (2009). Christopher Brown, “A Comparative and Critical Assessment of
Estoppel in International Law,” University of Miami Law Review 50 (1996): 380.
66
Ibid.
67
ICJ, Preah Vihear, at 23.
68
Ibid., at 34.
69
Ibid., at 27.
64

161

Yoshinori Kodama

with no reply by Thailand.70
Amongst these, the Thai Prince’s visit to the area in 1930 was considered
to be a reliable example of implied recognition. However, as the Thai side
suggested in its counter-memoir, the French flag may have been hoisted
surrounding the French resident’s private domicile as a private action.71 The
court did not accept Thai taxation engagement presented with affidavits as
complete administrative functions.
Lessons from these factual evaluations and reasonings, particularly for
States in the region with similar border demarcation disputes, were as follows:
first, the status of a treaty could be displaced by subsequent conducts or
unconscious inaction by a party, as designated as a “treaty settlement”; and
second, in the court process, there should be a need to collect and present facts
and evidence of territorial administrative functions, or the lack of them by the
other party.
States in the region with colonial administrative histories as well as
sporadic state functions in border areas at early periods may have considered
these requirements as a burden, given their administrative capacities. States
prefer predictability and certainty, minimizing its risk-taking, in the process of
dispute settlement, particularly, for territorial demarcation cases. These were
presumably elements for States in the region in scarcely choosing dispute
settlement methods towards the end of last century following the Preah Vihear
I case.
3. PREAH VIHEAR II: REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION AS A
JURISDICITIONAL PATHWAY
The Preah Vihear II case was initiated by Cambodia’s request for the
interpretation of the Preah Vihear I judgement, under article 60 of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice.72 Thailand’s compulsory jurisdiction
declaration had lapsed, and the ICJ has a strictly limited appeal procedure.73
Thus, Cambodia used the pathway of interpretation, seeking the withdrawal of
Thai military and police forces from the surrounding area of the Preah Vihear
Temple.

Ibid., at 31.
Ibid., at 30.
72
Statute of the International Court of Justice, 33 UNTS 993 (entered into force 24 October
1945), art. 60.
73
Ibid., art. 61.
70
71

162

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

The scope of interpretation shall be limited to terms and phrases in the
operative parts of the previous judgment.74 The court shall not deliberate upon
subsequent practice and facts. Nonetheless, the objective of the Cambodia’s
application was to ensure the withdrawal of the Thai forces from the area,
treating the imminent and present conflict on the ground. The interpretation
request does not require a newly-updated jurisdiction declaration, and
there is no time-limit for its application. It could become a convenient tool
to circumvent jurisdictional and admissibility barriers in the ICJ judicial
process.75
The Cambodian side used the following two logics to achieve a solution
within strict limits in the interpretation appeal: First, it presented the argument
on the meaning of the term “vicinity of the Preah Vihear” as the scope of the
Thai forces’ obligation for withdrawal.76 The court did not touch upon the
legal status of the Annex I map itself, as not included in the operative part
of the Preah Vihear I judgement. The reasoning of that judgment, however,
designated the map as a “treaty settlement,” thus granted eventually legally
binding status.77 Here, the court followed its self-imposed formal limits to the
scope of interpretation judgments.
The court presented relatively weak logic and reasons for geographical
interpretation: it proclaimed that the inclusion of the promontory of Preah
Vihear in the “vicinity of Preah Vihear” as part of “natural understanding.”78
The international courts and tribunals should not presuppose the existence
of “natural understanding,” given the diversity and complexity of commonly
understood facts and values.
Second, the court designated the scope of “vicinity of Preah Vihear”
as geographical spots including the area where the Thai police detachment
were stationed, following the Preah Vihear I judgment which required the
withdrawal.79 This is a tautological reverse logic. The court ordered the
withdrawal of the Thai forces from a certain geographical scope. This “certain
geographical scope” is where the Thai forces stationed. That is a circular logic
avoiding the designation of a “geographical scope.”
ICJ Reports 2013, at 307.
Michelle Barnett, “Cambodia v Thailand,” Brooklyn Journal of International Law 38 (2012):
271. Alexandra C. Traviss, “Temple of Preah Vihear: Lessons on Provisional Measures,”
Chicago Journal of International Law 13 (2012): 320.
76
ICJ Reports 2013, at 331.
77
Ibid., 309. The court stated that it “feels bound” by the Annex I map, in an un-legalistic
manner; Merits, 77.
78
Merits, para. 89.
79
Ibid., para. 88.
74
75

163

Yoshinori Kodama

The court also followed the Cambodian issue-setting by judging that the
Thai obligation was “general and continuing.”80 Therefore, the Thai forces
stationed in 2013 should be subject to the withdrawal obligation under the
1962 judgment. Thailand stationed their forces in their self-imposed “Council
of Ministers” line after the 1962 judgment. The court designated this stationing
as “continuing action” rather than newly-taken separate enforcement measures.
Cambodia effectively used the logic within the scope of the interpretation
procedure.
This successful handling by Cambodia presented a lesson for States in
the region and beyond, as an effective use of tools and paths in the judicial
procedures, in order to achieve a solution to issues at hand. The elimination
or circumvention of jurisdictional barriers has become a core task for legal
counsel even more significantly, in resorting to third party dispute settlement
procedures. This was seen in the 2016 South China Sea arbitration case, as
examined later in this article.81

B. THE LIGITAN AND SIPADAN CASE (2002)
1. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION FOR JUDICIAL APPLICATION
After a long interval, two maritime States in the Southeast Asia region,
Indonesia as an archipelagic State, on one hand, and Malaysia as a peninsula
State straddling international straits and transit routes, on the other, applied
for an ICJ litigation process by a mutually-agreed special agreement in 1997.82
This was based upon a top-down decision by political leaders from the two
States.83
The case concerned the territorial attribution of two islands, Ligitan and
Sipadan, located in maritime border areas between the two States. According
to governmental officials in one of the parties, the both parties retrospectively
had an intention to avoid the escalation of territorial disputes, with the
importance attached to the stability and certainty of border delimitation.84
Indonesia and Malaysia had engaged in military insurgency conflicts in early
periods of their post-independence era.85 In the late 1990s, the both States had
a clear priority upon economic nation-building as well as stable bilateral and
Ibid., at 287.
Infra, D.
82
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan; Marcel Hendrapati, “Implication of the ICJ Decision respecting
Sipadan Ligitan case towards basepoints and maritime delimitation,” International Journal of
Sciences: Basic and Applied Research 14, no.1 (2014): 374.
83
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan, para.1.
84
Interview with a governmental official, 15 January 2021 (file with the author).
85
Natalegawa, Does ASEAN Matter?, 241.
80
81

164

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

regional relations enabling their economic growth.86
Diplomatic negotiations through joint working groups established in 1991
did not produce results, thus leading to the resort to a third-party dispute
settlement procedure.87 Decision by a government to resort to judicial litigation
naturally needs a certain level of self-confidence in obtaining a judgement in
its favor. According to governmental experts in both parties, Indonesia had
a special emphasis upon the application of the 1891 Convention between
Britain and the Netherlands, the parties’ colonial predecessors, as a basis
for boundary demarcation.88 Indonesia’s logic and arguments concentrated
upon the interpretation of relevant articles in the 1891 Convention for their
justification.89
Malaysia denied the Convention as a basis for demarcation.90 It also denied
a geographic coverage of the two islands by colonial contracts concluded by
the Netherlands and local sultanates.91 Malaysia focused upon factual evidence
for effective territorial occupation of the two islands in pre- and post-1891
Convention periods.92 Relevant experts recalled their surprise by insufficient
preparations by Indonesia in presenting evidence for effective occupation,
using, for instance, private fishing activities and Boy Scout excursions.93 The
court decided in favor of Malaysia’s ownership of the two islands.
One government official explained the need which was felt by the two
parties to clarify border demarcations, given the ambiguity and uncertainty
about the attribution of the two islets.94 There was a shared interest by the
parties to settle such ambiguity, in order to construct stable bilateral relations.
This is one reason Indonesia managed domestic political backlash following
the judgment which was not in their favor. This aspect will be examined later
in this sub-section.95
2. ISSUES AND REASONING: TREATY INTERPRETATION AND
EFFECTIVITES COMPARATIVES
The judgment of the Ligitan and Sipadan case denied both Dutch contracts
with local political figures and Anglo-Dutch treaties as a basis for territorial
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95

Ibid., 228.
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan, para.1.
Interview with a governmental expert, 23 November 2018 (file with the author).
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan, Memorial, Indonesia 1 (1999), ch.IV.
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan, Memorial of Malaysia 1 (1999), at 27.
Ibid., ch.7.
Ibid., ch.6.
Memorial, Indonesia 1.
Interview with a governamental official, 15 January 2021 (file with the author).
Infra II.B.3.

165

Yoshinori Kodama

ownership over the two islands.96 Both parties denied the terra nullius status
for the two islands. The court followed this, given the existence of local
sultanates since the pre-colonial period.
Specifically, Indonesia’s claims for territorial succession from the 1817
Dutch patronage contract with Sultan of Boelognan as well as subsequent
contracts for territorial allocation in 1850 and 1879, were denied by the court
as lacking geographical coverage for the two islands.97 The court also denied
Malaysia’s claim for the chain of succession from Spain to the United States,
then to the United Kingdom, finally succeeded by Malaysia as an independent
State, for not clearly covering Ligitan and Sipadan.98
The two islands were defined as located in uncertain border areas between
the two parties. Here, the court did not categorize the two islands as belonging
to the original title holders, like local sultanates, nor defined the two islands
as terra nullius. The court did not take a position to require legal basis for
all corners of disputed geographical areas in order to legitimate colonial
successions.99 This is the issue of territorial expanse covered by a territorial
title, rather than the issue as to whether a territorial title exists or not, as
formulated in the 1986 ICJ Burkina Faso/Mali Frontier Dispute judgment.100
The court then set out the interpretation of Article IV of the 1981 AngloDutch Convention as not defining territorial demarcation for the two islands.
Article 4 is silent about the border allocation to the east of the island of Sebatik
(Sebittick), close to North Borneo.101 It provides the line of allocation (the
4°10’north latitude parallel) “shall be continued eastward... across the island
of Sebittick.”102 The court interpreted this phrase as not covering the east to
the island of Sebatik an “ordinary” and natural meaning of terms, following
Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.103
Indonesia claimed that the silence here assumed the existing intention by
the parties to extend eastwards, based upon the purpose and objective of the
Convention to bring about certainty and finality of border demarcation.104 The
Merits, para.99.
Ibid., para.113.
98
Ibid.
99
Seokyoon Huh, “Title to Territory in the Post-colonial Era Original Title and Terra Nullius
in the ICJ Judgments on Cases Concerning Ligitan/Sipadan (2002) and Pedra Branca (2008),”
European Journal of International Law 26, no.3 (2016): 714.
100
ICJ Reports 1986, at 586.
101
Merits, para.41.
102
Ibid., at 78, 5.22.
103
Ibid., para.2; Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1155 UNTS 331 (entered into force
27 January 1980), art. 31.
104
Memorial, Indonesia, 1, ch. V.
96
97

166

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

court adopted Malaysia’s argument that the silence implied the lack of intention
for extending the 4°10’north parallel line eastwards for border allocation.105
This is an issue of case-by-case textual interpretation, the judgment of which
depends upon comparative evaluation about facts and logics presented by
each party.
Following the denial of basing treaties or contracts for geographical
coverage, the court evaluated comparatively effective occupations by the two
parties, as manifestation of State authorities, as had been set out in the 1923
Island of Palmas arbitration and the 1953 ICJ East Greenland case.106 The
Island of Palmas arbitration provided “continuous and peaceful administrative
and regulatory activities” without a protest by a contesting party for a certain
length of time, as a basis for territorial sovereignty.107
The East Greenland case judgment relativized the intensity of effective
control when contested by other parties, emphasizing upon relative superiority
of control in such cases.108 It also confirmed the acceptance of “very little”
evidence in the case of disputes on unhabitable areas.109 The Ligitan and
Sipadan judgment further emphasized the importance of “specificity”,
meaning that administrative control should not be general, but “specific” to
disputed land areas.110
The court attached distinctive importance to Britain’s administrative
regulation on turtle and turtle egg management in 1930 as well as the
designation of bird sanctuaries in 1933, both in Sipadan.111 The court endorsed
Malaysia’s argument that these are administrative and regulative control as well
as quasi-judicial activities.112 Malaysia claimed that North Borneo authorities
had settled turtle and egg collection disputes between local inhabitants, which
was adopted by the court as evidence of acts à titre sovereign.113 The court did
not adopt Indonesia’s argument that the settlement was personal-based, rather
Merits, 117, para.52.
Ibid., para. 25; Island of Palmas (1928), RIAA, II, 829; Legal Status of Eastern Greenland
(1933), PCIJ, Series A./B. no. 53; Giovanni Distefano, “La notion de titre juridique et les
différends territoriaux dans l’ordre international [The Concept of Legal Title in Matters
of Territorial and Maritime Disputes],” Editions A (Paris: Pedone, 1995). Constantinos
Yiallourides, Disputed Waters and Seabed Resources in Asia and Europe (London and New
York: Routledge, 2019). Zhenni Li, “International Intertemporal Law,” California Western
International Journal 48, no 2 (2018): 342.
107
Ibid., Palmas, 839.
108
ICJ, Eastern Greenland, 141.
109
Ibid., 45 et 63.
110
Merits, para.136.
111
Ibid., paras.143 et 144.
112
Ibid., para.143.
113
Malaysia, Memorial, para.6.12.
105
106

167

Yoshinori Kodama

than the manifestation of territorial sovereignty.114
The court, on the other hand, denied a sovereignty-manifesting
characteristic for Dutch naval surveillance operations, such as naval patrols
in the 1870s and HNLMS Lynx’s patrol activities in 1921.115 Unless other
compelling factors exist, military or enforcement operations are normally
State activities of high intensity. The court adopted Malaysia’s allegation
that the Dutch patrol activities had been sporadic and intermittent once-forall “uneventful” matters.116 Malaysia pointed out the sporadic nature of such
patrol operations, as well as the lack of national flag-hoisting and detailed
records in logbooks.117 Indonesia may have had more skillful ways to present
factual evidence for naval and enforcement activities.
Regrettably, the conclusion of the court on this point is not clear in its
line of logic, merely stating that “it cannot be deduced from the report of
the commanding officer of the Lynx or from any other document …that the
naval authorities considered the waters…to be under the ownership of the
Netherlands and Indonesia.”118
The court also denied Indonesia’s claim of their nationals’ fishing and Boy
Scout excursions in the islands, as private activities without the involvement
of government authorities.119
The court, on the other hand, endorsed Malaysia’s construction of
lighthouses and navigational aids, as state authority manifestation.120
International courts and tribunals generally attach less importance to the
construction of lighthouses and navigational aids as sovereign actions,
unless they are installed in “small islands”, as was the case in the 1953 ICJ
Minquiers and Ecrehos case and the 2001 Qatar/Bahrain case.121 It is curious
that international judicial judgements have adopted such a vague concept as
a criterion.

Merits, para.143.
Ibid., para.130.
116
Ibid., para.139.
117
Malaysia, Counter-Memoire, para.4.9
118
Ibid., Merits,117,para.139.
119
Ibid., para.140.
120
Ibid., para.147.
121
Minquieres et des Ecrehos, France /Royaume-Uni (1953), ICJ Report, 1953, 70. Maritime
Delimitation and Territorial Question between Qatar and Bahrain, ICJ Reports 2001, 40, at 99.
Giovanni Distefano, Border Disputes and their Resolution according to International Law (Abu
Dhabi: Emirates Centre for Strategic Studies and Research, 2005), 25.
114
115

168

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

The court here defined Ligitan and Sipadan as “small islands” thus granting
evidential value to lighthouses.122 The judgment described Sipadan as a small
island with “approximately 0.13 sq.km”.123 This means, if it is converted to
a square, 350 by 350 meters approximately. Some reports present Litigan as
approximately 7.9 hectares (as a square, 250 by 250 meters approximately),
and Sipadan as 16 hectares (400 by 400 meters).124 The main island of
Minquiers is 200 yards by 50 yards (350 by 85 meters), and that of Ecrehos
is 300 by 150 yards (500 by 250 meters).125 Minquiers and Ecrehos were,
however, disqualified as “small islands.” An island in dispute in the 2001
ICJ Qatar /Bahrain case is 12 by 4 meters, as qualified as “small island”.126
The court’s application of the “small island” criterion may be criticized as
discretionary and arbitrary.
The court denied the evidential value of the map which the Dutch authority
submitted to its parliament in the ratification process of the 1891 Convention,
as not clearly covering Ligitan and Sipadan.127 On the other hand, the court
accepted Malaysia’s argument that the 1960 Indonesian archipelagic baseline
regulation had not used the two islands as “outermost islands” for drawing
archipelagic baselines.128
Indonesia defended itself with the argument that this lack of inclusion
had derived from hastiness in legislation as well as political considerations
to watch carefully the discussion in the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea where the concept and conditions for archipelagic waters
were being debated.129 Indonesia’s defense proved its knowledge of the option
for drawing archipelagic baselines. This drove the court further in favour of
Malaysia’s claim.
3. LESSONS FOR FURTHER JUDICIAL SETTLEMENT IN THE REGION
The Ligitan and Sipadan case demonstrated the importance of evidential
presentations and reasonings in the evaluation of comparative effective
occupation, effectivités comparatives. Indonesia and Malaysia engaged in
“mirror arguments” in items for respective claims and defense, in order to
Merits, para.147.
Ibid., 634.
124
Zainul Daulay, “Soverignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan (Indonesia/Malaysia),”
Law Reform 2, no.1 (2021): 119, 120.
125
ICJ, Minquiers et Ecrehos, at 22.
126
ICJ, Qatar and Bahrain, at 99.
127
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipandan, paras.44 et 45.
128
Ibid, para.130.
129
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan, Counter-Memorial, Indonesia 1 (2000), para.7.54; Public Sitting
held on Tuesday 4 June 2002, verbatim record, at 50.
122
123

169

Yoshinori Kodama

prove relatively superior evidence and logics for effectivités.
The court was convinced by the British regulation for management of
turtle and turtle eggs as well as the designation of a bird sanctuary.130 The court
applied the “small island” criterion, accepting lighthouse construction and
navigation aids installment, in favour of Malaysia’s claim.131 The court then
defined Indonesia’s failure to include the disputed islands in its archipelagic
baselines as evidence for not having been concerned about the territorial
attribution of the islands.132
It may be natural that sovereign States with sensitivity to territorial integrity
and natural resources allocation will feel hesitant in relying upon allegedly
discretionary evaluative comparison by a third-party dispute settlement body.
From this viewpoint, Indonesia’s management of domestic backlashes,
following the judgment unfavorable to it, gives us thoughts and lessons, in
tackling reticence about judicial settlement.
Relevant government officials explained to the author that the Indonesian
government had been fortunate in responding to its domestic audience that
the resort to litigation had been a policy choice by the previous presidential
administration.133 They also pointed out that, in the early 2000s period when
the judgement was made, natural resources allocations, including oil and gas,
in the Indonesia/Malaysia maritime border areas were not keenly recognized
by domestic stakeholders.134 This reduced the burden on the government to
address criticism from domestic audience.
Indonesia’s handling demonstrated that strong political leadership is
needed for resorting to third-party dispute settlement procedures. In addition,
the relatively less acute recognition of practical interests, including natural
resources, can lead to tolerance for resorting to inter-State judicial processes.
Whether these factors may arise in other disputes will not be certain. How
countries like Indonesia may continuously recognize the advantage of
third-party dispute settlement, despite the experience of being exposed to
an unfavorable judgement, will be a test case for the prevalence of judicial
settlement as an option in the region.

130
131
132
133
134

Ibid., Merits, para.144.
Ibid., para.147.
Ibid., para.130.
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan.
Ibid.

170

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

C. THE PEDRA BRANCA CASE (2008)
1. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION FOR JUDICIAL APPLICATION
The Pedra Branca, Middle Rock, and South Lodge case was a contentious
case between Malaysia and Singapore on territorial sovereignty over islands
and a low-tide elevation located in the south entry point of the Singapore Strait
from the South China Sea.135 These geographical figures are of importance
in maritime traffic, thus crucial for navigational safety as well as maritime
security. Clarity in their jurisdictional allocation is of wide-ranging interest for
States and private parties in the region.
On Pedra Branca, as a main subject-matter of contention, a navigational
lighthouse was established in 1851 by the British Crown Colony authority,
then maintained and administered by the Singaporean authority.136 Pedra
Branca has approximately 8.56 square meters, with the size of 137 meters long
and, on average, 60 meters wide.137 Therefore, it can be categorized as a “very
small island”, by the preceding Ligitan and Sipadan case criteria.138 According
to that criterion, a small intensity of effective control can be counted, including
the establishment and administration of a lighthouse.139
The Pedra Branca case was submitted based upon a special agreement
by the parties in 2003.140 It is noteworthy that the parties limited the scope of
litigation to the territorial sovereignty of the geographical figures, separating
the issue of maritime zone demarcation, leaving it to inter-governmental
consultations through establishing a bilateral technical committee.141 Maritime
areas around Pedra Branca are not perceived as contentious zones in terms of
natural resource excavation. The geographical figures in the areas are not a
matter of keen nationalistic sentiment by the parties, either.
In early years of the 21st century, Malaysia has had territorial or maritime
demarcation disputes and discrepancies with other parties, such as territorial
sovereignty over Sara and Sarawak against the Philippines, as well as Spratly
islands territorial and maritime claims against China and several neighboring
States.142 It should have been natural that Malaysia preferred a peaceful thirdICJ, Pedra Branca. Yoshifumi Tanaka, “Passing of Sovereignty, The Malaysia/Singapore
Territorial Dispute before the ICJ,” Hague Justice Journal 3, no.2 (2008).
136
ICJ, Ibid., para.24.
137
Ibid., para.16.
138
ICJ, Ligitan and Sipadan, para.147.
139
Ibid, para. 145.
140
Award, Annex, para.1.
141
Singapore Government Agency, Joint Press Statement (2 December 2010). Joint Press
Statement (22 January 2020).
142
Mohammad Zaki Ahman and Amusafir Kelana, “An Inter-State Maritime Territorial
135

171

Yoshinori Kodama

party settlement for a territorial sovereignty dispute mainly involving an
interest of navigational safety and security.
The submission to the ICJ was decided at a top political level. As recorded,
the then Malaysia Prime Minister stated that, though he was not confident
about the substance, non-submission to the court would have been seen as the
lack of confidence in the case.143 It was the same Prime Minister who decided
to discontinue in 2018 the submissions for revision and interpretation of the
judgment, based upon “mutual respect.”144 This is an example of predilection
for peaceful third-party settlement, rather than allowing for political escalation
and confusion, damaging bilateral relations.
Relevant government officials explained to the author that the agreement
by the both parties for litigation derived from the relatively tiny and peripheral
position of the islands, which had less interests in terms of natural resources.145
The deference of maritime demarcation issues to a technical committee was
also counted as a facilitative factor for submitting the remaining issue of
territorial sovereignty to judicial process.146
Legal experts in the both parties involved with the case shared with the
author their self-confidence in winning the case for respective reasons.147
Positive prospect for winning is necessary for motivating the parties to be
subject to judicial process. Malaysia was wholeheartedly confident in its
argument based upon existing treaties and contractual arrangements proving
its sovereignty.148
Singapore relied exclusively upon the 1953 correspondence between
colonial administrative authorities as evidence of the lack of sovereignty
recognized by the Sultanate of Johor, succeeded by Malaysia.149 Malaysian
legal experts were continuously confident about Malaysian sovereignty,
which led to the submission of revision of the case in 2017, resorting to new
Conflict,” Jurnal Sosisohumaniora 7, no.2 (2005): 93.
143
Ibid.
144
Kamarulzaman Askandar and Cariervin Sukim, “Making Peace over a Disputed Territory in
Southeast Asia,” Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies 3, no.1 (2016): 65.
145
Angaindrankumar Gnanasagaran, “Pedra Branca Dispute Reveals Disconnect between
Malaysia and Singapore,” The ASEAN Post, 12 January 2021, accessed 15 May 2023, https://
theaseanpost.com/article/pedra-branca-dispute-reveals-disconnect-between-malaysia-andsingapore. “Malaysia accepts Ruling on Pedra Branca, says Mahathir,” The Straits Times, 25
June 2019, accessed 15 May 2023, https://www.straitstimes.com/politics/malaysia-acceptsruling-on-pedra-branca-says-pm-mahathir.
146
Interview with a governmental official, 15 May 2017.
147
Ibid., Interview with a governmental official, 22 April 2022.
148
Memorial of Malaysia I (2004).
149
Memorial of Singapore 1 (2004).

172

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

evidence, though finally discontinued in 2018.150
2. REASONING: ORIGINAL TITLE AND SUBSEQUENT STATE
PRACTICE
In the exchange of submissions in the proceedings, Malaysia relied upon
the existence of the Johor Sultanate as a territorial entity since the pre-modern
period.151 It also based its argument upon treaty settlements by the 1824 AngloDutch Treaty for demarcation and the 1824 Crawfurd Treaty for territorial
cession to the Singaporean Colonial Settlement, excluding islets located
beyond 10 nautical miles from the coast on letters.152 These were reinforced by
the 1951 permission by the Sultanate granted to the Singaporean Settlement
for establishing a lighthouse on allegedly Pedra Branca, as manifestation of
the Settlement’s territorial control.153
Singapore denied the Sultanate of Johor as territorial entity in the premodern period, defining its control as merely personnel allegiance to the
Sultan, thus non-inhabited islands as Pedra Branca was outside of control.154
Singapore also denied the two treaties in 1894 as not a contractual basis for
territorial cessation.155 It also denied the 1844 permission by the Sultanate as
not covering Pedra Branca, based upon contextual interpretation.156 Singapore
based its claim upon state acts manifested in the process of establishing and
managing the lighthouse with the time span from 1847 to 1851.157
Singapore then presented the correspondence in 1953 from the colonial
authority of Singapore Settlement to an Administrative Officer in the Johor
Protectorate as a basis for Johor’s recognition of Singapore sovereignty over
the island, along with subsequent administrative acts as evidence for effective
controls.158 The 1953 letter of response from the Johor authority provided that
it did not claim the “ownership” of Pedra Branca.159
Singapore added in its Reply and oral hearings that Pedra Branca had been
terra nullius at the timing of the lighthouse construction in 1847-1851.160 This
last-minute presentation contains difficulties in understanding its intention,
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160

Interview with a legal expert, 15 November 2016.
Memorial of Malaysia, para.36.
Ibid., para. 50.
Ibid., para.116.
Counter-Memorial of Singapore (2005) para. 3.2.
Ibid., para.3.17.
Ibid., para.5.4.
Memorial of Singapore, para.5.2-.
Ibid., para.7.29.
Ibid., 181.
Reply of Singapore (2005), 7.

173

Yoshinori Kodama

given the general trend of court cases in disfavor of the terra nullius concept.161
It may have been used as tactical argument in order to weaken Malaysia’s
treaty basis in 1824, playing up the meaning of alleged state actions after the
lighthouse construction, including the 1953 correspondence.
The court denied the evidential value of treaty in 1824, due to the lack of
clarity in letters, as well as the Johor’s permission for lighthouse construction
in 1844 for insufficient specificity.162 Then, the court defined the original title
by the Johor Sultanate over Pedra Branca and South Lodge, relying upon
the general geographical scope covering these islets, as well as the lack of
competing claims.163 The terra nullius characterization was denied, due to the
status of the islands as navigational hazards which should have been known or
discovered.164 Nonetheless, these reasonings favored Singapore by lowering
its burden of proof to counter Malaysia’s territorial claim without treaty or
contractual basis.
The court accepted subsequent State practice as evidence for Singapore’s
sovereignty, including the 1953 correspondence.165 It also enumerated
Singapore’s actions as acts à titre sovereign without Malaysia’s protest: that
is shipwreck investigation in the area, permission for Malaysian authorities’
visits to the island, installation of military communication equipment on the
island, public tender advertisement for reclamation projects, and Singapore’s
official report including the islands in an attached map, as well as Malaysia’s
official map excluding the islands.166
The court’s reasoning showed that the 1953 correspondence could be
defined as evidence for the recognition by the Johor authority of Singapore’s
sovereignty, as described as “ownership,” over the island. Given the relative
evidential weakness of Johor’s original title, as opposed to treaty settlement,
the 1953 recognition seems to be sufficient to rebut the Malaysian arguments.
The court may have elaborated further evidential facts in order to complement
its reasoning in favour of Singapore. However, this combined presentation
blurred the core argument for authorizing Singapore’s sovereignty.
Huh, “Title to Territory,” 717. Marcelo Hohen,” Original Title in the Light of the ICJ Judgment
on Sovereignty over Pedera Branca/Pulau Batu Putech, Middle Rocks and South Ledge,”
Journal of the History of International Law 15 (2013):151. Dieter Dörr, “The Background of the
Theory of Discovery,” American Indian Law Review 38, no.2 (2014): 486. Randall Lesaffer,
“Argument from Roman Law in Current International Law,” European Journal of International
Law 16, no.1(2005): 27.
162
ICJ, Pedra Branca, para.145.
163
Ibid., para.117.
164
Ibid., para.61.
165
Ibid., paras.220, 222, et 223.
166
Ibid., para.231.
161

174

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Potential parties for third-party judicial settlement on territorial disputes
may have got an impression that the eternal presentation of facts and evidence
for State control and administration would decide the case, thus tactical
presentation and debate will count. The court should reasonably avoid
arbitrary and discretionary countenance in its reasoning. It should rather
clarify the crucial factor for deciding territorial disputes, as well as clearer
rules for allocating and measuring the burden of proof.

D. THE SOUTH CHINA SEA ARBITRATION (2016)
1. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE
The South China Sea arbitration award on merits on 12 July 2016 was
made in the compulsory arbitration procedures under the 1982 UNCLOS,
instituted by the Philippines on 22 November 2013, against China’s maritime
claims and activities in contested maritime zones.167 The litigation was
engaged directly in response to China’s forceful control over Scarborough
Shoal off the coast of the Philippines on 18 June 2012, following the ChinaPhilippine stand-offs triggered by China’s obstruction to Philippines’ fishery
activities in the surrounding maritime area.168
The litigation was also triggered widely by China’s law enforcement
operations and large-scale reclamation activities in overlapping maritime
areas.169 Thus, the background situation was similar to the ICJ Preah Vihear
cases, where the plaintiff resorted to third-party dispute settlement procedures
for eliminating military and enforcement control in disputed land areas.170
The Philippines’ litigation was further based upon its concerns about
China’s consistent but intermittent territorial and maritime advancement in the
South China Sea.171 On 19 January 1974, China gained control over the Paracel
Islands following military confrontations with South Vietnam, currently
contested by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam: in 1988, China commenced
occupation over seven geographical features in the Spratly Islands which had
been controlled by Vietnam; and in 1995, China took the control of Second
PCA, South China Sea, Award. Zhenguo Gao and Bing Bing Jia, “The Nine-Dash Line in
the South China Sea,” American Journal of International Law 107, no.1 (2013): 106. Robert
Beckman, “The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the Maritime Disputes in the South
China Sea,” American Journal of International Law 107, no.1 (2013): 142.
168
Award, at 11. Zhou Fangyin, “Between Assertiveness and Self-restrain,” International
Affairs 92, no.4 (2016): 869.
169
Award, at 67.
170
Fangyin, “Between Assertiveness and Self-restrain,” 869. Mark Raymond and David A.
Welch, “What’s Really Going on in the South China Sea?” Journal of Current Southeast Asia
Affairs 4, no.2 (2022): 214.
171
Bill Hayton, “How to Solve the South China Sea Disputes,” ISEAS, no. 25 (2022): 6.
167

175

Yoshinori Kodama

Thomas Shoal from the Philippines.172
Then, China temporarily took more non-confrontational approach for
some period, exemplified by the 2000 China-Vietnam maritime demarcation
agreement on the Gulf of Tonkin, along with agreements on fishing and
common exploration/development zones for natural resources.173
In the 2010s, China reactivated its State actions for strengthening control
over maritime zones, such as interference with Vietnam/Philippine seismic
surveys in their respectively claimed EEZs in 2011, and the issuance of tenders
by the China State energy company for offshore energy exploration in an EEZ
claimed by Vietnam.174
In the same period, China intensified its intrusion to maritime areas claimed
by Malaysia, as the southern end-post of the self-claimed “nine dash line”
zone, covering virtually the whole South China Sea, as the dispatch of massive
fishing boats, escorted by coast guard and naval ships.175 China’s large-scale
reclamation and artificial island building in its occupied geographical features
intensified in the same period, resulting in concerns amongst claimants in the
region, including the Philippines.176
The litigation was also prompted and enabled by the increased clarification
by China about its claims, triggered by its note verbales submitted in the
proceedings of continental shelf extension in the UN Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf, under Article 76(8) UNCLOS.177 China’s
note verbales on 7 May 2009, following the joint Philippines/Vietnam and
Vietnamese submissions on extended continental shelf included China’s
claims in the South China Sea consisting of, first, “sovereignty over the
islands and the adjacent waters,” as well as, second, “sovereign rights and
jurisdiction over the relevant waters, seabed, and subsoils, as widely known by
the international community.”178 The note verbales were attached by the map
Manoj Joshi, “The South China Sea Disputes,” ORF Occasional Papers, August 2016. Robin
Gonzales, “The Spratly Islands Dispute,” Thesis, University of Nevada, 2014, 33. M. Tailor
Fravel, “China’s Strategy in the South China Sea,” Contemporary Southeast Asia 33, no.3
(2011): 292. Ben Dolven, Mark E. Manyin, Shirley A. Kan, “Maritime Territorial Disputes in
East Asia,” Congressional Research Paper, 2014, 8. Kazuhiro Nakatani, “The South China Sea
Arbitration Award and the Rule of Law in the Seas,” Japan Review 1, no. 2 (2017): 2.
173
Benoît de Tréglodé, “Maritime Boundary Delimitation and Sino-Vietnamese Cooperation in
the Gulf of Tonkin (1994-2016),” China Perspectives 3 (2016): 35.
174
Fangyin, “Assertiveness and Self-restraint,” 871.
175
Ibid.
176
Dolven, Manyin, Kan, “Maritime Territorial Disputes in East Asia,” 10.
177
UN Document, CML/17/2009, 7 May 2009. UN Document, CML/18/2009, 7 May 2009.
178
Ibid.
172

176

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

with dashed lines which seemingly indicated the scope of China’s claims.179
China’s subsequent note verbale on 14 April 2011, following the Philippines’
response to China’s first note, added that China’s sovereignty and related
rights and jurisdiction were “supported by historical and legal evidence.”180
China had already proclaimed an EEZ and continental shelf, based upon the
1982 UNCLOS in its 1998 Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf
Act, which included a provision stating that China’s “historic rights” are not
affected by its UNCLOS-compatible maritime claims.181 Therefore, these
notes and instruments showed China’s maritime claims beyond territorial
seas, consisting of UNCLOS-based claims for EEZs and continental shelves,
as well as, in parallel, historical rights for sovereign rights and jurisdiction,
which are seemingly analogous, in terms of contents to EEZ/continental shelf
claims under UNCLOS.182
The upgraded clarity of China’s claims led to the Philippines’ submission
which narrowed down subject matters, enabling the lifting of jurisdictional
barriers under the UNCLOS procedures.183 China made a further clarification on
jurisdiction and admissibility by its Position Paper submitted on 11 December
2014.184 The Position Paper was, together with the letter on 8 December 2015
by the Chinese Ambassador to the Netherlands, designated by the Tribunal as
equivalent with preliminary objections, which further facilitated procedural
screening in the litigation.185
China’s reservation on 6 February 2009 to Japan’s extended continental
shelf, by referring to the eligibility of Okinotori-shima, an island with high-tide
elevation, for continental shelf, also contributed to substantive arguments on
the eligibility of artificial islands constructed by China on low-tide elevations
and submerged marine areas in the South China Sea.186 Indonesia reacted
Ibid.
UN Document, CML/8/2011, 14 April 2011.
181
The Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf Act (1998), art.14.
182
Sophia Kopela, “Historic Titles and Historic Rights in the Law of the Sea in the light of the
South China Sea Arbitration,” Ocean Development and International Law 48, no. 2 (2017):
181.
183
Award, at 13.
184
Position Paper of the Government of the People’s Republic of China on the Matter of
Jurisdiction in the South China Sea Arbitration initiated by the Republic of the Philippines
(7 December 2014), accessed 1 May 2023, http://nl.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/hldt/201412/
t20141216_2655633.htm.
185
Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (2015), at 23.
186
UN Document CML/2/2009 (9 February 2009). Robert C. Beckman and Tara Davenport.
“CLCS submissions and claims in the South China Sea,” Paper, The Second International
Workshop The South China Sea: Cooperation for Regional Security and Development, Vietnam
2010, 9.
179
180

177

Yoshinori Kodama

to China’s reservation in its note verbale on 8 July 2010 as contradictions
to China’s own claims.187 These arguments were reflected in the Tribunal’s
deliberations in the merits phase.188
The South China Sea arbitration award enhanced clarity and predictability
on both procedural and substantive issues, providing basis for policy decisions
for relevant parties in the region. The award set a precedent on the scope
of matters to be seized by the court or tribunal, namely jurisdictional limits
deriving from territorial sovereignty as well as the exceptions on sea boundary
delimitation. The award clarified the legal evaluation of historic claims and
the island status under Article 121(3) UNCLOS.
In the screening on admissibility, the Tribunal prescribed the application
of Article 282 UNCLOS on obligations under general, regional or bilateral
agreements for dispute settlement, as well as Article 283 UNCLOS on
obligations to exchange views.189 It also set out the scope of third parties’
participation as a prerequisite for the proceedings.190 These clarifications
provide useful guidelines for potential parties.
There is an argument that, given China’s rejections against the legallybinding award, the arbitration is of practically negligible significance in
resolution for South China Sea disputes, which have wider multi-faceted
political and security characteristics.191 Legal dispute settlement is inherently
limited in its scope. Judicial judgments or arbitral awards will contribute to
and facilitate the whole settlement by showing legally-binding norms, leading
to the change of course for State actions and policies, as well as influencing
relevant States’ way of thinking.
The South China Sea Arbitration award made immediate effects
upon China’s actions, allowing for Philippine traditional fishing rights in
Scarborough Shoal.192China refrained or reduced drilling and exploration
activities in relevant maritime zones.193 During the hearing sessions in the
arbitration proceedings, China continued large-scale reclamation and artificial
island building, which was later judged by the Tribunal as obstruction and
Indonesia, Note No.480/POL-703/VII/10 (8 July 2010).
Award, at 175.
189
UNCLOS, art. 121 and art. 283.
190
Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, at 71.
191
Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (12 July
2016) para.2.
192
Paul Reichler, “The South China Sea Arbitration and Beyond,” Japan Review 3, no. 2
(2019): 4.
193
Raymond and Welch, “What’s Really Going,” 14.
187
188

178

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

aggravation against tribunal settlement.194
China declared the completion of such activities in June 2015 before
the final award.195 On 29 March 2014, China demonstrated self-restraint in
Second Thomas Shoal controlled by the Philippines, by leaving Philippine
patrol and fishing activities and their rotating replacement.196 In May 2014,
China started the installation of deep water drilling rigs in waters controlled
by Vietnam, and after collisions between China and Vietnam, the rigs were
removed in July.197
On China’s actions and policies wider in the South China Sea after the
awards, it maintains annual fishing moratorium, covering most of contested
maritime areas, as manifestation of China’s attempt to reserve control over
fishery resources in the South China Sea.198 However, China generally
demonstrates modest reactions by modifying its behavior.199 China stopped
asserting the “nine-dash lines” based upon historical rights, as denied by the
awards.200 Chinese agencies then use modified justifications such as offshore
or outlying archipelagic baselines, based upon, still, alleged historical
evidence.201
On the other hand, China still advocates the eligibility of artificial islands
upon low tide elevations and submerged features for maritime claims.202
Thus, China partially complies with the awards, while formally rebuffing the
legitimacy and validity of the arbitration proceedings.
China also currently refrains from controversial measures which may
create further backlashes in the region; First, it is reported that in August 2017
China abolished prepared regulations for setting straight baselines surrounding
Award, 437.
Bing Ling, “China’s Attitude to the International Legal Order in the Xi Era: The Case of
South China Sea Arbitration,” Sydney Law School Research Paper No. 19/04 (2019): 5.
196
Fangyin, “Assertiveness and Self-restraint,” 875.
197
Feng Zhang, “Chinese Thinking on the South China Sea and the Future of Regional
Security” in US-China Competition and the South China Sea Disputes, Huiyun Feng and Kai
He eds. (London and New York: Routledge, 2018), 48.
198
Audrye Wong, “More than Peripheral,” The China Quarterly 235 (2017): 745, which reports
that the fishery moratorium was meant by the Chinese central government to stem local fishery
operations reaching sensitive marine areas.
199
Fangyin, “Assertiveness and Self-restraint,” 875.
200
Ibid.
201
National Institute for South China Sea Studies, “A Legal Critique of the Award of the Arbitral
Tribunal in the Matter of the South China Sea Arbitration,” Asian Yearbook of International
Law 24 (2018):155.
202
United States Department of State, “People’s Republic of China: Maritime Claim in the
South China Sea,” Limits in the Sea, no.150 (2022).
194
195

179

Yoshinori Kodama

seven geographical features in the Spratly Islands which it controls. Second,
China has stopped short of instituting an air defense identification zone over
the South China Sea, not following the precedent in the East China Sea which
took place on 23 November 2013.203
China’s actions and restraints are not totally consistent, especially in the
passage of time, though. In 2021, China intensified its fishing boats’ intrusion
to the sea zones surrounding the Natuna Islands, Indonesia’s territories, with
the escort of coast guard and naval ships.204
2. JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY ISSUES: SEPARATING
MARITIME ENTITLEMENT FROM TERRITORIAL SOVEREIGNTY
The Tribunal lifted jurisdictional barriers in its award on jurisdiction
and admissibility on 29 October 2015, responding to China’s objections
compiled in its Position Paper formally submitted on 7 December 2014.205
The objections included, first, the characteristic of the dispute as a territorial
sovereignty matter which is not covered by the Convention unless except
for some limited provisions on historic titles and historic bays.206 Second, it
consists of the exclusion of maritime boundary delimitation as exempted by
China’s declaration, as a governmental official statement, in 2006.207
The exclusion of territorial sovereignty disputes is not explicitly
prescribed under the Convention. However, deriving from the textual lack
of coverage under the Convention, such disputes are not included in the
subject-matter of disputes “concerning the interpretation or application of the
Chang Ching, “Why is there no South China Sea Air Defence Identification Zone?” SCSPI,
accessed 15 May 2023, http://www.scspi.org/en/dtfx/why-there-no-south-china-sea-airdefense-identification-zone. Mike Yeo, “Analysis: Can China Enforce a South China Sea AirDefence Identification Zone?” USNI News, 18 July 2016, accessed 15 May 2023, https://news.
usni.org/2016/07/18/analysis-can-china-enforce-south-china-sea-air-defense-identificationzone. Ankit Panda, “Is China Really About to Announce a South China Sea Air Defence
Identification Zone?” The Diplomat, 1 June 2016, accessed 15 May 2023, https://thediplomat.
com/2016/06/is-china-really-about-to-announce-a-south-china-sea-air-defense-identificationzone-maybe/. Chisako Masuo, Chugoku no Kodo-Genri [China’s Behavioral Principles]
(Tokyo: Chuko-Shinsho, 2019), 253.
204
“Bakamla: Ribuan Kapal Asing Masuki Laut Natuna [Indonesian Maritime Security Agency,
Thousands of foreign ships enter Natuna Sea],” CNN Indonesia, 13 September 2021, accessed
1 May 2023, https://www.cnnindonesia.com/nasional/20210913151110-20-693598/bakamlaribuan-kapal-asing-masuki-laut-natuna.
205
Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, at 2.
206
Position Paper, China (7 December 2014), para.4, accessed 1 May 2023, http://nl.chinaembassy.gov.cn/eng/hldt/201412/t20141216_2655633.htm.
207
United Nations, Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, Ocean & Law of the Sea,
Declarations and statements (New York, updated 2022).
203

180

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Convention.”208 Article 298(1)(a)(i) excludes explicitly “any unsettled dispute
concerning sovereignty over…land territory” from compulsory conciliation
under the Convention.209 Arbitration procedures have higher intrusion to State
sovereignty by legally-binding awards, thus naturally the exemption shall
apply to the arbitration.
On territorial sovereignty, the Tribunal judged China’s claims as historic
rights over maritime resources, as distinct from historic titles for sovereignty.
Historic rights as claimed by China concerns maritime claims with exclusivity
short of sovereignty, limited to sovereign rights and jurisdiction on maritime
resources, not including the freedom of navigation and overflight.210 This is
proclaimed by China itself.211
China claims its sovereignty over islands and their adjacent waters, so
there might be a possibility that “adjacent waters” include the whole South
China Sea. Here, China’s claims had not been clear. The Tribunal referred
to China’s measures and actions, such as the oil excavation bidding in 2012
as well as the objection to Philippine award for petroleum blocks in 2011,
beyond 200 nautical miles from any geographical features, and within China’s
“nine dash lines”.212 These measures proved that China’s claims were beyond
rights provided under the Convention.
The Tribunal also pointed out that China’s designation of straight baselines
around the Paracel Islands and Hainan under the 1996 Law on Territorial
Waters and Contiguous Zones Act, as evidence for limiting territorial waters
to 12 nautical miles from these baselines, precluding the South China Seawide territorial and internal water claims.213
China may have had different positions that, though they own territorial
maritime claims in the whole sea, they refrained from the exercise of such
rights, as a policy choice. The Tribunal saw no factual evidence that China
exercised territorial sovereignty rights over the whole South China Sea in a
continuous and peaceful manner without protest from other States, based upon
the established international court and tribunal jurisprudence.214
The Tribunal denied the legal legitimacy of China’s historical rights
UNCLOS, art. 288.
Ibid., art. 298.
210
Position Paper, China (7 December 2014), para. 28, accessed 1 May 2023,http://nl.chinaembassy.gov.cn/eng/hldt/201412/t20141216_2655633.htm .
211
Award, at 67.
212
Ibid., at 86.
213
Ibid., at 91.
214
Ibid., at 114.
208
209

181

Yoshinori Kodama

over maritime resources in the merit award.215 The Tribunal also denied the
eligibility of geographical features in the South China Sea for EEZs and
continental shelves under Article 121(3).216 With these substantive judgments,
it was concluded that the issue of maritime delimitation had disappeared, since
there are no overlapping maritime zones with the Philippines.217
The Tribunal followed the established procedural sequence that
jurisdictional issues can be judged in the merit phase unless the objection
does not possess an exclusively preliminary character, as prescribed in its
Rules and Procedure.218 International courts and tribunals do not adopt the
strict distinction between procedural and substantive matters, following the
common law legal traditions. This may be unfamiliar for legal experts in the
region who generally follow the code-based continental legal approach. Under
this approach, jurisdictional requirements shall be prerequisite for proceeding
to the merit phase, thus no substantive issue is addressed in the preliminary
phase.
China claimed that the subject-matter of the Philippine claims were, as a
matter of truth, territorial sovereignty and maritime delimitation, thus excluded
from the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.219 The issue of historic rights over maritime
resources, as claimed by China, was logically and practically separated by
territorial sovereignty, since such rights were not claimed on the basis of
geographical features, but based upon historical evidence. The Tribunal had
no bearings upon territorial ownerships over geographical features.
From this viewpoint, the South China Sea arbitration awards can be
distinguished from the 2015 Chagos Arbitration, in which the territorial
ownership was exactly the subject-matter of the submission, though it took the
form of defining “the coastal State” as designator of the maritime protection
zone.220 The Chagos award proclaimed that, in deciding upon exclusions from
subject-matters as sovereignty objections, relative weight should be examined
as to which extent territorial sovereignty is concerned, thus the sovereign
matter is predominant, not with incidental connection.221 This benchmark is to
examine whether the territorial sovereignty element is incidental or ancillary
Ibid., at 112.
Ibid., at 175.
217
Ibid., at 261.
218
PCA, South China Sea, Rules and Procedure (2013).
219
Position Paper, China (7 December 202014), para.4, accessed 1 May 2023, http://nl.chinaembassy.gov.cn/eng/hldt/201412/t20141216_2655633.htm.
220
PCA, Chagos Marine Protected Area, PCA 2011-03, para. 229.
221
Ibid., para. 220.
215
216

182

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

to the dispute or not.222 Such an approach is not exactly the reflection of the
UNCLOS provisions, where any element which will relate decisions on
territorial ownership shall be exempted, following the State’s will to reserve
sovereignty matters from third-party compulsory dispute settlement.
The denial of China’s claims on historical rights and the eligibility of
geographical features under Article 121(3) UNCLOS will consequentially
affect maritime delimitation between China and the Philippines. China has lost
all legitimacy for maritime claims beyond 12 nautical miles from geographical
features, thus, as consequence, the Philippines’ EEZ and continental shelf
persist. Thus, there is no more need for maritime zone delimitation. The award
affects the exercise of maritime delimitation. This is a consequence, not an
element for which the jurisdiction by the Tribunal was denied a priori.
There is an issue that the judgment on low-tide elevations or submerged
areas may directly concern territorial sovereignty, since designation on lowtide elevations will deny sovereignty completely, thus the State will lose its
sovereignty.223 The examination of low-tide elevations is a merit issue, and
albeit a factual issue, a matter subject to the Tribunal’s formal adjudication.
If the decision about low-tide elevations is excluded from jurisdiction, there
will be a paradox. If geographic feature X is designated as low-tide elevation
in the merit phase, the Tribunal will lose jurisdiction, thus the territoriality of
geographical feature X is not denied and remains intact, though, as a matter
of fact, it is not eligible. This should be an issue which needs legislative
treatment, for instance, the court or tribunal may be authorized to refer to an
enquiry committee, constituted by scientific and technical experts, to examine
authoritatively the status of geographical feature X from scientific and factual
basis.224
On jurisdictional matters, the Tribunal clarified the scope of law
enforcement exclusions under Article 298 as those related to marine science
research and fisheries, as provided under Article 297(2) and (3), following
the 2013 Arctic Sunrise Arbitration award.225 The Tribunal also made it clear
Natalie Klein, “The Vicissitudes of Dispute Settlement under the Law of the Sea Convention,”
International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 32, no. 2 (2017): 332. Alan E. Boyle, “Dispute
Settlement and the Law of the Sea Convention: Problems of Fragmentation and Jurisdiction,”
International and Comparative Law Quarterly 46, no. 1 (1997): 37, 44.
223
Position Paper, China (7 December 2014), para.23, accessed 1 May 2023, http://nl.chinaembassy.gov.cn/eng/hldt/201412/t20141216_2655633.htm; Stefan Talmon, The South China
Sea Arbitration: Jurisdiction, Admissibility, Procedure (Brill, 2022), 309.
224
UNCLOS, art. 289.
225
Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, at 131.PCA, Arctic Sunrise, Award on Jurisdiction,
PCA 2014-02, para.76.
222

183

Yoshinori Kodama

that the law enforcement exclusions under Article 298 shall apply to the
coastal State’s enforcement in its EEZ, not to non-coastal State’s enforcement
activities in the coastal State’s EEZ, as the case of China’s activities within the
Philippines’ EEZ.226
On the issue of admissibility, the Tribunal followed the Chagos arbitration
award that the requirement for prior exchange of views by the parties
under Article 283 shall not need particular formality for such exchange.227
The Tribunal denied China’s objection under Article 283 to prioritize other
agreements as the 2002 China/ASEAN Declaration on the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea, which includes a provision to “undertake to” resolve
disputes through consultations and negotiations.228 The Tribunal denied the
legally-binding character of this provision, thus justified the Philippines’
submission to the arbitration proceedings.229
3. SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES: HISTORIC RIGHTS AND THE ISLAND
STATUS
The Tribunal denied in its merit phase China’s claims based upon historical
evidence for control and manage natural resources in the South China Sea,
beyond territorial and internal waters if China’s territorial claims over
geographical features are sustained.230 China’s historic claims were dismissed
under the 1982 UNCLOS which has limited provisions on historic titles and
rights as well as under the established customary international law.231
Historic claims tend to be abused by the State, with the intention to be
exonerated from the burden to present detailed facts and evidence. China
frequently uses State practice, such as discovery, navigational records, map
description, fishing practice during the Han and Ming Dynasties, before the
consolidation of sovereignty concept under modern international law.232 The
use of term “time immemorial” is meant to defy evidence for State actions in
the modern times presented by contesters.

Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, at 145.
Ibid., at 112. PCA, Chagos, Award, paras. 71, 72, and 75.
228
Position Paper, China (7 December 2014), 30, accessed 1 May 2023,http://nl.china-embassy.
gov.cn/eng/hldt/201412/t20141216_2655633.htm .
229
Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, at 106.
230
Award, at 67. Christopher R. Rossi, “Treaty of Tordesillas Syndrome: Sovereignty ad
Absurdum and the South China Sea Arbitration,”Cornell International Law Journal 50, no. 2
(2017): 231. Kopela, “Historic Titles and Historic Rights,” 183.
231
Award, at 98.
232
Position Paper, China (7 December 2014) para.4, accessed 1 May 2023,http://nl.chinaembassy.gov.cn/eng/hldt/201412/t20141216_2655633.htm.
226
227

184

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

The Tribunal judged that the 1982 UNCLOS shall supersede the preceding
norms and practices.233 It also provided that customary international law
requires the burden of proof upon claimants, demanding continuous and
peaceful State control without protest from contesting parties.234 This can be a
deterrence to the abuse of historical claims. China’s early practices of natural
resource control were considered to be lacking in clarity and specificity, then
could be categorized as States’ rights and interests on the high seas.235
There may be an argument that the reference to the established customary
international law was redundant and not necessary, since the evaluation based
upon the 1982 UNCLOS was sufficient do deny China’s historic claims.236 The
Tribunal sustained this, based upon the relevance of customary international
law evaluation, as well as the need for “completeness” of dispute settlement.237
Article 288 UNCLOS provides the Tribunal’s jurisdictional coverage as
disputes “concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention.”238
The judgment on the compatibility of State actions with customary
international law, along with UNCLOS provisions, can be categorized as
disputes concerning the application of the Convention. In handling disputes
and discrepancies, practitioners refer to and debate on specific UNCLOS
provisions, as well as how rules on the same subject-matters of UNCLOS
provisions are treated under customary international law.
As an issue of substance, the Tribunal clarified the application of the island
status requirements under Article 121 UNCLOS to geographical features in
the South China Sea.239 It reiterated and judged the non-eligibility of low-tide
elevations for territorial and maritime claims under the Convention.240 The
Tribunal also applied the term, “rocks which cannot sustain human habitation
or economic independence of their own,” as unqualified for owning EEZs
and continental shelves under Article 121(3).241 In consequence, the Tribunal
concluded that all geographical features in the South China Sea are either lowtide elevations or rocks which cannot sustain human habitation or economic
independence of their own.242
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242

Award, at 97.
Ibid., at 112.
Ibid., paras. 270, 271.
China’s Position Paper, para. 4-.
Award, para.263.
UNCLOS, art. 288.
Award, para 481.
Ibid., at 119.
UNCLOS, art.121.
Award, at 204.

185

Yoshinori Kodama

Article 121 is not clear in its logical structures on text. The Article makes
it clear to define an island as opposed to low-tide elevations and submerged
marine areas. It also provides, as logical deduction from the text, that rocks
are islands’ sub-category, thus some islands are designated as rocks.243 The
definition and characteristics for rocks are not clear, but presumed that
rocks are designated by referring to their size, geological characteristics, the
surrounding environment, functions, as well as relevant human practices.
The Tribunal did not present the definition of “rocks” in the award.244 It will
presumably be clarified through the accumulation of cases and legislative
consultations.
It is also becoming necessary to clarify the scope of islands which cannot
sustain human habitation or economic independence of their own, as subjects
which are increasingly relevant in view of physical degradation due to the sea
level elevations.245
The Tribunal judged the status of geographical features which had not
been included in the Philippines’s submissions, such as Itu Aba and some
other features in the Spratly Islands, as not qualified for EEZs and continental
shelves under Article 121(3) UNCLOS.246 The Tribunal used Itu Aba and
other features as samples for all geographical features in the South China Sea,
in light of their significance compared to the others.247
As a matter of judicial procedures and practice, judgment on subject
matters which were not submitted by the claimant are not an operative part
of the award, but part of factual and legal reasoning, following Article 10 to
Annex VII to UNCLOS.248 The Tribunal used the term “conclude” for defining
the status of Itu Aba and other features, but the correct term should have been
“consider,” given its non-operative character.249

UNCLOS, art.121.
Award, para. 481, 482.
245
Duncan French, “Case Note: In the Matter of the South China Sea Arbitration: Republic
of Philippines v People’s Republic of China, Arbitral Tribunal Constituted under Annex VII
to the 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention, Case No. 2013-19, Award of 12 July
2016,” Environmental Law Review 19 (2017): 48. Natalie Klein, “Land and Sea: Resolving
Contested Land and Disappearing Land Disputes under the UN Convention on the Law of
the Sea,” in Resolving Conflicts of Law: Essays in Honour of Lea Brilmayer, C. Giorgetti and
Natalie Klein, eds. (Brill, 2019), 14.
246
Award, at 237.
247
Ibid., para.626.
248
Annex VII to UNCLOS, art.10, which provides that “[t]he award of the arbitral tribunal shall
be confined to the subject-matter of the dispute.”
249
Award, para. 622 and 625.
243
244

186

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Following these conclusions by the Tribunal on China’s historic rights
and the island status in the South China Sea, China’s obstruction of Philippine
fishing activities was judged to have infringed upon the Philippines’ sovereign
rights in its EEZ (Articles 56, 58(3), and 77 UNCLOS).250 China’s large-scale
reclamations and artificial island constructions were found to have breached
China’s obligations to protect and preserve the marine environment (Articles
192 and 194(5) UNCLOS), as well as not to aggravate and extend the ongoing
disputes before the Tribunal (Articles 279, 296, and 300, as well as general
international law).251
4. IMPLICATIONS FOR DISPUTE SETTLEMENT IN THE REGION
The South China Sea arbitration made limited but meaningful contribution
to the progress of dispute settlement relating the South China Sea, by clarifying
legal rules on both procedures and substance. In particular, the clarification for
the scope of exceptions regarding sea boundary demarcation enhanced the
clarity and predictability for the State’s decision upon resort to third-party
litigation. The Tribunal provided that maritime entitlement can be judged
independently from territorial sovereignty and maritime demarcation.252
Thus, for instance, when State A claims EEZs and continental shelves
or their equivalent by allegedly illegal offshore archipelagic baselines,
artificially-build geographical features on low-tide elevations or submerged
marine areas, or any historical basis, these claims can be seized by the court or
tribunal, regardless of territorial ownership and independently of opposite or
adjacent States’ EEZ or continental shelf in existence.
The award on merits of the South China Sea arbitration may facilitate
policy consultations amongst relevant parties surrounding the South China
Sea, given the denial of eligibility for EEZs and continental shelves from
all geographical features in the South China Sea.253 The claimants may well
engage in maritime delimitation endeavors, based upon EEZs and continental
shelves measured from their coastal lines in accordance with the Convention.
This is just occurring. In December 2022, Indonesia and Vietnam agreed
on the delimitation of their EEZs in accordance with UNCLOS, with no
considerations on China’s claims.254
Ibid., at 319.
Ibid., at 437.
252
Ibid., at 85.
253
Ibid., at 204.
254
Sebastian Strangio, “After 12 Years, Indonesia and Vietnam Agree on EEZ Boundaries,”
The Diplomat, 23 December 2022, accessed 15 May 2023, https://thediplomat.com/2022/12/
after-12-years-indonesia-and-vietnam-agree-on-eez-boundaries/.
250
251

187

Yoshinori Kodama

There exist territorial ownership disputes, like the state of Sabah in North
Borneo in Malaysia, claimed by the Philippines. Since the Philippines does
not claim EEZ from Sabah as baselines, relevant parties may undertake
consultations on EEZ delimitation, while shelving territorial sovereignty
issues.
The Tribunal’s denial of maritime eligibility from all geographical features
leads to the reservation of a “high sea pocket” at the center of the South China
Sea, beyond 200 nautical miles from any party’s coastal baselines.255 Relevant
States and stakeholders shall be allowed to exercise the full-fledged freedom
of navigation and overflight, as well as laying submarine cable and pipelines.
Furthermore, natural resource exploitation can be assured, unless extended
continental shelf claims by coastal States are recognized within the “high sea
pocket”.
Finally, on a de facto basis, the award may have some influence upon
territorial sovereignty disputes over geographical features without prejudging
final legal settlement. The Tribunal denied the sufficiency of effective control
by China over maritime areas in the South China Sea in both pre-modern and
current periods.256 This applies, as a matter of fact, to some land features.
Territorial ownership disputes shall be settled by the comparison of State
actions for controlling the given features, as well as any fact of inter-State
agreements or one party’s recognition or acquiescence.257
Records of occupation may be evaluated in light of continuous and
peaceful control without protest from contestants.258 Taiwan’s occupation
of the Pratas Islands and Itu Aba as well as China’s occupation of Woody
Islands in the 1940s may be examined, based upon those benchmarks. Other
recent occupations since the 1950s through the 1970s and 80s to 90s are
either occupations by use of force without creating territorial titles, or actions
protested by contestants.259
Predictably, judicial or arbitral procedures on land territorial disputes
would become a legal battle for presenting sporadic administrative actions as
evidence of control, or other claimants’ actions or non-actions which may be
Storey and Lin, “South China Sea,” 21.
Award, at 112.
257
Supra, II.2 et 3.
258
PCA, Palmas.
259
The State Council, China, China Adheres to the Position of Settling Trough Negotiation the
Relevant Disputes Between China and the Philippines in the South China sea (White Paper),
para.68, which states that “the international community does not recognise effective control
created through occupation by force,” accessed 1 May 2023, http://english.www.gov.cn/state_
council/ministries/2016/07/13/content_281475392503075.htm
255
256

188

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

regarded as recognition or acquiescence.
Possible legal consequences may be the proclamation of being unjudgeable,
like the evaluation of some sporadic State actions in the ICJ Pedra Branca
case.260 This would well lead to political settlement or cooperation schemes
without prejudice to territorial ownership.

IV.

PRESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
SETTLEMENT IN ASIA

ON

LEGAL

DISPUTE

A. TRENDS FOR LEGAL SETTLEMENT IN AND AROUND THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA
As has been seen in the preceding sections, Southeast Asian countries,
particularly those surrounding the South China Sea have been increasing their
resort to third party dispute settlement procedures, including litigation and
compulsory conciliation, since the beginning of this century.
There are two patterns: one is what may be referred to as a genuine trend
for the conscious use of legal procedures, either judicial proceedings or
arbitration by like-minded and similarly-characterized States in the region,
notably Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore261.
Indonesia and Malaysia instituted by mutual agreement for the 2002 ICJ
Ligitan and Sipadan Case, then Malaysia and Singapore commenced the
2008 ICJ Pedra Branca Case. Both treated high-staked issues on territorial
sovereignty. The 2005 Land Reclamation arbitration under Annex VII to
UNCLOS between Malaysia and Singapore was also amicably commenced
with relatively shallow preliminary objections by Singapore.262
Three States share almost all attributes and backgrounds which are
considered to be factors favorable for legally-binding third-party dispute
settlement procedures: common interests as maritime and transit nations,
based upon trade and investment, with a strong aversion to military solutions,
with middle –level status situated in the neighborhood.263
ICJ, Pedra Branca.
Beth A. Simmons, “Capacity, Commitment, and Compliance, International Institutions and
Territorial Disputes,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 46 (2002): 829.
262
RIAA XXVII, 135.
263
John Merrills and Eric De Brabandere, Merrills’ International Dispute Settlement, Seventh
Edition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022), 13. Andrew T. Guzman, “International
Tribunals: A Rational Choice Analysis,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 157, no. 1
(2008): 171. Karen K. Alter, “Do International Courts Enhance Compliance with International
Law?” Review of Asian and Pacific Studies 25 (2018): 70.
260
261

189

Yoshinori Kodama

In the Ligitan and Sipadan case, the Malaysian leader was reportedly not
totally confident about wining the litigation, preferring a peaceful settlement
for a sticky issue for the sake of bilateral friendship. Malaysia and Singapore
were inclined towards administrative management for maritime zones in
the Land Reclamation case, rather than winning or losing.264 Malaysia lost
the Pedra Branca case, but its control over domestic backlash proved the
country’s mature understanding of litigation frameworks: You sometimes win,
and sometimes lose, but in the long-term you are benefited by the settlement
of disputes.
The other category is the use of compulsory institutionalized dispute
settlement frameworks raised by one party, mostly less-resourced States,
through unblocking jurisdictional and admissibility barriers against a larger
powerful contestant.265 These include the 2013 ICJ Preah Vihear interpretation
case, the 2016 South China Sea arbitration under Annex VII UNCLOS.
The plaintiff State utilized logics and reasons to allow for litigation
procedures, sometimes by separating high-staked territorial sovereignty issues,
and sometime by opening limited windows for jurisdiction under conditions
and requirements in the procedures. Institutional frameworks, typically
the 1982 UNCLOS, with a certain level of compulsory dispute settlement
procedures, have been effectively used by less powerful States.
Why the State accept compulsory legally-binding procedures in
institutional setting? In most cases, contracting parties accept third-party
settlement procedures as a package in its conclusion or participation for the
framework. This is considered to be a meaningful benefit for the parties.
In the case of UNCLOS, for instance, contracting parties are granted or
endorsed to enjoy wider territorial waters, secured international strait passage,
and standardized EEZs and continental shelves. At the time of ratification,
States have slim ideas over contentious cases raised by other parties in the
future. As human behavioral science shows, people tend to value instant
gratification, rather than future risks.266 China did not imagine, at its ratification
of UNCLOS in 1996, the litigation instituted by the Philippines over South
China Sea claims in 2013. Southeast Asian countries are generally deft in
RIAA XXVII, 135.
Eric de Brabandere, International Dispute Settlement, From Practice to Legal Discipline
(Cambridge University Press, 2018). Chisa Ishizuka, “Jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice under Compromissory Clauses of Multilateral Treaties,” (Japanese language),
Hitotsubashi Journal of Law and International Studies 1 (2002): 355, accessed 1 May 2023,
https://hermes-ir.lib.hit-u.ac.jp/hermes/ir/re/22924/hogaku0110103550.pdf.
266
Shane Frederick, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue, “Time Discounting and Time
Preference,” Journal of Economic Literature 40, no.2 (2002): 351.
264
265

190

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

handling institutionalized dispute settlement frameworks.

B.

FACTORS FOR
SETTLEMENT

CHOOSING

THIRD-PARTY

DISPUTE

In more general terms, one may consider factors and elements in favour of
resort to third-party dispute settlement procedures, particularly in the context
and background of Asia, notably amongst States surrounding the South China
Sea. The selection for specific dispute settlement methods is an extension
of the State’s pursuit for its interests, as in the case for any foreign policy
actions. The State decides policy measures by comparing benefits and costs
with calculating each element’s probability and risks.
In academia, there has been a long debate on factors and elements for
choosing legal dispute settlement, such as the preference for impartial, binding
authoritative judgement, based upon accurate and well-founded reasonings
as well as precise evaluation of relevant facts.267 On the other hand, there
is a list of elements for refraining from adversarial, clear-cut, all-or-nothing,
non-reviewable solutions, without considering overall historical and political
contexts, made by uncontrollable discretionary deliberations, based upon
legal counsel’s debates.268
With all these relevant elements, the State considers and calculates
perspectives for winning or losing the case, particularly in the case of zerosum single-cut disputes, like territorial and maritime demarcation disputes.
The government will be willing to use legally-binding procedures in any way,
if it considers the probability for winning the case is 100 per cent.
Guzman, “International Tribunals,” 172. Yuval Shany, “No Longer a Weak Department of
Power?” European Journal of International Law 20 (2009):1. Laurence R. Helfer and AnneMarie Slaughter, “Why States Create International Tribunals,” California Law Review 93
(2005): 3. Simon A. Benson, “Fragmentation or Coherence?” International Journal of Law and
Public Administration 3, no.1 (2020): 79. Carla S. Copeland, “The Use of Arbitration to Settle
Territorial Disputes,” Fordham Law Review 67 (1999): 3074. Kal Raustiala, “Compliance
& Effectiveness in International Regulatory Cooperation,” Case Western Reserve Journal of
International Law 32 (2000): 420. Kenneth W. Abbott, Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik,
et. al., “The Concept of Legalization,” International Organization 54, no.3 (2000): 401.
268
Andreas Paulus, “International Adjudication,” in The Philosophy of International Law,
Samantha Besson and John Tasioulas eds. (Oxford University Press, 2012), 207. Lara M.
Pair, “Judicial Activism in the ICJ Charter Interpretation,” ILSA Journal of International &
Comparative Law 8 (2001). Ernest A Young, “Judicial Activism and Conservative Politics,”
University of Colorado Law Review 73, no.4 (2002): 1139. George W Downs, “Enforcement
and the Evolution of Cooperation,” Michigan Journal of International Law 19, no.2 (1998): 319.
Eric A. Posner and Miguel F. P. de Figueiredo “Is the International Court of Justice Biased?”
Journal of Legal Studies 34, no. 2 (2005): 610. Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, “Judicial
Independence in International Tribunals,” California Law Review 93, no.1 (2005): 3.
267

191

Yoshinori Kodama

The government seriously contemplates domestic political backlash in the
case of losing. This is a phenomenon in both democratic and less democratic
countries. If the government has long educated and promoted, amongst their
nationals, the inviolability of their alleged territories. It will never take the risk
of referring to a third-party procedure with any probability of losing.
If a less democratic State has promoted domestically the sense of
infallibility and invincibility of its leader, statecraft, or political party,
uncontrollable independent judicial procedures will be too risky to resort to.
In the case of democratic countries with semi-regular government changes,
the defeat of an international judicial case may be overcome by attributing
responsibilities to the previous administration, as was the case for Indonesia
in the 2002 Ligitan and Sipadan case.
The State may also consider, if it loses, backlashes from fellow States
or the whole international community, as the fear of reputation costs and
reciprocal non-compliance or retaliation from the contestants or other parties to
a multilateral framework.269 However, the State will be more worried about its
existential risks threatened from its domestic audience. Thus, damage control
and domestic management in the case of defeat will be crucial in the State’s
decision-making for resort to or accept third-party legal dispute settlement.
The State may consider overall long-term interests in its decision-making.
The prolongation of disputes may undermine friendly and stable bilateral
or regional relations.270 This was the case in Malaysia’s choice of judicial
settlement in the 2002 Ligitan and Sipadan case as well as the 2008 Pedra
Branca case. Reputational costs or lost credibility caused by not resorting to
a well-established dispute settlement procedure may be also relevant to the
State’s decision.271 However, intangible interests are generally less crucial,
compared to clear-cut interests at stake in disputes, as territorial ownership
and resource-endowed maritime zones.
In sum, the State’s calculation for resorting to third-party dispute settlement
procedures can be formulated as follows:
Q=αA-(1-α)B+C
Q: Preference for third-party dispute settlement.
Andrew T. Guzman, “The Cost of Credibility,” Journal of Legal Studies 31, no. 2 (2002): 305..
Helfer and Slaughter, “Why States Create International Tribunals,” 5. Benson, “Fragmentation
or Coherence,” 80.
271
Tom Ginsburg and Richard H McAdams, “Adjudicating in Anarchy,” William & Mary Law
Review 45, no.4 (2003-2004): 1229.
269
270

192

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

A: Perceived benefits for winning the case.
α: perceived probability of winning. (0<α<1)
B: Perceived costs for losing the case.
C: Other overall elements for favoring litigation, such as friendly
bilateral or regional relations.
Based upon this, zero-sum territorial disputes, for instance, may have a
large sum of A, quite a large sum of B, and some amount of C. The State’s
perception on probability of winning will decide a final choice for resort to
third-party settlement. Malaysia resorted to the ICJ proceedings in the 2008
Pedra Branca case. Hypothetically, if Malaysia perceived A as 5, B as 10, and
C as 3, in the scale of 10, Q=5α-10(1-α)+3=15α-7. If Q>0, α should be more
than 7/15. Malaysia may have considered that it would win the case with the
probability of 7 amongst 15, then instituted the ICJ proceedings.
Maritime administrative management cases may have relatively small
sums of A and B, as well as a large sum of C. Again, hypothetically, in the 2005
Land Reclamation arbitration between Malaysia and Singapore, Malaysia
perceived A as 5, B as 2, and C as 5, thus Q=5α-2(1-α)+5 = 7α+3.272 If Q>0, α
should be more than minus 3/7. Malaysia may have considered that it would
lose the case with the probability of three out of seven, but resorted to the
UNCLOS arbitration procedure.

C. FURTHER CLARITY AND CONSISTENCY FOR COURTS AND
TRIBUNALS
States tend to hesitate about litigation for a number of reasons. States
choose legally-binding third-party dispute settlement by consent, so the
subject-matter of settlement should be within the consent.273 Otherwise, the
State will be surprised and frightened against future litigation. The State
also expects that judgement should be well-reasoned and consistent with
precedents, enabling their rational calculation for resorting to procedures, as
seen in the preceding section.
Recent judicial and arbitral cases have been accumulating basically clear
and predictable decisions, which encourage the trend in the region surrounding
the South China Sea towards more resort to third-party settlement procedures.
RIAA XXVII, 135.
Merrills and De Brabandere, Merrills’ International Dispute Settlement, 13. ICJ, Asylum,
Judgment, ICJ Reports 1950, 266, at 402; Annex VII to UNCLOS, art.10.
272
273

193

Yoshinori Kodama

The more instituted are cases, the more clarified are rules and reasoning. Then,
the more the States rely upon third-party settlement. This is a virtual circle.
The 2016 South China Sea arbitration, for instance, provided that maritime
entitlement may be separately considered from territorial sovereignty, thus
defined the outer limit of jurisdiction with clarity. The same arbitration clarified
the status of historical rights under UNCLOS and customary international law,
as well as the application of Article 121(3) on “rocks which cannot sustain
human habitation or economic life of their own” to the South China Sea,
providing clear basis for maritime delimitation amongst relevant parties.
The Timor Sea Conciliation clarified the requirements for alternative
proceedings to exclude UNCLOS procedures, providing that other proceedings
should be supposed to seek proactively for legally-binding settlement.
With these forward trends, the author considers that international courts
and tribunals may need more consciousness for consistency and coherence
in some categories of cases. In territorial and maritime demarcation disputes,
factual situations should be more coherently categorized, with the order of
evidential intensity being clearly formulated in each category.
If there is a treaty between colonial States (or, in some limited cases,
with independent local States) or contracts with local authorities, defining
territorial or maritime demarcation, the challenging party should demonstrate
clear contesting facts in the form of explicit recognition. If there is no treaty,
but if the one party is judged to own original title, the contestant party should
prove relevant facts, depending upon the intensity of the original title, in
most cases, at least acquiescence or tacit recognition. If there is no treaty nor
original title, it was originally terra nullius or uncertain territorial expanse, so
the comparison of effectivités will decide the ownership. These categories are
summarized in Table 3, with graphic illustrations (Table 4).
In concrete terms, the first category is represented by the ICJ Preah Vihear
case, where Thailand’s acquiescence of French note verbale attached by a
map was judged to rebut the existing treaty settlement. The court justified
this decision by adding other subsequent practice showing control and
acquiescence, but more explicit recognition of treaty revision on the side of
Thailand may have been basically required.
The second category was the 2008 ICJ Pedra Branca case, where the
original title by Malaysia was rebutted by the 1953 correspondence between
Singapore and the Johor regional administration, recognizing Singapore’s
territorial ownership. This was enough evidence, if the 1953 correspondence
is legitimately interpreted as recognition. This was the ICJ’s judgment. Given
194

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

the relatively lower evidentiary intensity of original titles, facts of acquiescence
plus the accumulation of effective control without protest, if any, should have
been sufficient for its rebuttal.
The third category is typically exemplified by the 2002 Ligitan and Sipadan
case, where the comparison of effectivités decided the territorial ownership,
given the uncertainty in the status of the relevant islands.
As another example which may need further clarification, some judicial
cases regarding the evidential requirements of effectivité for “small islands”
need more consistent clarification. The ICJ decided that state control required
for territorial ownership for “uninhabited small islands” may be weaker than
those required for non-small islands. The threshold for “small islands” may
well be more clearly and consistently provided.

V. CONCLUSION
This article has examined why Southeast Asia has been traditionally
reticent about the use of international third-party legal dispute settlement
procedures. It also analyses, why and how, since the outset of this century,
countries surrounding the South China Sea have shown a steady increase of
cases resorting to third-party legal procedures.
As a background, Southeast Asia, particularly sub-regions surrounding
the South China Sea, is featured by the semi-closed sea at its center, encircled
by the continental side and the archipelagic maritime areas. The South China
Sea is connected to the outer seas by narrow outlets as chokepoints, which
provide special positions and preoccupations to States holding straits and
transit points, seeking for a stable maritime order.
Historically, the region had been influenced by diverse culture bases,
with less consciousness about territorial management. This was gradually
converted to territorial entities and exclusive maritime zones through
Western colonialization. This gives special features to territorial and maritime
demarcation disputes in the region. Contestant parties first pursue the records
of treaties or contracts as basis for territorial or maritime entitlement by them
or colonial predecessors. Then, if such contractual bases are non-existent or
feeble, parties seek factual evidence for original titles by their own, or the
contestant party’s recognition or acquiescence. If there are no original titles
nor state manifestation, the parties present factual evidence of state practice
for effective control without protest, as effectivités comparatives, which are
judged by the court or tribunal for identifying superior evidence for territorial
195

Yoshinori Kodama

ownership.
The Southeast Asia region has been steadily intensifying political platforms
for cooperation, led by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
This provides a sense of cooperation and personal contacts by Member States’
officials and stakeholders. This leads to the pursuit for effective third-party
legal dispute settlement procedures. Stakes in the region are natural resources,
including oil and gas mining as well as fisheries. These are consistently the
origin of the need for territorial and maritime dispute settlement.
Recent cases regarding Southeast Asia can be categorized into two: First,
judicial or arbitral cases by like-minded and similarly-characterized States in
the region, namely Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore; as well as, second,
the use of compulsory institutionalized dispute settlement frameworks,
through unblocking jurisdictional and admissibility barriers by the plaintiff
parties, in most cases, less resourced States. States choose third-party legal
procedures by comparing the benefits of winning and the costs of losing with
perceived probabilities, as well as possible overall benefits like the stability
and friendship of bilateral relations.
In order to mitigate States’ hesitancy against legal procedures, the courts and
tribunals are encouraged to give further well-reasoned consistent judgements
and awards. For instance, territorial and maritime demarcation disputes
should be based upon precise correspondence between original entitlements
and subsequent State actions. When there are treaties or contacts for original
territorial or maritime entitlements, the contestant party should present explicit
recognition by the other party for rebutting original entitlements; when there is
original titles without treaty basis, the contesting party is required to present,
at least acquiescence with evidence of subsequent State control, depending
upon the intensity of the original title; When the disputed area was originally
terra nullius or uncertain territorial expanse around borders, the parties need
to present evidence for State controls, by which the court or tribunal decides
territorial ownership with superior State control.

196

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

APPENDIX

Figure 1. The South China Sea and Surrounding Seas: Schematic Chart

197

Yoshinori Kodama

Figure 2. The South China Sea and Surrounding Seas: Major Straits as Chokepoints

198

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Figure 3. Patterns of Territorial Disputes and Rebutting Evidence

Figure 4. Graphic Illustrations for Territorial Dispute Patterns
A: Treaties or contracts as a basis for territorial ownership.

199

Yoshinori Kodama

B: Original titles owned by one party.

C: Terra nullius or uncertain territorial expanse as an initial condition.

200

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Journals and Periodicals
Abbott, Kenneth W., Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik, et. al. “The Concept of
Legalization.” International Organization 54, no.3. (2000): 401-419.
Ahman, Mohammad Zaki and Amusafir Kelana. “An Inter-State Maritime Territorial
Conflict, A study on Malaysia’s Conflict Resolution through Peaceful Means.”
Jurnal Sosisohumaniora 7, no.2 (2005): 93-109.
Alter, Karen K. “Do International Courts Enhance Compliance with International
Law?” Review of Asian and Pacific Studies 25, (2018): 51-78.
Askandar, Kamarulzaman and Cariervin Sukim. “Making Peace over a Disputed
Territory in Southeast Asia: Lessons from the Batu Puteh/Pedra Branca Case.”
Journal of Territorial and Maritime Studies 3, no.1 (2016): 65-85.
Banks, Nigel. “Settling the Maritime Boundaries between Timor-Leste and Australia
in the Timor Sea.” Journal of World Energy Law and Business 11 (2018): 387409.
Barnett, Michelle. “Cambodia v Thailand, A Case Study on the Use of Provisional
Measures to Protect Human Rights in International Border Disputes.” Brooklyn
Journal of International Law 38 (2012): 269-303.
Basu, Pratnashree. “The Eastern Corridor and the Law of the Sea.” ORF Occasional
Papers, November 2020.
Beckman, Robert. “The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the Maritime
Disputes in the South China Sea.” American Journal of International Law 107,
no.1 (2013): 142-163.
Benda, Harry J. “The Structure of Southeast Asian History: Some Preliminary
Observations.” Journal of Southeast Asian History 3, no. 3. (1962): 106-138.
Benson, Simon A. “Fragmentation or Coherence? Does International Dispute
Settlement Achieve Comprehensive Justice?” International Journal of Law and
Public Administration 3, no.1 (2020): 77-88.
Boyle, Alan E. “Dispute Settlement and the Law of the Sea Convention: Problems of
Fragmentation and Jurisdiction.” International and Comparative Law Quarterly
46, no.1 (1997): 37-54.
Brown, Christopher. “A Comparative and Critical Assessment of Estoppel in
International Law.” University of Miami Law Review 50 (1996): 370-412.
Chesterman, Simon. “Asia’s Ambivalence about International Law and Institutions:
Past, Present and Future.” European Journal of International Law 27, no.4 (2017):
945-978.
Copeland, Carla S. “The Use of Arbitration to Settle Territorial Disputes.” Fordham
Law Review 67. (1999): 3073-3108.
D’Amato, Anthony. “Consent, Estoppel, and Reasonableness: Three Challenges to
Universal International Law.” Virginia Journal of International Law 10, (1969):131.
Daulay, Zainul. “Sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan (Indonesia/
Malaysia).” Law Reform 2, no.1 (2021):119-128.
De Tréglodé, Benoît. “Maritime Boundary Delimitation and Sino-Vietnamese
Cooperation in the Gulf of Tonkin (1994-2016).” China Perspectives 3 (2016):

201

Yoshinori Kodama

33-41.
Dörr, Dieter. “The Background of the Theory of Discovery.” American Indian Law
Review 38, no.2 (2014): 477-499.
Downs, George W. “Enforcement and the Evolution of Cooperation.” Michigan
Journal of International Law 19, no.2 (1998): 319-344.
Eric A. Posner and Miguel F. P. de Figueiredo “Is the International Court of Justice
Biased?” Journal of Legal Studies 34, no. 2 (2005): 599-630.
Fangyin, Zhou. “Between Assertiveness and Self-restraint: Understanding China’s
South China Sea Policy.” International Affairs 92, no.4 (2016): 869-890.
Fravel, M Tailor. “China’s Strategy in the South China Sea.” Contemporary Southeast
Asia 33, no.3 (2011): 292-319.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue. “Time Discounting
and Time Preference: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature 40,
no.2 (2002): 351-401.
French, Duncan. “Case Note: In the Matter of the South China Sea Arbitration: Republic
of Philippines v People’s Republic of China, Arbitral Tribunal Constituted under
Annex VII to the 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention, Case No.
2013-19, Award of 12 July 2016.” Environmental Law Review 19 (2017): 48-56.
Gao, Zhinguo and Jia, Bing Bing. “The Nine-Dash Line in the South China Sea:
History, Status, and implications.” American Journal of International Law 107,
no.1 (2013): 98-124.
Ginsburg, Tom and Richard H. McAdams. “Adjudicating in Anarchy: An Expressive
Theory of International Dispute Resolution.” William & Mary Law Review 45,
no.4. (2003-2004):1229-1339.
Guzman, Andrew T. “The Cost of Credibility,” Journal of Legal Studies 31, no. 2
(2002): 303-326.
Guzman. Andrew T. “International Tribunals: A Rational Choice Analysis.” University
of Pennsylvania Law Review 157, no. 1 (2008): 171-235.
Helfer, Laurence R. and Anne-Marie Slaughter. “Why States Create International
Tribunals: A Response to Professors Posner and Yoo.” California Law Review
93, (2005):899-956.
Hendrapati, Marcel. “Implication of the ICJ Decision respecting Sipadan Ligitan case
towards basepoints and maritime delimitation.” International Journal of Sciences:
Basic and Applied Research 14, no.1 (2014): 374-393.
Henry, Etienne. “Alleged Acquiescence of the International Community to Revisionist
Claims of International Customary Law, with Special Reference to the Just Contra
Bellum Regime.” Melbourne Journal of International Law 18, no.2 (2017): 1-35.
Hohen, Marcelo. “Original Title in the Light of the ICJ Judgment on Sovereignty over
Pedera Branca/Pulau Batu Puteh, Middle Rocks and South Ledge.” Journal of the
History of International Law 15, no.2 (2013): 151-171.
Huh, Seokyoon. “Title to Territory in the Post-colonial Era Original Title and Terra
Nullius in the ICJ Judgments on Cases Concerning Ligitan/Sipadan (2002) and
Pedra Branca (2008).” European Journal of International Law 26, no.3 (2016):
709-725.
Ishizuka, Chisa. “Jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice under Compromissory
Clauses of Multilateral Treaties: Some Relationships between Court Judicial

202

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Policy and Parties’ Judicial Strategies.” (Japanese language) Hitotsubashi Journal
of Law and International Studies 1, (2002): 355-388. https://hermes-ir.lib.hit-u.
ac.jp/hermes/ir/re/22924/hogaku0110103550.pdf
Jenne, Nicole. “Managing Territorial Disputes in Southeast Asia: Is There More Than
the South China Sea?” Journal of Current Southeast Asia Affair 3 (2017): 35-61.
Joshi, Manoj. “The South China Sea Disputes.” ORF Occasional Papers, August 2016.
Kaye, Stuart. “The Timor Gap Treaty: Creative Solutions and International Conflict.”
Sydney Law Review 16 (1994): 72-96.
Klein, Natalie. “The Vicissitudes of Dispute Settlement under the Law of the Sea
Convention,” International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 32, no. 2 (2017):
332-363. https://doi.org/10.1163/15718085-12322045.
Kopela, Sophia. “Historic Titles and Historic Rights in the Law of the Sea in the light
of the South China Sea Arbitration.” Ocean Development and International Law
48. (2017): 181-207.
Koperla, Sophia. “The Legal Value of Silence as State Conduct in the Jurisprudence
of International Tribunal.” Australian Yearbook of International Law 29. (2011):
87-134.
Lesaffer, Randall. “Argument from Roman Law in Current International Law:
Occupation and Acquisitive Prescription.” European Journal of International Law
16, no.1 (2005): 25-56.
Li, Zhenni. “International Intertemporal Law.” California Western International
Journal 48, no.2 (2018) :342-347.
Ling, Bing. “China’s Attitude to the International Legal Order in the Xi Era: The Case
of South China Sea Arbitration.” Sydney Law School Research Paper No. 19/04
(2019): 1-21.
Mitchel, Martin D, “The South China Sea, A Geographical Analysis,” Journal of
Geography and Geology 8, no. 3, (2016):14-25.
Nakatani, Kazuhiro. “The South China Sea Arbitration Award and the Rule of Law in
the Seas,” Japan Review 1, no. 2 (2017): 1-5.
National Institute for South China Sea Studies, “A Legal Critique of the Award of
the Arbitral Tribunal in the Matter of the South China Sea Arbitration,” Asian
Yearbook of International Law 24 (2018): 151-293.
Ovchar, Alexander, “Estoppel in the Jurisprudence of the ICJ, A Principle Promoting
Stability Threats to Undermine it,” Bond Law Review 21. (2009).
Pair, Lara M, Judicial Activism in the ICJ Charter Interpretation, ILSA Journal of
International & Comparative Law 8. (2001): 181-221.
Posner, Eric A. and John C. Yoo. “Judicial Independence in International Tribunals.”
California Law Review 93, no.1 (2005): 1-74.
Ramon, Adrianus Adityo Vito. “Completing the Jigsaw: The Recent Development of
the Maritime Boundaries in the Timor Sea.” Indonesian Journal of International
Law 15, no.4 (2018): 481-522.
Raustiala, Kal. “Compliance & Effectiveness in International Regulatory Cooperation.”
Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law 32 (2000): 387-440.
Raymond, Mark and David A. Welch. “What’s Really Going on in the South China
Sea?” Journal of Current Southeast Asia Affairs 4, no.2 (2022): 214-239.
Reichner, Paul. “The South China Sea Arbitration and Beyond: China’s Approach to

203

Yoshinori Kodama

the Law of the Sea and the Rule of Law.” Japan Review 3, no. 2 (2019): 4-12.
Rossi, Christopher R. “Treaty of Tordesillas Syndrome: Sovereignty Ad Absurdum
and the South China Sea Arbitration.” Cornell International Law Journal 50, no.
2 (2017): 231-283.
Shany, Yuval. “No Longer a Weak Department of Power? Reflections on the
Emergence of a New International Judiciary.” European Journal of International
Law 20 (2009):73-91.
Simmons, Beth A. “Capacity, Commitment, and Compliance, International Institutions
and Territorial Disputes.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 46 (2002): 829-856.
Sulmasy, Glenn and John Yoo. “Counterintuitive: Intelligence Operations and
International Law.” Michigan Journal of International Law 28, no.3 (2007): 625638.
Tamada, Dai. “The Timor Sea Conciliation: The Unique Mechanism of Dispute
Settlement.” European Journal of International Law 33, no.1 (2020): 321-344.
Tanaka, Yoshifumi. “Passing of Sovereignty, The Malaysia/Singapore Territorial
Dispute before the ICJ.” Hague Justice Journal 3, no.2 (2008): 103-344.
Thayer, Carlyle. “ASEAN, China and the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea.”
SAIS Review of International Affairs 23, no.2 (2013): 75-84.
Traviss, Alexandra C. “Temple of Preah Vihear: Lessons on Provisional Measures.”
Chicago Journal of International Law 13 (2012): 317-344.
Tseng, Peter. “The Peaceful Non-Settlement of Disputes: Article 4 of CMATS in
Timor-Leste v Australia.” Melbourne Journal of International Law 18 (2017):
349-372.
Watts, Sir Arthur. “Enhancing the Effectiveness of Procedures of International Dispute
Settlement.” Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law 5 (2012):1-39.
Wong, Audrye. “More than Peripheral.” The China Quarterly 235 (2017): 735-757.
Young, Ernest A. “Judicial Activism and Conservative Politics.” University of
Colorado Law Review 73, no.4 (2002):1139-1216.
Books and Book Chapters
Beckman, Robert and Leonardo Bernard. “Disputed Area in the south China Sea,
Prospects for Arbitration or Advisory Opinion.” In The South China Sea, A
Crucible of Regional Cooperation or Conflict-Making Sovereignty Claims, edited
by C. J. Jenner and Truong Thuy. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
De Brabandere, Eric. International Dispute Settlement, From Practice to Legal
Discipline, Cambridge University Press, 2018.
International Court of Justice. The International Court of Justice: Handbook. United
Nations, 2014.
Klein, Natalie. “Land and Sea: Resolving Contested Land and Disappearing Land
Disputes under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.” In Resolving Conflicts
of Law: Essays in Honour of Lea Brilmayer, edited by C. Giorgetti and Natalie
Klein. Brill, 2019.
Masuo, Chisako, Chugoku no Kodo-Genri [China’s Behavioral Principles]. Tokyo:
Chuko-Shinsho, 2019.
Merrills, John, and Eric De Brabandere. Merrills’ International Dispute Settlement,

204

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Seventh Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022.
Natalegawa, Marty. Does ASEAN Matter? A View from Within. Singapore: ISEAS,
2018.
Natalie Klein, “Land and Sea: Resolving Contested Land and Disappearing Land
Disputes under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea,” in Resolving Conflicts
of Law: Essays in Honour of Lea Brilmayer, C. Giorgetti and Natalie Klein, eds.
(Brill, 2019),
Pauker, Guy J., F. H. Golay, and C. H. Enloe. C H, Diversity and Development in
Southeast Asia. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.
Paulus, Andreas. “International Adjudication.” In The Philosophy of International
Law, edited by Samantha Besson and John Tasioulas. 207-224. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2012.
Pluvier, J. M. Southeast Asia from Colonialism to Independence. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1974.
Schofield, Clive. “What’s at Stake in the South China Sea?” In Beyond Territorial
Disputes in the South China Sea, edited by Robert Beckman, Ian TownsendGault, Clive Schofield, Tara Davenport, and Leonardo Bernard. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar, University of Wollongong, 2013.
Storey, Ian and Lin Cheng-yi, eds. The South China Sea Dispute, Navigating
Diplomatic and Strategic Tensions, Singapore: Yusof Ishak Institute, 2016.
Talmon, Stefan. The South China Sea Arbitration: Jurisdiction, Admissibility,
Procedure. Brill, 2022.
Tseng, Katherine Hui-Yi. Rethinking South China Sea Disputes, The Untold
Dimensions and Great Expectations, Oxford: Routledge, 2017.
Yano, Toru. Japan’s Southeast Asia Policy, In Search of Mutual Trust. Tokyo: Simul
International, 1978.
Yiallourides, Constantinos. Disputed Waters and Seabed Resources in Asia and
Europe, Maritime Disputes and International Law. New York: Routledge, 2019.
Zhang, Feng. “Chinese Thinking on the South China Sea and the Future of Regional
Security.” In US-China Competition and the South China Sea Disputes, edited by
Huiyun Feng and Kai He. London and New York: Routledge, 2018.
Legal Documents
Charter of the United Nations. 1 UNTS 15 (entered into force 24 October 1945).
Statute of the International Court of Justice. 33 UNTS 993 (entered into force 24
October 1945).
Agreement Establishing Certain Seabed Boundaries in the Area of Timor and Arafura
Seas. 974 UNTS 319 (signed 9 October 1972).
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. 1155 UNTS 331 (entered into force 27
January 1980).
Treaty between Australia and the Republic of Indonesia on the Zone of Cooperation in
an Area between the Indonesian Province of East Timor and Northern Australia.
29 ILM 475 (signed 11 December 1989, entered into force 9 February 1991).
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). 1833 UNTS 397
(entered into force 14 November 1994).

205

Yoshinori Kodama

Japan-Singapore Economic Partnership Agreement (entered into force 30 November
2002). Available at <https://www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/singapore/jsepa.
html>.
Timor Sea Treaty between the Government of East Timor and the Government of
Australia. 2258 UNTS 3 (signed 20 May 2002, entered into force 2 April 2003).
Treaty between Australia and the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste on Certain
Maritime Arrangements in the Timor Sea. 2483 UNTS 359 (signed 12 January
2006, entered into force 27 June 2006).
Japan-Cambodia Investment Agreement. (signed 14 June 2007). Available at <http://
www.cambodianembassy.jp/web2/?page_id=555&lang=en>.
Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 2624 UNTS 223 (entered into
force 15 December 2008).
China. The Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf Act (1998).
China. Note Verbales submitted in the proceedings of continental shelf extension
in the UN Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, UN Document
CML/2/2009(9 February 2009), CML/17/2009 (New York, 7 May 2009),
CML/18/2009 (New York, 7 May 2009), CML/8/2011 (New York, 14 April 2011).
Indonesia. Note Verbale No.480/POL-703/VII/10 (8 July 2010).
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. (signed 15 November 2021).
Available at https://rcepsec.org/legal-text.
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Indonesia and the Government
of the Commonwealth of Australia establishing Certain Seabed Boundaries.
(signed 18 May 1971), Available at <https://www.ecolex.org/details/treaty/
agreement-between-the-government-of-the-commonwealth-of-australia-andthe-government-of-the-republic-of-indonesia-establishing-certain-seabed-boundaries-tre-152886/.>
Island of Palmas (1928), 2 RIAA 829.
Legal Status of Eastern Greenland (1933), PCIJ Ser.A/B no. 53.
Colombian-Peruvian asylum (1950), ICJ Reports 1950.
Minquieres et des Ecrehos (1953), ICJ Report 1953.
Temple of Preah Vihear, Merits, between Cambodia and Thailand (1962), ICJ Report
1961.
West Sahara, Advisory Opinion (1975), ICJ Report 1975.
Gulf of Maine Case, ICJ Reports 1984.
Burkina Faso/Mali Frontier Dispute Judgment (1986), ICJ Report 1986.
Southern Bluefin Tuna cases (1999), ITLOS (1999)280, 23 RIAA 1.
Maritime Delimitation and Territorial Question between Qatar and Bahrain (2001),
ICJ Report 2001.
Sovereignty over Pulay Ligitan and Pulay Sipadan (2002), ICJ Reports 2002.
Land Reclamation by Singapore in and around the Straits of Johor (2005), RIAA
XXVII.
Sovereignty over Pedra Branca/Pulau Batu Pujtech, Middle Rocks and South Ledge
(2008), ICJ Reports 2008.
Delimitation of the Maritime Boundary between Bangladesh and Myanmar in the Bay
of Bengal (2012), ITLOS, Case no. 16.

206

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June 1962 in the Case concerning the
Temple of Preah Vihear (2013), ICJ Reports 2013.
Whaling in the Antarctic case (2014), ICJ Reports, 2014.
Seizure and Detention of Certain Documents and Data, Provisional Measures, Order
(2014), ICJ Reports 2014.
Railway Land (2014), PCA 2012-01.
Arctic Sunrise Arbitration (2014), PCA 2014-02.
Chagos Marine Protected Area Arbitration (2015), PCA 2011-03.
South China Sea Arbitration (2016), PCA 2016-1.
Application for Revision of the Judgment of 23 May 2008 in the Case concerning
Sovereignty over Pedra Branca/Pulau Batu Puteh, Middle Rocks and South
Ledge, ICJ, filed in the Registry of the Court (2 February 2017).
Timor Sea Conciliation (2018), PCA 2016-10.
Web Sources
Ching, Chang. “Why is there no South China Sea Air Defence Identification Zone?”
SCSPI, accessed 15 May 2023, http://www.scspi.org/en/dtfx/why-there-nosouth-china-sea-air-defense-identification-zone.
CNN Indonesia. “Bakamla: Ribuan Kapal Asing Masuki Laut Natuna [Indonesian
Maritime Security Agency, Thousands of foreign ships enter Natuna Sea].”
13 September 2021. Accessed 1 May 2023, https://www.cnnindonesia.com/
nasional/20210913151110-20-693598/bakamla-ribuan-kapal-asing-masuki-lautnatuna.
Davenport, Tara. “Compulsory Conciliation under UNCLOS: Prospects for Future
Use, Centre for International Law.” University of Singapore. Accessed 6
October 2022, https://cil.nus.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/CompulsoryConciliation-under-UNCLOS-Prospects-for-Future-Use-Dr-Tara-Davenport.pdf.
Gnanasagaran, Angaindrankumar. “Pedra Branca Dispute Reveals Disconnect between
Malaysia and Singapore.” The ASEAN Post, 12 January 2021. Aaccessed 15 May
2023, https://theaseanpost.com/article/pedra-branca-dispute-reveals-disconnectbetween-malaysia-and-singapore.
International Court of Justice. “List of All Cases.” Accessed 31 March 2021, https://
www.icj-cij.org/en/list-of-all-cases.
Ministry of Commerce, People’s Republic of China, Spokesman’s Remarks (16
November 2020). Accessed 31 March 2021, http://english.mofcom.gov.cn/
article/newsrelease/policyreleasing/202011/20201103017259.shtml.
Panda, Ankit. “Is China Really About to Announce a South China Sea Air Defence
Identification Zone?” The Diplomat, 1 June 2016. Accessed 15 May 2023, https://
thediplomat.com/2016/06/is-china-really-about-to-announce-a-south-china-seaair-defense-identification-zone-maybe/.
Strangio, Sebastian. “After 12 Years, Indonesia and Vietnam Agree on EEZBoundaries,”
The Diplomat, 23 December 2022, accessed 15 May 2023, https://thediplomat.
com/2022/12/after-12-years-indonesia-and-vietnam-agree-on-eez-boundaries/.
The Straits Times. “Malaysia accepts Ruling on Pedra Branca, says Mahathir.” 25 June
2019. Accessed 15 May 2023, https://www.straitstimes.com/politics/malaysia-

207

Yoshinori Kodama

accepts-ruling-on-pedra-branca-says-pm-mahathir.
UN News. “Security Council urges permanent ceasefire after recent Thai-Cambodia
clashes.” 14 February 2011. Accessed 15 May 2023, https://news.un.org/en/
story/2011/02/366652.
United States Energy Information Administration. “The South China Sea is an
important world energy trade route, Major Crude Oil Trade Flows in the South
China Sea (2011).” Today in Energy, 4 April 2013. Accessed 15 May 2023, https://
www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=10671#:~:text=Almost%20a%20
third%20of%20global,Gulf%20suppliers%20and%20Asian%20consumers.
Yeo, Mike. “Analysis: Can China Enforce a South China Sea Air-Defence
Identification Zone?” USNI News, 18 July 2016. Accessed 15 May 2023, https://
news.usni.org/2016/07/18/analysis-can-china-enforce-south-china-sea-airdefense-identification-zone.
Other Sources
ASEAN Secretariat, ASEAN welcomes Cambodia-Thai firm commitment to avoid
further clashes, Jakarta (22 February 2011).
Beckman, Robert C. and Tara Davenport. “CLCS submissions and claims in the South
China Sea.” Paper, The Second International Workshop The South China Sea:
Cooperation for Regional Security and Development, Vietnam 2010.
Chong Ja Ian, “ASEAN’s Non-Intervention and the Myanmar Conundrum,” ASEAN
Focus, Jakarta, (2021).
Dolven, Ben, Mark E. Manyin, Shirley A. Kan. “Maritime Territorial Disputes in East
Asia.” Congressional Research Paper, 2014.
Gonzales, Robin. “The Spratly Islands Dispute.” Thesis, University of Nevada, 2014.
Hayton, Bill. “How to Solve the South China Sea Disputes.” ISEAS 25. Singapore:
Yusof Ishak Institute (2022).
Heine-Geldern, R, “Conception of State and Kingship in Southeast Asia,” Data Paper
18, Cornell University (1956).
Joint Press Statement; Eight Meeting of the Malaysia-Singapore Joint Technical
Committee on the Implementation of the International Court of Justice Judgment
on Pedra Branca, Middle Rocks and South Ledge (22 January 2020).
Koh, Tommy, Lecture on International Law, Southeast Asia Lecture Hall, Foreign
Policy Community of Indonesia, Jakarta, 8 August 2022 (online lecture).
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Singapore, Transcript of Press Conference by Foreign
Minister Prof S Jayakumar and Mah Bow Tan (9 October 2003).
Morales, Neil Jerome, “Philippines turns up heat on China over boats massing in
South China Sea,” The Jakarta Post (6 April 2021).
Position Paper of the Government of the People’s Republic of China on the Matter of
Jurisdiction in the South China Sea Arbitration initiated by the Republic of the
Philippines (7 December 2014).
Position Paper of the Government of the People’s Republic of China on the Matter of
Jurisdiction in the South China Sea Arbitration initiated by the Republic of the
Philippines (7 December 2014).
Singapore Government Agency, Joint Press Statement on the 5th Malaysia-Singapore
Joint Technical Committee Meeting on the Implementation of the ICJ Judgment

208

Judicialization In and Around the South China Sea

on Pedra Branca, Middle Rocks and South Ledge, 29-30 November 2010 (2
December 2010).
Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China on the
Award of 12 July 2016 of the Arbitral Tribunal in the South China Sea Arbitration
established at the Request of the Republic of the Philippines (12 July 2016).

209

Yoshinori Kodama

210

