The Paciﬁc Review

ISSN: 0951-2748 (Print) 1470-1332 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpre20

Elite role conceptions and Indonesia’s agency in
the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Paciﬁc: reclaiming
leadership
Pia Dannhauer
To cite this article: Pia Dannhauer (2024) Elite role conceptions and Indonesia’s agency in the
ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Paciﬁc: reclaiming leadership, The Paciﬁc Review, 37:1, 30-55, DOI:
10.1080/09512748.2022.2125999
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2022.2125999

Published online: 23 Sep 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1218

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpre20

THE PACIFIC REVIEW
2024, VOL. 37, NO. 1, 30–55
https://doi.org/10.1080/09512748.2022.2125999

Elite role conceptions and Indonesia’s agency in
the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific:
reclaiming leadership
Pia Dannhauer
School of Government and International Relations, Griffith University,
Brisbane, Australia
ABSTRACT

In June 2019, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) issued a
shared regional vision, the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP). The
document ended a debate about how to respond to the concept of the
Indo-Pacific, the United States’ Indo-Pacific Strategy, and new additions to
regional security architecture, especially the Quad. Indonesia, traditionally a
leading voice in ASEAN, exerted significant diplomatic capital developing and
securing agreement on the AOIP after a period of diminished leadership from
the organisation. Dominant explanations for this behaviour cannot fully
address why the country led in constructing AOIP despite what most analysts
agree was the disengagement of President Joko ‘Jokowi’ Widodo (2014 -)
from foreign policy. Developing an original ‘role integration’ model, this article argues that Indonesia was able to lead on AOIP because President
Jokowi’s preference for maritime cooperation and economic diplomacy integrated with the Indonesian Foreign Ministry’s efforts to maintain ASEAN unity
and centrality in this instance. The findings of this research offer both new
empirical insights into the domestic decision-making processes that shaped
Indonesia’s agency in AOIP and add to the role theory literature by shifting
the analytical focus from domestic contestation to cooperative dynamics that
can shape the national role conception.

KEYWORDS Indo-Pacific; ASEAN; leadership; role theory; Joko Widodo; Indonesia

Introduction
In June 2019, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) launched
the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP), a vision document that reaffirms ASEAN centrality and reiterates the importance of peace and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region.1 Indonesia played a key role in drafting the
CONTACT Pia Dannhauer
pia.dannhauer@griffithuni.edu.au
International Relations, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia.
ß 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

School of Government and

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

31

concept and lobbying for the agreement of AOIP despite a previous decline
in the country’s agency in the organisation after the election of President
Joko ‘Jokowi’ Widodo (2014 -). Why did Indonesia reclaim its leading role in
achieving ASEAN consensus on the norms and principles which should
underpin the Indo-Pacific order and ASEAN’s central place within it?
Some observers argue that Indonesia’s leadership in constructing this
regional vision was driven by the country’s middle power aspirations
embodied in President Jokowi’s maritime doctrine, the Poros Maritim Dunia
(Global Maritime Fulcrum or PMD) (Anwar, 2020; also Agastia, 2020). This
argument is inconsistent, however, with the widely shared assessment that
Jokowi has been generally disengaged from foreign policy during this
Presidency, as he has prioritised his domestic agenda (Connelly, 2014;
Bland, 2020, p. 160; Agastia, 2021). For this reason, other analysts argue
that the AOIP was an initiative of the Foreign Ministry (Kementerian Luar
Negeri or Kemlu), which has long championed the idea that Indonesia
should play a leadership role in ASEAN (Scott, 2019, pp. 202–204;
Weatherbee, 2019. p. 4).
In this article, I argue that both assessments of Indonesia’s leadership in
producing the AOIP are flawed. Instead, I argue that this leadership resulted
from an alignment of ideas and interests between the President and the
foreign policy bureaucracy. I argue too that this alignment is best explained
using an original ‘role integration’ model. In contrast to the role contestation scholarship, which focusses on competition over the national role
conception, this model offers an alternative analytical focus on how different role preferences may be integrated to achieve cooperation across government in conceiving and enacting role. The article shows that even
though President Jokowi did not share Kemlu’s commitment to the regional
leader role and instead preferred a maritime power role conception that
supported his economic and development agenda, in the case of AOIP his
interests aligned with Kemlu’s leadership ambitions in ASEAN. Their role
preferences were therefore integrated in the role conception, allowing policymakers to reclaim Indonesia’s leadership mantle in ASEAN and shaping
an approach to AOIP that was characterised by an emphasis on economicfunctional cooperation while downplaying the significance of strategic
competition.
To dissect how domestic actors identified problems, made decisions and
acted upon them, data from several sources was analysed. They included
25 interviews with informed actors within Indonesia’s foreign policy community, including active and retired foreign policy officials, academics and
analysts, as well as journalists. The analysis of high-level statements and
speeches also helped identify dominant role conceptions. These include
Jokowi’s Annual Speech of the Nation, Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi’s

32

P. DANNHAUER

Annual Press Briefings as well as statements made in ASEAN. Policy documents and opinion pieces, as well as audio-visual media, were analysed too.
The article proceeds in five parts. The first section outlines the gaps in
current explanations for Indonesia’s leadership on AOIP and introduces a
‘role integration’ model as an alternative framework to conceptualise the
country’s foreign policy behaviour. The following section discusses
President Jokowi’s maritime power role conception and explains why
Indonesia’s agency in providing new principles and values in ASEAN notably declined under his rule. The third section shows how intensifying geopolitics in the Indo-Pacific region threatened ASEAN’s cohesion and
relevance and provided the context for Kemlu diplomats to renew
Indonesia’s leadership in the organisation. In doing so, the fourth part
argues, Kemlu promoted their preferred regional leader role conception,
signalling policy makers’ ongoing commitment to ASEAN as Indonesia’s
central diplomatic platform to engage with the region. Finally, the fifth section illustrates how the President’s and Kemlu’s role preferences integrated,
leading Indonesia to emphasise economic-functional cooperation over strategic competition in the construction of AOIP. The article closes with a
recapitulation of this argument and its theoretical as well as empirical
implications.
This article makes two contributions. First, it provides a more nuanced
perspective on President Jokowi’s involvement in the construction of AOIP
and offers new empirical insights into the decision-making dynamics
behind Indonesia’s agency in ASEAN. Second, it adds to the scholarship on
domestic role dynamics by developing an original theoretical framework
and new hypotheses on the integration of divergent roles in the national
role conception.

Indonesia and the AOIP
One explanation for Indonesia’s leadership on AOIP contended that it was
part of the country’s efforts to position itself as an emerging ‘middle power’
in the Indo-Pacific region. Prominent foreign policy scholar Dewi Fortuna
Anwar, for instance, acknowledges the historical roots of Indonesia’s maritime orientation but argues Indonesia’s recent reconceptualization of its
geostrategic outlook from Asia- to Indo-Pacific is the result of President
Jokowi’s maritime doctrine and the associated Indonesian Ocean Policy,
which laid out the President’s goal to enhance Indonesia’s presence in the
maritime sphere at regional and international levels (Anwar, 2020; also
Agastia, 2020).
This argument does not, however, adequately account for the timing of
Indonesia’s reclamation of a leadership role in 2018, when the maritime

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

33

doctrine had already been in place since 2014. There is also a considerable
body of research that puts into doubt Jokowi’s agency in foreign policy.
This literature argues that after coming to power, the President showed no
affinity for foreign policy, and took a ‘hands-off’ and ad-hoc approach to
foreign policy (Connelly, 2014; Bland, 2020, p. 160; Agastia, 2021). It suggests that even his signature program the PMD was not his vision but
rather a ready-made campaign platform developed by his close advisors
(Rosyidin & Pattipeilohy, 2020). A lack of personal investment in the concept may explain why the idea all but disappeared during his second term
(Laksmana, 2019; Arif, 2021, p. 379).
Given the relative disengagement of the President in foreign policy,
other analysts argue that Kemlu took initiative on AOIP. As intensifying USChina rivalries created a new sense of urgency in the region, they contend,
Kemlu diplomats took it upon themselves to promote an Indo-Pacific concept to secure regional stability (e.g. Scott, 2019, pp. 202–204; Weatherbee,
2019, p. 4). This perspective, however, neglects the fact that while Kemlu is
responsible for formulation, stipulation, and implementation of foreign policy in line with Law 37/1999 and Law 24/2000, it cannot pursue its preferred
foreign policy independently, because the President remains Indonesia’s
highest executive authority and thus central decision-maker in foreign policy (Dosch, 2006, p. 49). Accordingly, a focus on Kemlu’s agency alone is
useful to understand who drove Indonesia’s leadership behaviour but insufficient to fully explain Indonesia’s agency in promoting shared principles
underpinning the Indo-Pacific order in ASEAN.
The prevailing explanations for Indonesia’s leadership in constructing
AOIP are thus incomplete. The ‘middle power’ argument cannot explain
why Indonesia took a leading role in defining norms and principles for
ASEAN in 2018, but not before. Accounts of Kemlu’s agency provide an
answer to the question who promoted leadership when President Jokowi
was relatively disengaged, but do not explain why he supported this course
of action. To answer the question why Indonesia led in AOIP, better insights
into the role of President Jokowi in realising Indonesia’s role in ASEAN
are needed.

Role theory and Indonesian foreign policy
To address this puzzle, this article uses role theory. A role is constituted by
both ego and alter components. The alter part of a role is constituted by
the role expectations of the group or social structure in which the role is
enacted. Meanwhile, the ego part or national role conception (NRC) comprises ‘perceptions, values, and attitudes of the actor occupying a position’
(Holsti, 1970, p. 239). Notably, the NRC itself comprises not only aspects of

34

P. DANNHAUER

national identity but also policymakers’ perceptions of their state’s responsibilities or opportunities within the international system (Breuning, 2011, p.
26). Intra-role conflict occurs when ego and alter expectations diverge,
while inter-role conflict happens when two roles within the state’s role set
impose contradictory demands (Harnisch, 2011, p. 8). This can, for instance,
happen due to a country’s participation in multiple, at times conflicting,
institutions (Barnett, 1993).
Role theory is particularly useful to understand Indonesia’s leadership in
ASEAN because it accounts for the specific nature of Indonesia’s leadership
in ASEAN’s consensus-based institutional framework, which is shaped both
by aspects of Indonesia’s self-understanding of its status in ASEAN as well
as the expectations and constraints imposed by other ASEAN members.
€land was the first to systematically examine Indonesia’s foreign policy
Ru
through the role theory framework to identify continuity and change in
Indonesia’s role set after democratisation. He demonstrated that different
main roles moved to the foreground throughout subsequent periods of the
post-independence period. Despite these variations, however, Indonesia’s
role set showed a significant degree of continuity. The regional leader role,
for instance, remained a persistent part of Indonesia’s role set and helped
enact main roles such as advocate of development under Suharto and
€land, 2017, p. 53).
advocate of democracy following democratisation (Ru
Indeed, several studies outline that the enactment of certain foreign policy roles was part of Indonesia’s search for a greater global status.
Indonesia frequently enacts roles to achieve overarching foreign policy
objectives. Thies and Sari for instance asserted that certain role enactments
qualify Indonesia as a middle power according to a multi-tier model of auxiliary roles that help achieve a middle power status (Thies & Sari, 2018).
Meanwhile, Karim demonstrated that Indonesia’s pursuit of regional leader
or global bridge-builder roles is part of its endeavours to seek a middle
power status (Karim, 2018). Using its role as a bridge-builder between
developed and developing countries in the Doha round, Indonesia also
sought to enhance its global status (Karim, 2021b).
The democracy promoter role similarly helped Indonesian elites to
enhance the country’s international prestige. But at times it also conflicted
with pre-reformasi role conceptions, thus undermining Indonesia’s foreign
policy aspirations, especially in ASEAN. Based on its democratisation the
country sought to promote democracy and human rights as core values
through new institutions, for instance through the ASEAN Charter. As a
regional leader that emphasizes consensus-building and cohesion among
member states with diverse political systems, however, Indonesia could not
ignore the concerns of member states who were reluctant to embrace
these values due to their less democratic political systems (Karim, 2017).

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

35

Another field of study recognizes the structuring effect of external audiences. In the case of Indonesia’s attempt to act as a bridge between the
Muslim world and Western democracies, for example, the role conception
as a Muslim democracy did not adhere to either expectation from the
Muslim world or Western liberal democracies and thus hindered successful
role enactment (Grzywacz, 2020). At the same time, Indonesia itself rejected
the democracy promoter role expected by Western liberal democracies in
favour of its role conception as a champion of developing countries due to
concerns over international responses to alleged human rights abuses in
West Papua (Karim, 2020).2
In such instances of conflicting audience expectation, as Karim maintains,
Indonesia may thus enact the same roles differently on regional and global
levels. When a conflict between audience expectations occurs, policymakers
may be forced to either attribute different meanings to the same role
depending on the level of engagement or perform a role in one level but
disregard it on another (Karim, 2022). Agastia, on the other hand, showcases an example of convergence between ego and alter expectations. He
argued that Indonesia’s agency in promoting its own Indo-Pacific concept
was driven by its role conception as a regional leader and bridge-builder.
At the same time, Indonesia adjusted to external cues and role expectations
through integrating aspects of the dominant Indo-Pacific powers’ own strategies and building on existing ASEAN-centred mechanisms. Due to this process of socialisation or ‘role location’, Indonesia secured widespread
acceptance of its middle-power role in the Indo-Pacific (Agastia, 2020).
The current literature thus emphasises the interactive nature of the role
conceptions that drive Indonesia’s foreign policy behaviour, as well as the
constraints imposed on these conceptions by the expectations of other
states. Yet there is comparatively little research on the processes of role
articulation in the domestic sphere. Where domestic role interactions are
discussed, they are largely conceptualised as a constraint on policymakers.
Karim identified a two-fold ‘role legitimation’ strategy employed by former
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono or ‘SBY’ to reduce the likelihood of
domestic contestation to his internationalist ambitions. In order to imbue
his agenda with meaning, the President drew on historical roles and reproduced international expectations as inherent social qualities within the state
(Karim, 2021a). Other studies noted that domestic audience expectations
may constrain decision-makers from pursuing certain role conceptions
€land, 2017, p. 53).
(Karim, 2017, p. 388; Ru
This reflects a broader tendency within role research to assume consensus on the NRC, based on the view that the NRC is a product of socialisation
(Kirste & Maull, 1996, p. 287; Chafetz, Abramson & Grillot, 1996; Breuning,
2011, p. 23). But such consensus is not a given. Indonesia’s role in ASEAN

36

P. DANNHAUER

was at times significantly contested, as exemplified by parliamentarians
refusing the ratification of ASEAN agreements on neo-nationalist, gains-ori€land, 2009; Hurley & Lee, 2021); or socio-economic actors
ented grounds (Ru
leveraging their political influence to undermine regional cooperation and
protect their wealth and resources (Robison & Hadiz, 2017; Dosch, 2015, pp.
292–294; Chandra, 2016).
Conflicts over the NRC are captured by the notion of ‘role contestation’,
which describes the process of disaggregating the state into various
domestic stakeholders with potentially diverging role conceptions and
centres on how competition over the role conception influences behavioural outcomes (Thies & Breuning, 2012; Wehner & Thies, 2014; Jones,
2017; Cantir & Kaarbo, 2016, p. 6).

Role integration and the AOIP
In the case of the AOIP, there is no evidence of significant conflict over
Indonesia’s role conception. Rather, the question arises how and why
Kemlu, as the main proponent of AOIP, gained President Jokowi’s support
for defining shared principles for ASEAN in the Indo-Pacific order when the
President showed little agency in foreign policy. Here, the role contestation
literature does not provide the theoretical tools necessary to conceptualise
how agreement emerged on Indonesia’s role in AOIP.
To fill this gap, this article presents an alternative ‘role integration’ model
to conceptualise cooperation in the role conception. Rather than focusing
on how domestic conflicts over the national role conception shape foreign
policy behaviour, the ‘role integration’ model offers new arguments regarding the cooperation among actors with different role conceptions to explain
how the leadership role could be successfully pursued in AOIP.
To conceptualise how different actors’ roles preferences are integrated in
the role conception, this model builds on previous findings on the importance of institutional power and resources to resolve differences within the
ego (Cantir & Kaarbo, 2016, p. 177). This research showed that bureaucratic
agencies and the individual cabinet members leading them will seek to promote a role conception in line with their respective bureaucratic interests
(Brummer & Thies, 2015, p. 290; Jones, 2017, p. 374). However, analyses of
role contestation also showed that powerful leaders will use their power to
impose their role preferences without great consideration for alternative
role conceptions or adjustments to accommodate contestation from other
government actors (Wehner & Thies, 2014; Brummer & Thies, 2015).
The ‘role integration’ model argues that the reverse holds also true: role
conceptions will be integrated if bureaucratic elites support a role and the
President’s role conception aligns with this preference. In terms of

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

37

Indonesia’s leadership in ASEAN, it can thus be expected that role integration occurs where the regional leader role is supported by Kemlu and aligns
with the President’s role conception.
The following sections will discuss the evidence supporting these claims.
They detail President Jokowi’s maritime power role conception, discuss
Kemlu’s enduring support for the regional leader role in the face of intensifying strategic competition in the Indo-Pacific, and outline how the integration of these different role preferences allowed for Indonesia to reclaim its
leadership mantle through the construction of AOIP.

Jokowi’s ‘maritime power’ role conception
President Jokowi supported a maritime power role conception that brought
with it significant changes in Indonesia’s approach to ASEAN. Until Jokowi
came to power in 2014, the regional leader role had been an enduring part
of Indonesia’s foreign policy role set. Beginning with President Suharto’s
support for the founding of ASEAN in 1967, the organisation quickly
became the centre of Indonesia’s concentric circles of engagement with the
world. Regional integration was seen as a tool to maintain the country’s
preferred bebas dan aktif (independent and active) approach to foreign policy by fostering cooperative relations in Southeast Asia and insulating
against the influence of external powers. Accordingly, Indonesia took an
active role in maintaining regional stability and promote peaceful dialogue
through conflict management efforts as well as institution-building (Anwar,
1994, pp. 207–214). Following the fall of Suharto in 1998 and the onset of
democratic reforms or reformasi, a period of domestic turmoil forced
Indonesian leaders to focus on domestic stabilisation and take a low profile
in regional affairs. With greater democratic consolidation, however, the
country reinvigorated its presence in ASEAN.
After reformasi, democracy became an essential part of the country’s
self-understanding and also provided a new rationale for its regional
approach. Under Indonesia’s first democratically elected President Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono (2004-2014), the country not only maintained its traditional role as a contributor to regional stability and harmony, but also
exerted intellectual leadership to define new norms and values in ASEAN
(Sukma, 2011). Especially during Yudhoyono’s second term, Indonesia also
positioned itself as a ‘regional power with global concerns’ to ensure
ongoing coherence between the country’s increasingly global orientation
and continued emphasis on ASEAN as the cornerstone of its foreign policy
(Natalegawa, 2018, p. 29).
Newcomer President Jokowi, however, wanted a foreign policy agenda
directed at enhancing national sovereignty and autonomy. In the words of

38

P. DANNHAUER

one academic, ‘he didn’t really care about political image. He was more
concerned about whether his engagement or Indonesia’s engagement in
one of the projects abroad really brings benefit for Indonesia’ (Interview,
August 2021). The President defined national interests primarily in material
terms and, accordingly, and prioritised economic diplomacy. As a recent
biography written by Jokowi’s former Chief of Staff (2015-2019) described,
the President
did, in fact, enter politics with considerable international experience, though
it was experience with a specific focus pertaining to his business
background. ( … ) this international experience all came with a very clear
and explicit focus: it was intended to generate sales, to advance his
company, and later, as Asmindo’s Surakarta chairman, to advance the local
furniture industry more generally. This formative understanding of
interactions with the world beyond Indonesia did play into his ideas about
foreign policy when he became President (Prasodjo, 2021, p. 207).

To enhance national development and resilience, Jokowi emphasised
Indonesia’s maritime identity already during his presidential campaign. In
their mission statement, for instance, Jokowi and his running mate Jusuf
Kalla referenced Indonesia’s personality as an archipelagic country and
maritime nation (Detik, 2014). Upon coming into office, the President promoted this role conception as part of his Poros Maritim Dunia (Global
Maritime Fulcrum or PMD) doctrine. In his 2015 State Speech, the President
urged his domestic audience that Indonesia must ‘show the world that the
Indonesian nation is a maritime nation. A nation that maintains and utilizes
its seas with full sincerity. That is the first part of our effort to become the
Global Maritime Fulcrum [PMD]’ (Widodo, 2015).
Such a maritime orientation was not a new feature of Indonesia’s foreign
policy. The 1957 Wawasan Nusantara (Archipelagic Outlook), also called the
Juanda Declaration, classified Indonesia’s many islands as one united archipelago. By declaring its internal waters as a historically, economically, and
geographically integral part of the country, it became an essential component of post-independence national integration efforts (Cribb & Ford, 2009,
p. 38). In addition, PMD referenced the glory days of the Sriwijaya
(7th–12th century) and Majapahit (13th–16th century) empires, which were
recognized as maritime hubs of the pre-modern era, thereby constructing
a vision of Indonesia’s power projection in the maritime domain
(Rosyidin, 2021).
Still, the PMD was an innovation in so far as that the reinvigoration of
Indonesia’s identity as an archipelagic state prompted a reconceptualization
of Indonesia’s geostrategic interests as a fulcrum between two oceans, and
a re-evaluation of the country’s interests in the face of shifting power balances in the Indo-Pacific. It also firmly placed Indonesia as an emerging middle power, a vision which the President had already defined during his

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

39

2014 campaign and continued to reference in his depictions of Indonesia
as negara besar (big country) in the following years (Widodo, 2015, 2017).
As Professor Anak Agung Banyu Perwita from the Indonesia Defense
University described, ‘the concept of Indo-Pacific is very much the concept
that Indonesia should go beyond, beyond Southeast Asia’. Furthermore,
Indonesia was trying and will always try to play a major role in the
international relations, not only in terms of ASEAN. ( … ) when we talk about
whether Indonesia should move up or should go beyond ASEAN, it means
that Indonesia to some extent will achieve the status of middle power
(Interview, 28 July 2021).

Jokowi first outlined the five pillars of the PMD doctrine at the 2014 East
Asia Summit. Notably the first three pillars principally concerned domestic
issues. They comprised rebuilding Indonesia’s maritime identity, maintaining and managing marine resources, developing maritime infrastructure
and connectivity, and cooperation in the maritime domain on conflict areas
such as illegal fishing. Only the latter two pillars, dealing with territorial disputes, and enhancing maritime defence capabilities covered foreign policy
issues (Connelly, 2015, p. 8). The release of Presidential Regulation No. 16/
2017, the Kebijikan Kelautan Indonesia (Indonesian Ocean Policy) further
reiterated Indonesia’s sovereignty over its waters and substantiated PMD’s
goals by outlining a policy framework for maritime affairs, especially allocating administrative responsibilities to realise the maritime drive
(Humas, 2017).
The PMD was thus inherently domestically focussed, and the maritime
sphere predominantly conceptualised as a key domain for development
opportunities. In line with this outlook, the foreign policy outreach was widened to expand relations with Indian Ocean states through defence, political and economic engagements (Nabbs-Keller, 2014, p. 7). The country
participated in various multilateral fora, and most prominently, reinvigorated its engagement in the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) to execute its maritime drive (JakartaGlobe, 2017). In line with Jokowi’s preference
for direct and benefit-oriented engagements, Indonesia also established
several maritime bilateral partnerships. As former Vice Minister for Maritime
Sovereignty, Coordinating Ministry for Maritime Affairs (2015 2018) and
Ambassador to Germany, Arif H. Oegroseno recalled, ‘this one of the great
examples of Indonesian independent and active foreign policy, where we
can pursue our foreign policy independently and actively seeking for partners, actively seeking for new ideas without any political conditionalities or
burdens’ (Interview, 8 July 2021).
ASEAN, meanwhile, was no longer placed at the centre of foreign policy.
In the President’s eyes, the organisation was overly bureaucratic and slow.
At the 30th ASEAN Summit, for instance, Jokowi called upon all member

40

P. DANNHAUER

states to make meetings ‘more effective and efficient’ (Halim, 2017).
Despite ongoing engagement in the organisation’s regional meetings,
Indonesia’s role was therefore limited to participation with little investment
of diplomatic capital.
Shuttle diplomacy on the South China Sea dispute illustrates this shift. In
2012, during the Presidency of SBY, Foreign Minister Natalegawa mediated
among member states to secure a joint communique after then-Chair
Cambodia refused to issue a statement that was critical of China’s assertiveness in the South China Sea. Under the leadership of Jokowi, there was no
comparable consensus-building by Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi when
Cambodia withdrew its support for a statement after the 2016
China–ASEAN ministerial meeting, because President Jokowi was cautious
not to compromise economic relations with China (Connelly, 2016, p. 9).
Jokowi’s lack of agency on issues that do not directly serve his economic
and development priorities, therefore, meant that Indonesia’s leadership in
ASEAN was diminished. This limited presidential agency in ASEAN was also
the reason why Indonesia’s agency in constructing AOIP was not prompted
or substantially shaped by the President. As one foreign policy
expert noted,
there was no AOIP in the discussion of the first term of the Jokowi
administration ( … ) even the definition of maritime diplomacy in the
Whitebook on maritime diplomacy was initially not mentioning that there
should be an ASEAN Outlook. Yes, ASEAN was the primary tool of maritime
diplomacy but not in the outlook sense of the word. Secondly, if you look at
the strategic planning document of the Foreign Ministry from 2015 to 2019,
there’s only one bit that has the word Indo-Pacific on it and that’s in
reference to a previous attempt by Marty to have an Indo-Pacific Treaty. So
it’s clear that at the beginning of Jokowi’s term there was no thought
process of an Indo-Pacific strategy (Interview, September 2021).

In sum, President Jokowi supported a maritime power role conception
that centred on Indonesia’s identity as a fulcrum at the Indian and Pacific
Oceans and served his economic and development priorities. The
President’s disengagement from issues outside his narrow domestic agenda
also meant, however, that Indonesia’s agency on defining norms, principles
and values in ASEAN diminished.

Changing geopolitics and Indonesia’s leadership renewal
In 2017, the context in which Indonesian foreign policy operated changed.
Initially driven by Japan, major powers had reconfigured their strategic conception of the region from Asia- to Indo-Pacific as early as 2007 when
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe talked about the ‘confluence of two
seas’ in front of the Indian parliament (Abe, 2007). China’s announcement

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

41

of the Belt and Road Initiative in 2013 also significantly contributed to the
materialisation and institutionalisation of the Indo-Pacific through extensive
investment in connectivity across the region. Indeed, the rise of the IndoPacific concept is often directly associated with the revival of the
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad) between the US, India, Japan and
Australia, who adopted the Indo-Pacific as their regional framework to
respond to China’s growing influence and compensate for shortcomings of
the current institutional architecture (Wilson, 2018).
Notably, during this time then Indonesian Foreign Minister Natalegawa
had already called for an ASEAN-led response to these developments. In
2013, Natalegawa first introduced his idea for an Indo-Pacific Treaty of
Friendship and Cooperation in a keynote address to an Indonesia conference at Washington’s Centre for Strategic and International Studies. He
argued the trajectory of the Indo-Pacific region is of ‘profound interest’ to
Indonesia and a ‘new paradigm’ for international relations needed. He thus
proposed a model based on the 1976 Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia (TAC) to which all dialogue partners had acceded
(Natalegawa, 2013).
In the Foreign Minister’s view, this would move relations among the
region’s states beyond the current ‘hub and spokes’ structure of ASEAN-centred mechanisms by offering an independent code for the whole IndoPacific region. His initiative was placed on ASEAN’s agenda but met with
little enthusiasm as member states remained reluctant to take a joint position on developments in the Indo-Pacific region. Although the 2014 ASEAN
Ministerial Meeting tasked senior officials to explore options for a regional
framework, the Indonesian initiative disappeared for the coming years and
Natalegawa’s time in office ended soon after (Weatherbee, 2019, p. 3).
Indonesia’s Indo-Pacific concept was only injected with new momentum
a few years later. A strong statement delivered by US Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson singled out China as a subversive and provocative threat to the
rules-based international order in October 2017 (Tillerson, 2017). One
month later, at the 2017 APEC meeting in Vietnam, US President Donald
Trump advanced the US Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) concept. This
intensified tensions between the US and China and compromised ASEAN’s
ability to maintain autonomy. ASEAN members were ambivalent in their
view of the Quad, with some worrying an endorsement of FOIP would
alienate China, which remains a key partner (Le Thu, 2018, p. 19). At the
same time, the emergence of new regional concepts was seen to undermine ASEAN’s position at the centre of the wider multilateral architecture.
The rise of new bi- and mini-lateral arrangements thus raised fears over
ASEAN’s future relevance among member states (Tang, 2018, p. 51).

42

P. DANNHAUER

This new sense of urgency within ASEAN provided policymakers with the
window of opportunity to reassert Indonesia’s leadership role. The Foreign
Ministry initiated consultations with domestic and international partners
the same year and started drafting an alternative Indo-Pacific framework,
which was previewed in a speech by Foreign Minister Marsudi at CSIS
Jakarta (Marsudi, 2018). In August 2018, Indonesia formally presented its
Indo-Pacific concept at the 8th Ministerial Meeting of the East Asia Summit
and both President and Foreign Minister promoted the initiative at various
occasions on the regional level in the following months. Having undergone
intensive negotiations and adjustments, Indonesia’s Indo-Pacific
Cooperation Concept was formally endorsed by ASEAN as the rebranded
ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific in June 2019 (Nabbs-Keller, 2020, p. 25).
The key figures involved in the development and promotion of an IndoPacific framework were all Kemlu officials. They included the Director
General of ASEAN Cooperation Jose Antonio Marato Tavares and the former
Head of the Badan Pengkajian dan Pengembangan Kebijakan (Policy
Analysis and Development Agency or BPPK) Siswo Pramono, who was
dubbed the ‘brain’ behind drafting the Indo-Pacific Cooperation Concept
(Interview with security expert, July 2021; Interview with researcher, August
2021). Damos Agusman, then Kemlu’s Director General for International
Law and Treaties, was also mentioned as an important figure in the process
(Arif, 2021, p. 381).
Foreign Minister Marsudi also became an integral part of the lobbying
for and promotion of the IPC concept within ASEAN. The extent of her lobbying for the AOIP even earned her the nickname ‘Miss Indo-Pacific’ among
ASEAN counterparts (Bayuni, 2019). In contrast to the Indo-Pacific Treaty
proposed by then Foreign Minister Natalegawa, the Indo-Pacific concept
was not Marsudi’s original initiative. However, the development of the
concept was an opportunity for her to make a mark before the end of her
term. According to the Deputy Executive Director for Research at
the Centre for Strategic and International Studies Jakarta (CSIS)
Shafiah Muhibat,
she tasked many of her Director Generals, at least two or three people were
working on it [AOIP] seriously to actually come up with new ideas on what
to put into the Indo-Pacific drafts. It really meant a lot to her (Interview, 13
August 2021).

Kemlu’s commitment to leadership
The Foreign Ministry were driven to promote a shared ASEAN vision due to
their enduring commitment to the regional leader role conception. As
ASEAN stayed silent on developments in the Indo-Pacific concept despite

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

43

the geopolitical contest heating up, Kemlu saw their only option to uphold
these values and maintain the regional autonomy by proactively shaping it.
Diplomats continued to see ASEAN as the central platform to exercise norm
setting in the wider region, guided by the values and principles defined
within the Constitution, relevant laws, and the Rencana Pembangunan
Jangka Panjang Nasional (Long-Term Development Plan or RPJPN) - in this
case, RPJPN 2005-2025 (Interview with diplomat, 4 August 2021).
Kemlu’s agency on the ASEAN level was thus motivated by the desire to
reassert ownership over the Indo-Pacific narrative and urging other ASEAN
states to abandon their reactive stance. As Aristyo Rizka Darmawan, a
Lecturer at Universitas Indonesia, described,
Indonesia is in the centre of ASEAN and is also in the centre of this
geopolitical situation in the Indo-Pacific ( … ) We don’t want ASEAN to
become geopolitically contested and become the victim of the geopolitical
rivalry. And how do we create a more effective and more relevant ASEAN?
( … ) Let’s create an intellectual concept, a geopolitical concept and that’s
how the ASEAN Outlook on Indo-Pacific came into being (Interview, 16
July 2021).

This approach is consistent with elites’ perception of the organisation as
a vehicle to project influence despite limited national capabilities. As such,
AOIP still centres on ASEAN but also opens a playing field for external partners to be involved (Interview with Shafiah Muhibat, 13 August 2021). Also,
the current Director General (DG) of ASEAN Cooperation at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs Sidharto Suryodipuro confirmed that membership in ASEAN
continues to facilitate Indonesia’s pursuit of a more integrative policy
beyond the immediate region, despite its limited capabilities (Interview, 27
August 2021).
But Kemlu’s role enactment also underlines the order-building function
of the Indonesian leadership role. Elites view ASEAN not only as a strategic
buffer serving national interests but use the organisation as a platform to
encourage their neighbours to take ownership of the regional order by
forming shared objectives and roles through common institutions
(Wicaksana, 2016). By reclaiming the leadership role, diplomats could
ensure ASEAN consensus on the key norms and principles which should
underpin a prosperous and peaceful Indo-Pacific order as well as ASEAN’s
central place within it. In the words of one senior diplomat,
in the past, ASEAN would say this is what we need, and our partners would
contribute. But the thinking behind this [AOIP] is that ASEAN Member States
would work it out among themselves what kind of cooperation, what kind
of projects they want to do ( … ) and then invite its partners (Interview,
August 2021).

44

P. DANNHAUER

Previous research also argued that while Indonesia’s agency in the IndoPacific was grounded in efforts to prevent domination from any major
power, its inclusive order-building approach was rooted in elites’ specific
view of regional developments through a lens of ambivalence between
leadership aspirations and suspicion of the outside world as well as a harmony-oriented political culture (Wicaksana, 2021). Indeed, the rationale for
Indonesia’s inclusive approach to promoting an Indo-Pacific concept was
located by Kemlu officials in the country’s long history of peacefully navigating great power rivalries.
Siswo Pramono explained that the stance pursued by the ancient
Sriwijaya and Majapahit kingdoms, who were caught between the ancient
empires of today’s China and India, continues to inspire Indonesia’s free
and independent strategic outlook.3 Pramono drew a parallel between the
old strategy of accommodation and diplomacy pursued by Sriwijaya despite
persistent rivalries between the greater empires, and Indonesia’s current
position between China and the US.4 These civilisational origins and traditions of synergy and inclusivity informed its inclusive order-building
approach in the Indo-Pacific.
Moreover, Pramono maintained that Indonesia holds a unique perspective due to its struggle to overcome an ‘archipelagic fragility’, reflecting
scholarly analyses of Indonesia’s foreign policy as understood in terms of
vulnerability and weakness.5 Indeed, this constituted a key factor forcing
Indonesia to maintain non-alignment and outreach, while also embracing
an open form of nationalism to maintain unity, based on the doctrine of
‘nationalism in the garden of internationalism’ first promoted by President
Sukarno (Interview, 4 August 2021).
At the same time, the pursuit of the leadership role points to ministry
officials’ perception of their country’s global potential and ambitions to
position Indonesia as recognised middle power. Regarding Indonesia’s reorientation towards the maritime domain, a senior diplomat for example
pointed out that,
the concept is new, the terminology is new. But the thinking behind it is not
new. When I was in elementary school, this is something that we were
taught, that Indonesia lies in between two oceans and two continents, Asia
and Australia. That this is a very strategic region. That it has always been a
trading region, it has always been open to not only international trade, but
also to international interaction (Interview, August 2021).

Indonesia has long held a historical self-understanding as a ‘quiet and
benevolent leader’ in Southeast Asia (Tan, 2007, p. 158). This perspective
continues to be relevant. As one Ambassador stated, ‘Can we behave irresponsibly as the largest nation in Southeast Asia? Of course, we can. But
those things don’t happen because we chose not to’ (Interview, July 2021).6

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

45

Statements from Foreign Ministry officials thus reveal a sense of Indonesia’s
potential and ambitions for Indonesia to play a greater role on the global stage.
Kemlu officially integrated the middle power concept into the mediumterm development plan in 2015 (Karim, 2018, p. 353). Arguably, the notion
of middle power is a contentious one in Indonesian foreign policy discourse. One academic, for instance, outlined that the concept of middle
power has less appeal for Indonesia, because it did not match the country’s
increased confidence in its global role following the reform period
(Interview, August 2021). A government advisor also emphasised that while
the concept is important as a driver of foreign policy, Indonesia had significant ‘homework’ to do to actually realise this role (Interview, July 2021).
Notwithstanding this ambivalence, the promotion of an Indonesian IndoPacific concept, according to senior Kemlu diplomat Yayan Mulyana, signalled that ‘we want and we are capable to go beyond our boundaries’
(Interview, 18 August 2021).
Thus, policy leaders from Kemlu remained commitment to ASEAN as the
central platform for Indonesia’s foreign policy and therefore preferred a
regional leader role conception. By developing and promoting shared principles to underpin the Indo-Pacific order in ASEAN, diplomats sought to
uphold the region’s strategic autonomy in the face of intensifying great
power rivalries, while also enhancing Indonesia’s credentials as an emerging
Indo-Pacific power.

Role integration and Jokowi’s belated support
Although President Jokowi showed little investment in regional leadership,
therefore, intensifying geopolitical dynamics prompted Kemlu to reclaim
the leadership mantle in ASEAN. Kemlu’s pursuit of the leadership role was
made possible by the nature of foreign policy decision-making under
Jokowi. In considering the influence of the President’s outlook on foreign
policy, one high-level diplomat maintained, ‘Leaders always matter, personalities matter. ( … ) But at the same time also the foreign affairs actors deal
with matters, so there’s always this interaction’ (Interview, August 2021).
One Kemlu diplomat also pointed out that the Foreign Ministry now enjoys
greater autonomy because, in contrast to President Yudhoyono, Jokowi
does not have a special staff or a personal advisor for foreign policy in the
presidential palace (Interview, July 2021).
Specifically, there was a kind of ‘division of labour’ in that the President
trusted the Foreign Ministry to craft policy, especially in areas that were not
of direct interest. As it did not serve Jokowi’s narrow economic and development priorities, ASEAN policy fell predominantly into the responsibility of

46

P. DANNHAUER

the Foreign Ministry. One interviewee summarised Jokowi’s line of thinking
as such: ‘I trust you to handle the foreign policy, the boring stuff ( … ) if
you need my help, you come see me and explain to me, and if I think it’s
important, I’ll bring the political leverage as necessary’ (Interview with foreign policy expert, September 2021). Accordingly, the reinvigoration of
Indonesia’s leadership on an Indo-Pacific vision for ASEAN was also not
prompted by the President. In fact, Jokowi did not provide meaningful
input on the substance of the cooperation concept at all (Interview with
academic, August 2021).
Notwithstanding, President Jokowi ultimately supported Kemlu’s promotion of the regional leader role by using his political leverage to promote
consensus among ASEAN on AOIP. At the 32nd ASEAN Summit, for instance,
the President maintained that a shared regional concept would be ‘crucial
for ASEAN to remain relevant, to be able to perform its centrality and to
demonstrate ASEAN’s ability to manage strategic environmental change’
(Setkab, 2018). At the following summit, he added it would also provide a
new direction for ASEAN’s cooperation with external partners (SetKab, 2018).
The reason why Jokowi sanctioned an active role in ASEAN was because,
in this instance, the pursuit of the leadership role aligned with his own goal
of attracting investment and infrastructure and, to some extent, enhanced
the legitimacy of his overarching domestic priorities. Thus, regional leader
and maritime power role preferences were integrated and allowed Kemlu
to exercise norm-setting in the region but also meant that Indonesia’s
approach to leadership in ASEAN was heavily shaped by Jokowi’s domestic priorities.
The AOIP centred around functional cooperation goals in the maritime
domain, climate change and disaster risk reduction, sustainable development and economic cooperation (ASEAN, 2019). This focus on economicfunctional cooperation was a non-controversial objective to accommodate
reluctant ASEAN member states, who resisted any proposals for a more
institutionalised security architecture (Interview with senior researcher,
August 2021). ASEAN members fundamentally differed in their view of geopolitical developments, with very different perceptions of China’s presence
as well as the revival of the Quad (Le Thu, 2018). The maritime emphasis of
AOIP alienated especially land-based member states such as Myanmar or
Laos who were less invested in articulating an Indo-Pacific agenda. In fact,
it was initially uncertain whether the country would succeed in engendering consensus at all (Bayuni, 2018).
Yet the emphasis on practical cooperation areas was also a result of
Jokowi’s emphasis on economic growth to enhance domestic development
as well as Indonesia’s defence capacities to ultimately preserve state sovereignty and the country’s ability to pursue its interests (Rosyidin, 2017, p.

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

47

183). Regional stability has been at the core of Indonesia’s pursuit of
domestic purposes like state-building, economic development, and regime
consolidation ever since the Suharto era. One of Suharto’s main priorities
upon coming to power was economic reconstruction in the face of stagnating production rates, a decline in manufacturing rates and huge external
debts. Foreign policy was reconceptualised to meet these needs. The introduction of pembangunan nasional (national development) was an expression of the regime’s belief that an independent and active foreign policy
could only be pursued if the country built internal strength (Sukma, 1995,
pp. 310–311).
Accordingly, the framing of the Indo-Pacific concept as a platform for
cooperation strongly resonated with the President’s interest in maritime
cooperation and connectivity, as exemplified by Jokowi’s proposal for
Jakarta to host an Indo-Pacific Connectivity forum only shortly after the
adoption of AOIP (Septiari, 2019). As one academic outlined, ‘in the end, it’s
framed as an economic cooperation initiative. And the President is comfortable with that because it resonates with his own domestic political agenda’
(Interview, August 2021).
Secondly, Kemlu’s concept for an ASEAN Indo-Pacific vision was intended
to provide an inclusive alternative to Indo-Pacific strategies put forward by
other regional powers that laid too much stress on excluding China.
Indonesian elites remained overall cautious regarding China due to concerns over economic exploitation and political subordination as well as
ongoing rejection of the domination of any major power (Yeremia, 2022).
At the same time, as one diplomat declared, ‘if we had to choose between
America and China, it would be a disaster’ (Interview, August 2021). The
promotion of dialogue and peaceful relations through ASEAN-centred institutions was thus consistent with Indonesia’s traditional emphasis on maintaining equidistance between the great powers. As one Indonesian
Professor described, Indonesia’s cooperation concept was set up ‘to make
sure that ASEAN is not working under the definition of the United States,
which to some degree may then offend China. This is what’s behind it, and
it is very, very implicitly. And that’s what Indonesia always does. We just try
to stay in the middle’ (Interview, July 2021).
However, the inclusivity of Indonesia’s approach also aligned well with
the President’s own interest in maintaining good relations with China.
Jokowi had moved notably closer toward China than his predecessor. As a
senior foreign policy researcher explained, the prospect of foreign investments under the umbrella of the Belt and Road Initiative acted as a
‘sugarloaf’, catering to his ambitious infrastructure development goals
(Interview, July 2021). In 2017, China was indeed Indonesia’s biggest export

48

P. DANNHAUER

destination with more than 13% of the country’s total exports (World
Bank, 2017).
Another interviewee also contended the giant neighbour is not only an
interesting partner with considerable financial resources. It is also seen as
more ‘generous’ and suitable for Jokowi’s transactional approach. For
instance, China provided immediate assistance on pressing issues such as
the Nanggala submarine incident or the COVID-19 vaccines.7 Importantly
this comes without imposing conditions: ‘China came to Indonesia by asking ‘What do you need? ( … ) They give. China basically gives anything and
that’s what the Indonesian government wants’ (Interview with academic,
July 2021). Several of Widodo’s cabinet members therefore maintained
good relations with Beijing. In 2019, Jokowi’s ‘Mr Fix-it’ Luhut Pandjaitan
offered 28 infrastructure projects to China and implemented a coordinating
task force to oversee the realisation of BRI projects (Straits Times, 2019).
Also Minister of State-Owned Enterprises Erick Thorir has facilitated largescale investments from China (Reuters, 2021). Both have travelled to
Beijing several times and repeatedly expressed their commitment to protecting Chinese business interests.
In sum, for Kemlu diplomats, the regional leader role remained the preferred role conception to exercise order-building to maintain strategic
autonomy from rival US and China while enhancing Indonesia’s credentials
as a significant actor in the Indo-Pacific region. Jokowi, meanwhile, promoted a maritime power role for Indonesia to make use of new opportunities to boost cooperation on maritime security and connectivity in the
Indo-Pacific arena. In the case of AOIP, however, Jokowi’s domestic interests
aligned with Kemlu’s leadership ambitions in ASEAN. Their role preferences
were therefore integrated in the role conception, allowing policymakers to
reclaim Indonesia’s leadership mantle in ASEAN despite the President’s limited investment in the organisation. This integration also meant that the
country’s approach to constructing AOIP was characterised by functional
cooperation objectives, while downplaying the strategic dimension of
the AOIP.

Conclusion
Indonesia’s leadership in ASEAN declined significantly after 2014, as
President Jokowi promoted his preferred maritime power role conception
as embodied in the Poros Maritim Dunia. Yet the country played a key role
in drafting the concept and lobbying for the agreement of the ASEAN
Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP), a vision document that reaffirms ASEAN
centrality and reiterates the importance of peace and cooperation in the
Indo-Pacific region. Current explanations for Indonesia’s leadership on AOIP

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

49

do not fully explain this change. The middle power argument does not
explain why Indonesia took a leading role in defining norms and principles
for ASEAN, when Jokowi took a primarily ‘hands-off’ approach to foreign
policy and prioritised his domestic agenda. Accounts of Kemlu’s agency
provide an answer to the question who promoted leadership when
President Jokowi was relatively disengaged from foreign policy but do not
explain why the President as the central decision-maker on foreign policy
supported leadership in AOIP.
This article therefore set out to more accurately explain why Indonesia
took a leading role in constructing AOIP by investigating the decision-making dynamics between President and Foreign Ministry. In doing so this
research made a two-fold contribution. Firstly, the article developed an original ‘role integration’ model. This model adds to the existing scholarship
on domestic role dynamics, which is currently focussed primarily on competition over the role conception. By elaborating when and why roles may
not be contested, this model provides an alternative strategy to disaggregate the NRC without focussing on intra-ego conflicts and showed that different roles can be integrated to achieve cooperation in the
role conception.
Secondly, the article offered new empirical findings on Jokowi’s role in
the construction of AOIP. Specifically, the results presented here indicate
that while the President did not share Kemlu’s enduring commitment to
ASEAN as the country’s central diplomatic platform, in the case of AOIP
Jokowi supported the Foreign Ministry’s leadership ambitions because an
active role in ASEAN supported his economic and development objectives.
These findings counter the conventional narrative of Jokowi’s disengagement from foreign policy and provide a more nuanced account of President
Jokowi’s agency in ASEAN.
Recognising Jokowi’s pragmatic and outcome-oriented approach to
Indonesia’s role in ASEAN helps understand when and how the country
exerts diplomatic capital on regional issues and is particularly pertinent in
view of Indonesia’s upcoming chairmanship in ASEAN in 2023. Future
research should therefore pay closer attention to the decision-making
dynamics between different foreign policy actors to comprehensively
explain why Indonesia takes the positions it does in ASEAN.

Notes
1.

2.

The concept of ASEAN centrality emphasises the organisation’s position at the centre of
and bridge between a variety of multilateral mechanisms in East Asian regionalism, such
as the East Asia Summit or the ASEAN Regional Forum (Caballero-Anthony, 2014,
p. 565).
For a detailed discussion of the significance of the West Papua issue in Indonesian
foreign policy see Wangge & Lawson, 2021.

50

P. DANNHAUER
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

H.E Dr. Siswo Pramono spoke to the author in his personal capacity.
Although rather than accommodation, Indonesia today relies on a nonalignment strategy.
The literature has long pointed to a pervasive sense of weakness in Indonesian foreign
policy based on Indonesia’s postcolonial condition and associated external dependence,
internal diversity, and fears over outside interference due to its resource wealth
(Weinstein, 1967, 1972). On the other hand, scholars also noted that this vulnerability is
coupled with a sense of regional entitlement emerging from revolutionary
achievements, the country’s size, strategic location and natural resources (Leifer, 1983,
p. 173).
Notably, its reliance on ASEAN also meant that Kemlu officials had to significantly adjust
their approach to AOIP to the expectations of ASEAN counterparts who held diverging
views of geopolitical developments as well as the maritime emphasis of AOIP. Thus,
whereas Natalegawa proposed a treaty, Kemlu’s 2018 concept was presented as a less
legalistic approach to accommodate ASEAN’s informal decision-making (Interview with
diplomat, August 2021). This underlines the ongoing constraint on Indonesia’s
leadership role posed by ASEAN’s institutional environment and limited convergence
among member states (Quayle, 2018).
In April 2021, Indonesia’s KRI Nanggala-402 submarine sank in the Bali Sea during a
torpedo exercise. China was the first country to offer its assistance in salvaging the ship.
Given the discovery of potential Chinese maritime reconnaissance activities in
Indonesian waters earlier that year, the motivation behind this support for the
Indonesian military has been questioned (Nugroho & Marzuki, 2021).

Acknowledgements
I thank my PhD supervisors Professor Ian Hall, Professor Kai He and Dr Greta
Nabbs-Keller for their guidance during the various stages of writing this paper. I
also wish to thank the anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Ethics approval
This project has been approved by the Griffith University Human Research Ethics
Committee (GU Ref No: 2021/166).

Notes on contributor
Pia Dannhauer is a PhD Candidate enrolled at the Griffith School of Government
and International Relations at Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia.

ORCID
Pia Dannhauer

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4090-3979

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

51

References
Abe, S. (2007). Speech by H.E. Mr. Shinzo Abe, Prime Minister of Japan, at the
Parliament of the Republic of India ‘Confluence of the Two Seas’. https://www.
mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/pmv0708/speech-2.html.
Agastia, I. (2021). Joko Widodo’s fleeting maritime ambitions: An actor-specific analysis of Indonesia’s global maritime fulcrum. Journal of Asian Security and
International Affairs, 8(3), 304–323. doi:10.1177/23477970211039306
Agastia, I. (2020). Understanding Indonesia’s role in the ‘ASEAN Outlook on the IndoPacific’: A role theory approach. Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies, 7(3), 293–305. doi:
10.1002/app5.308
Anon (2019, 20 March). Indonesia to propose projects worth US$91 billion for
China’s Belt and Road. The Straits Times. https://www.straitstimes.com/asia/seasia/indonesia-to-propose-projects-worth-us91-bilion-for-chinas-belt-and-road.
Anwar, D. F. (2020). Indonesia and the ASEAN outlook on the Indo-Pacific.
International Affairs, 96(1), 111–129. doi:10.1093/ia/iiz223
Anwar, D. F. (1994). Indonesia in ASEAN - Foreign Policy and Regionalism. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Arif, M. (2021). Balancing with Jokowi’s characteristics: A neoclassical realism
approach to indonesia’s foreign and security policies in the South China sea.
Journal of Asian Security and International Affairs, 8(3), 370–390. doi:10.1177/
23477970211041455
ASEAN. (2019). ASEAN outlook on the Indo-Pacific. https://asean.org/speechandstatement/asean-outlook-on-the-indo-pacific/.
Barnett, M. (1993). Institutions, roles, and disorder: The case of the Arab states system. International Studies Quarterly, 37(3), 271–296. doi:10.2307/2600809
Bayuni, E. (2019). ASEAN unites in claiming centrality in Indo-Pacific region. The
Jakarta Post. 12 July. https://www.thejakartapost.com/academia/2019/07/12/
asean-unites-in-claiming-centrality-in-indo-pacific-region.html.
Bayuni, E. (2018). Nations still oceans apart on Indo-Pacific future. The Jakarta Post. 19
December.
https://www.thejakartapost.com/academia/2018/12/19/nations-stilloceans-apart-on-indo-pacific-future.html.
Bland, B. (2020). Man of Contradictions - Joko Widodo and the struggle to remake
Indonesia. A Lowy Institute Paper. Melbourne: Penguin Books Australia.
Breuning, M. (2011). Role theory research in international relations: State of the art
and blind spots. In Role theory in international relations, (pp. 16–36). Oxon:
Routledge.
Brummer, K., & Thies, C. G. (2015). The contested selection of national role conceptions. Foreign Policy Analysis, 11(3), 273–293. doi:10.1111/fpa.12045
Caballero-Anthony, M. (2014). Understanding ASEAN’s centrality: Bases and prospects in an evolving regional architecture. The Pacific Review, 27(4), 563–584. doi:
10.1080/09512748.2014.924227
Cantir, C., & Kaarbo, J. (2016). Domestic role contestation, foreign policy, and international relations. London: Taylor & Francis Group. http://ebookcentral.proquest.
com/lib/griffith/detail.action?docID=4516481.
Chafetz, G., Abramson, H., & Grillot, S. (1996). Role theory and foreign policy:
Belarussian and Ukrainian compliance with the nuclear nonproliferation regime.
Political Psychology, 17(4), 727–757. doi:10.2307/3792136

52

P. DANNHAUER

Chandra, A. C. (2016). Regional economic community building amidst rising protectionism and economic nationalism in ASEAN. JAS (Journal of ASEAN Studies), 4(1),
1–19. doi:10.21512/jas.v4i1.878
Connelly, A. L. (2016). Indonesia in the South China Sea: Going it alone. Lowy Institute
Analyses. https://www.lowyinstitute.org/sites/default/files/documents/Connelly%
2C%20Indonesia%20in%20the%20South%20China%20Sea.pdf.
Connelly, A. L. (2014). Indonesian foreign policy under President Jokowi. Lowy
Institute.
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/indonesian-foreign-policyunder-president-jokowi.
Connelly, A. L. (2015). Sovereignty and the sea: President Joko Widodo’s foreign policy challenges. Contemporary Southeast Asia, 37(1), 1–28.
Cribb, R. B., & Ford, M. (2009). Indonesia Beyond the Water’s Edge: Managing an
Archipelagic State. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Detik (2014). Ini Visi Misi Jokowi-Jusuf Kalla. Detik News. https://news.detik.com/
berita/2586880/ini-visi-misi-jokowi-jusuf-kalla/.
Dosch, J. (2015). Relations Between ASEAN and China Two-level Games in Trade and
Security. Internationales Asien Forum. International Quarterly for Asian Studies.
M€
unchen, 46(3/4), 279–312.
Dosch, J. (2006). The Impact of Democratization on the Making of Foreign Policy in
€dostasien Aktuell: Journal of Current
Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines. Su
Southeast Asian Affairs, 25(5), 42–70.
Grzywacz, A. (2020). Indonesia’s (inter)national role as a Muslim democracy model:
Effectiveness and conflict between the conception and prescription roles. The
Pacific Review, 33(5), 728–756. doi:10.1080/09512748.2019.1585387
Halim, H. (2017). Jokowi encourages ASEAN to take on global challenges. The Jakarta
Post. 30 April. https://www.thejakartapost.com/seasia/2017/04/30/jokowi-encourages-asean-to-take-on-global-challenges.html.
Harnisch, S. (2011). Role theory: Operationalization of key concepts. In: Role theory in
international relations, (pp. 7–15). Oxon: Routledge.
Holsti, K. J. (1970). National role conceptions in the study of foreign policy.
International Studies Quarterly, 14(3), 233–309. doi:10.2307/3013584
Humas (2017). Presiden Jokowi Teken Perpres Kebijakan Kelautan Indonesia.
Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia. https://setkab.go.id/presiden-jokowiteken-perpres-kebijakan-kelautan-indonesia/.
Hurley, A., & Lee, T. (2021). Delayed ratification in environmental regimes:
Indonesia’s ratification of the ASEAN agreement on transboundary haze pollution.
The Pacific Review, 34(6), 1108–1137. doi:10.1080/09512748.2020.1801816
JakartaGlobe (2017). IORA summit to produce ‘Jakarta Concord’. Jakarta Globe. 5
March. https://jakartaglobe.id/news/iora-summit-produce-jakarta-concord.
Jones, E. (2017). Sellout’ ministries and jingoes: China’s bureaucratic institutions and
the evolution of contested national role conceptions in the South China sea.
Foreign Policy Analysis, 13(2), orw059–379. doi:10.1093/fpa/orw059
Karim, M. F. (2018). Middle power, status-seeking and role conceptions: The cases of
Indonesia and South Korea. Australian Journal of International Affairs, 72(4),
343–363. doi:10.1080/10357718.2018.1443428
Karim, M. F. (2017). Role conflict and the limits of state identity: The case of
Indonesia in democracy promotion. The Pacific Review, 30(3), 385–404. doi:10.
1080/09512748.2016.1249908

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

53

Karim, M. F. (2022). Role conflict in international relations: The case of Indonesia’s
regional and global engagements. International Relations. doi:10.1177/
00471178211073880
Karim, M. F. (2021a). Role legitimation in foreign policy: The case of Indonesia as an
emerging power under Yudhoyono’s presidency (2004–2014). Foreign Policy
Analysis, 17(3), 1–19. doi:10.1093/fpa/orab010
Karim, M. F. (2020). The limits of global human rights promotion: Indonesia’s ambivalent roles in the UN Human Rights Council. Contemporary Politics, 26(3), 351–370.
doi:10.1080/13569775.2020.1720065
Karim, M. F. (2021b). When trade and foreign policy collide: Indonesia in Doha development round. The Pacific Review, 34(4), 605–632. doi:10.1080/09512748.2020.
1724189
Kirste, K., & Maull, H. W. (1996). Zivilmacht und Rollentheorie. Zeitschrift F€
ur
Internationale Beziehungen, 3(2), 283–312.
Laksmana, E. A. (2019). Indonesia as “Global Maritime Fulcrum”: A Post-Mortem
Analysis. Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative. https://amti.csis.org/indonesia-asglobal-maritime-fulcrum-a-post-mortem-analysis/.
Le Thu, H. (2018). Southeast Asian perceptions of the Quadrilateral Security
Dialogue. https://s3-ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/ad-aspi/2018-10/SR%20130%
20Quadrilateral%20security%20dialogue.pdf.
Leifer, M. (1983). Indonesia’s foreign policy. 1st ed. London: George Allen & Unwin
Ltd.
Marsudi, R. (2018). Keynote speech: The Global Disorder: An Indonesian Perspective.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EVTl7-hoGqw.
Nabbs-Keller, G. (2020). ASEAN Centrality and Indonesian Leadership in a Contested
Indo-Pacific Order. Security Challenges, 16(3), 21–26.
Nabbs-Keller, G. (2014). Strategic Clarity, Political Uncertainty: Prospects for Defence
and Security under President Joko Widodo. In: New Perspectives on Indonesia:
Understanding Australia’s Closest AsianNeighbour. Perth, Perth USAsia Centre. pp.
2–24. https://perthusasia.edu.au/PerthUSAsia/media/Perth_USAsia/Publications/
New-Perspectives-on-Indonesia-Understanding-Australias-Closest-Neighbour.pdf.
Natalegawa, M. (2013). An Indonesian perspective on the Indo-Pacific. The Jakarta
Post. 20 May. https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2013/05/20/an-indonesianperspective-indo-pacific.html.
Natalegawa, M. (2018). Indonesian foreign policy: Waging peace, stability and prosperity. In Aspirations with limitations, (pp. 15–32). Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies (ISEAS).
Nugroho, S., & Marzuki, K. (2021). Urgent lessons from Indonesia’s submarine disaster.
East Asia Forum. https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2021/06/30/urgent-lessons-fromindonesias-submarine-disaster/.
Prasodjo, D. (2021). Jokowi and the New Indonesia: A Political Biography. Clarendon:
Tuttle Publishing.
Quayle, L. (2018). Indonesia, the ASEAN socio-cultural community, and the contingent profile of regional ‘great-power management. The Pacific Review, 31(2),
131–150. doi:10.1080/09512748.2017.1327450
Reuters (2021). Indonesia says China consortium to invest $5 billion in electric battery venture. Reuters. 2 April. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-indonesiaev-idUSKBN2BP0S4.
Robison, R., & Hadiz, V. R. (2017). Indonesia: A tale of misplaced expectations. The
Pacific Review, 30(6), 895–909. doi:10.1080/09512748.2017.1306578

54

P. DANNHAUER

Rosyidin, M. (2017). Foreign policy in changing global politics: Indonesia’s foreign
policy and the quest for major power status in the Asian Century. South East Asia
Research, 25(2), 175–191. doi:10.1177/0967828X17706570
Rosyidin, M. (2021). The cult of glory: National myth and the idea of Global Maritime
Fulcrum in Indonesia’s foreign policy, 2014–2019. South East Asia Research, 29(3),
297–314. doi:10.1080/0967828X.2021.1954484
Rosyidin, M., & Pattipeilohy, S. C. H. (2020). Regionalism under challenge: Ideas and
Joko Widodo’s foreign policy towards ASEAN, 2014-2019. JAS (Journal of ASEAN
Studies), 8(2), 147–172. doi:10.21512/jas.v8i2.6596
R€
uland, J. (2009). Deepening ASEAN cooperation through democratization? The
Indonesian legislature and foreign policymaking. International Relations of the
Asia-Pacific, 9(3), 373–402. doi:10.1093/irap/lcp010
€land, J. (2017). Democratizing foreign-policy making in indonesia and the democRu
ratization of ASEAN: A role theory analysis. TRaNS: Trans -Regional and -National
Studies of Southeast Asia, 5(1), 49–73. doi:10.1017/trn.2016.26
Scott, D. (2019). Indonesia grapples with the Indo-Pacific: Outreach, strategic discourse, and diplomacy. Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs, 38(2), 194–217.
doi:10.1177/1868103419860669
Septiari, D. (2019). RI offers to host new Indo-Pacific forum. The Jakarta Post. 31
October.
https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2019/10/31/ri-offers-host-newindo-pacific-forum.html.
SetKab (2018). Indo-Pacific Concept Important for ASEAN: President Jokowi.
Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia. https://setkab.go.id/en/indo-pacific-concept-important-for-asean-president-jokowi/.
Setkab (2018). President Jokowi: Indo-Pacific Cooperation Should be Inclusive and
Promote ASEAN Centrality. Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia. https://setkab.
go.id/en/president-jokowi-indo-pacific-cooperation-should-be-inclusive-and-promote-asean-centrality-3/.
Sukma, R. (2011). Do new democracies support democracy? Indonesia finds a new
voice. Journal of Democracy, 22(4), 110–123. doi:10.1353/jod.2011.0057
Sukma, R. (1995). The evolution of Indonesia’s foreign policy: An Indonesian view.
Asian Survey, 35(3), 304–315. doi:10.2307/2645547
Tan, P. J. (2007). Navigating a turbulent ocean: Indonesia’s worldview and foreign
policy. Asian Perspective, 31(3), 147–181. doi:10.1353/apr.2007.0015
Tang, S.-M. (2018). ASEAN’s tough balancing act. Asia Policy, 25(4), 48–52. doi:10.
1353/asp.2018.0061
Thies, C. G., & Breuning, M. (2012). Integrating foreign policy analysis and international relations through role theory. Foreign Policy Analysis, 8(1), 1–4. doi:10.
1111/j.1743-8594.2011.00169.x
Thies, C. G., & Sari, A. C. (2018). A role theory approach to middle powers: Making
sense of Indonesia’s place in the international system. Contemporary Southeast
Asia: A Journal of International and Strategic Affairs, 40(3), 397–421.
Tillerson, R. (2017). Defining Our Relationship with India for the Next Century: An
Address by U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson. Center for Strategic & International
Studies.
https://www.csis.org/analysis/defining-our-relationship-india-next-century-address-us-secretary-state-rex-tillerson.
Wangge, H. R., & Lawson, S. (2021). The West Papua issue in Pacific regional politics:
Explaining Indonesia’s foreign policy failure. The Pacific Review, 0(0), 1–29. doi:10.
1080/09512748.2021.1931417

THE PACIFIC REVIEW

55

Weatherbee, D. (2019). Indonesia, ASEAN, and the Indo-Pacific cooperation
concept. ISEAS Perspective47. Singapore: ISEAS Yusof Ishak Institute.
Wehner, L. E., & Thies, C. G. (2014). Role theory, narratives, and interpretation: The
domestic contestation of roles. International Studies Review, 16(3), 411–436. doi:10.
1111/misr.12149
Weinstein, F. B. (1967). Indonesian foreign policy and the dilemma of dependence:
From Sukarno to Soeharto. Jakarta: Equinox Publishing.
Weinstein, F. B. (1972). The uses of foreign policy in Indonesia an approach to the
analysis of foreign policy in the less developed countries. World Politics, 24(3),
356–381. doi:10.2307/2009754
Wicaksana, I. (2021). How does Indonesia exercise agency in the contested and complex regional environment?. The Pacific Review. doi:10.1080/09512748.2021.
1998202.
Wicaksana, I. G. W. (2016). International society: The social dimensions of Indonesia’s
foreign policy. The Pacific Review, 29(5), 741–759. doi:10.1080/09512748.2015.
1047467
Widodo, J. (2015). Pidato Kenegaraan Presiden Republik Indonesia 2015. https://
www.liputan6.com/news/read/2293713/isi-lengkap-pidato-kenegaraan-perdanapresiden-jokowi.
Widodo, J. (2017). Pidato Kenegaraan Presiden Republik Indonesia 2017. https://setkab.go.id/transkip-pidato-kenegaraan-presiden-republik-indonesia-dalam-rangkahari-ulang-tahun-ke-72-kemerdekaan-republik-indonesia-tahun-2017-pada-sidangbersama-dpr-ri-dan-dpd-ri-16-agustus-2017-di-gedung-dp/.
Wilson, J. D. (2018). Rescaling to the Indo-Pacific: From Economic to security-driven
regionalism in Asia. East Asia, 35(2), 177–196. doi:10.1007/s12140-018-9285-6
World Bank. (2017). Indonesia Exports by country and region 2017. World Integrated
Trade Solution World Bank. https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/Country/
IDN/Year/2017/TradeFlow/Export.
Yeremia, A. E. (2022). Indonesian diplomats’ and foreign policy scholars’ perceptions
and their implications on Indonesian foreign ministry bureaucratic responses to a
rising China. The Pacific Review, 35(3), 529–556. doi:10.1080/09512748.2020.
1851293

