Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Marine Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/marpol

The legal basis for Chinese vessels navigating in the South China Sea☆
Yen-Chiang Chang a, Xingyi Duan b, Ling Yang c, *
a

Institute of Bohai and Yellow Sea Studies, School of Law, Dalian Maritime University, China
School of Law, Dalian Maritime University, China
c
Institute of Shipping Development, Dalian Maritime University, China
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
The Right of Navigation
The South China Sea
UNCLOS
Enforcement Jurisdiction
Regional Cooperation

The South China Sea is widely recognised as one of the most complex regions in the world, owing to territorial
sovereignty and maritime delimitation disputes among different coastal States, as well as the involvement of
States outside the region. In order to effectively protecting the security of their sovereignty and maritime enti­
tlements, regional States have enacted a series of restrictive regulations on vessel navigation at the domestic
level. Some of these domestic laws fall directly within the scope authorised by the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, IMO conventions, and other general international laws. However, there are also instances
where certain practices lack support from existing international legal norms. Additionally, the extensive presence
of disputed waters in the South China Sea introduces significant uncertainty regarding the effectiveness of na­
tional laws in this region. This paper aims to clarify the legal regimes related to navigation rights at both the
aspects of international law and regional States’ domestic law. The goal is to examine whether the navigation
restrictions imposed by South China Sea regional States on vessels have binding force on Chinese vessels. Based
on this analysis, recommendations are provided to help Chinese vessels exercise navigation rights more effec­
tively in the South China Sea and to promote regional cooperation by safeguarding such rights.

1. Introduction
China’s maritime activities in the South China Sea (hereinafter the
SCS) have faced criticism from other regional States and many nonregional States, especially when Chinese vessels navigate and engage
in related activities in disputed waters [1]. The opposition to China’s
maritime activities is not only rooted in dissatisfaction with China’s
various maritime claims in the SCS, which they believed such claims
breached other States’ sovereign rights and maritime entitlements, but
also stems from China’s interference in the navigation of other regional
States and external States such as the United States. For instance, China
has repeatedly expelled Vietnamese and Filipino fishing vessels from its
exclusive economic zone and disputed waters [2]. Additionally, China
has actively intercepted U.S. warships navigating in the SCS [3]. Due to
these actions being widely criticised for undermining the principle of
"freedom navigation", regional States may take countermeasures, such
as expulsion or restrictions on the navigation of some Chinese private

vessels and official vessels. Currently, China’s navigation rights in the
SCS face increasingly serious challenges [4]. As a key participant in the
region and a major maritime power without dispute, China aims to
actively change this situation. One crucial aspect is to reassess, from a
legal standpoint, whether Chinese vessels should still enjoy navigation
rights in different areas of the SCS given the current circumstances.
It can be argued that China’s previous interventions in the navigation
activities of other States in the region have, to a considerable extent,
placed China’s assertion of navigation rights in a passive position [5].
However, a potentially confusing issue arises here: does China’s inter­
ference with the navigation of vessels from other States imply a denial of
their navigation rights in the corresponding waters? In reality, based on
China’s official responses to such incidents, as well as its longstanding
diplomatic assertions and domestic legislation, China has never explic­
itly denied the basic navigation rights of other States in waters under its
jurisdiction—specifically, the freedom of navigation in its exclusive
economic zone (EEZ) and the right of innocent passage in its territorial

☆
The fieldwork is supported by the following project: Basic Research Funds for Central Universities, Humanities and Social Sciences, China. Research on Building a
Maritime Community with a Shared Future and Safeguarding National Maritime Security Grant No. 3132023705. National Social Science Fundamental Commis­
sioned Project, China: Study on Domestic Rule of Law and Foreign Rule of Law Coordination in Global Environmental Governance, Grant No. 23＆ZD166.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: rudieger@hotmail.com, ycchang@dlmu.edu.cn (Y.-C. Chang), 5206105@qq.com (X. Duan), yangling@dlmu.edu.cn (L. Yang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2024.106229
Received 10 November 2023; Received in revised form 14 May 2024; Accepted 23 May 2024
Available online 25 May 2024
0308-597X/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

sea [6].1
Taking the example of China’s expulsion of Vietnamese and Filipino
fishing vessels, although the outcomes suggested a reduction in the
navigation rights of the corresponding foreign fishing vessels, the pur­
pose of these vessels’ navigation was to fish in the EEZ where China
asserts its sovereign rights and jurisdiction, and China’s expulsion ac­
tions were taken to defend its sovereign rights, not to deny their navi­
gation rights. If foreign vessels impaired the sovereign rights and
exclusive jurisdiction of a coastal State, some restrictions imposed by the
coastal State on the navigation are inevitable, and this does not imply a
denial of the navigation rights of foreign vessels per se. In fact, in the "M/
V Saiga" case in the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
(ITLOS), there was a direct involvement of coastal State imposing re­
strictions on navigation rights. However, the tribunal emphasised that
bunkering at sea and navigation activities are distinct, and if bunkering
at sea falls within the scope of the coastal State’s sovereign rights and
jurisdiction under Article 56 of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (Hereinafter “UNCLOS”), the coastal State has the right to
restrict activities conducted by foreign vessels.2 While China’s assertion
of sovereign rights and exclusive jurisdiction in the corresponding wa­
ters is highly disputed, the actions taken by China to defend these rights
do not imply a denial of the navigation rights of foreign vessels in the
corresponding waters. Similarly, the question of whether Chinese ves­
sels have navigation rights should also be strictly distinguished from the
purpose of the navigation of Chinese vessels.
Obviously, UNCLOS has established a basic framework for the nav­
igation rights of various vessels. However, it is also worth noting that
many States, including China, have imposed additional restrictions on
the navigation rights of different types of foreign vessels in their terri­
torial seas and EEZs through domestic laws outside the scope of UNCLOS
[7]. Additionally, regional States also impose restrictions on other ac­
tivities that vessels may undertake. Although these restrictions do not
imply a denial of the vessels’ navigation rights per se, they may poten­
tially have a certain adverse impact on the specific exercise of these
rights by vessels, just like the "M/V Saiga" case revealed. In the SCS,
where multiple claimant States assert sovereignty, sovereign rights, and
jurisdiction over the same waters, the navigation rights in disputed
waters face significant uncertainty.
This article will provide an in-depth analysis of the impact of current
international law, as well as the domestic laws of regional States in the
SCS, on the issue of navigation rights of Chinese vessels. It aims to clarify
whether these domestic legal rules receive the support of enforcement
jurisdiction according to international law. Given the complexity of
maritime disputes in the SCS, the article will explore the nature of
Chinese vessels’ navigation rights in such disputed waters. Additionally,
the article will propose targeted recommendations for China and other
claimants to effectively safeguard their navigation rights, which, to
provide a basis for cooperation and mutual benefit, ensuring the pro­
tection of fundamental navigation rights in the SCS and laying the
groundwork for the effective resolution of maritime disputes in the
future.

SCS, China has implemented relevant domestic legislation to establish a
legal basis for a range of marine activities in the area, while also
reforming its coast guard regime to increase patrols and scientific
research activities in the region [11]. These measures demonstrate
China’s commitment to protecting its existing rights and interests in the
SCS and its determination to exercise these rights in accordance with the
law.
Despite China’s active efforts to safeguard the navigation rights of its
vessels in the SCS, the increasing complexity of territorial sovereignty
and maritime entitlements disputes between China and other regional
States has led to persistent challenges to the navigation rights. Some
regional States perceive China’s maritime activities in the SCS, including
activities of vessels, as a threat to their territorial security and a serious
infringement on their own maritime entitlements. In response, they have
taken a series of countermeasures [12]. Although China’s proposal to
ease tensions in the SCS through cooperation in maritime security and
joint resource exploration [13], some regional States still perceive these
measures as aimed at gaining physical control over the islands in the SCS
and bolstering its military-strategic interests. This, in turn, further ex­
acerbates the current regional tensions and oppositional stance [14].
With the active involvement of external powers such as the United
States, Vietnam and the Philippines have been actively cooperating with
the United States in various aspects of SCS security and maritime law
enforcement activities [12,15,16]. The Biden administration emphasises
that the purpose of such cooperation is to counter China’s illegal ac­
tivities in the regional States’ exclusive economic zones (such as fishing)
[17]. Therefore, once such cooperation is fully achieved, it can naturally
be seen as these States may not only completely regard the disputed
waters as their exclusive economic zones and improve their law
enforcement abilities, but also seek to further strengthen their sover­
eignty and maritime rights claims by involving external forces [18].
Furthermore, China has imposed some restrictions on the navigation of
vessels, especially fishing vessels and supply vessels from claimant
States, in the waters where China has asserted jurisdiction, when such
foreign vessels navigating in disputed waters, they may face challenges
from the Chinese Coast Guard.[19] In turn, some regional States have
proposed or applied countermeasures, advocating for restrictions on
Chinese vessels’ navigation rights as well [20,21]. Further, after the
United States forces intervene the SCS, due to China’s historically
assertive stance towards vessels of claimant States, the navigational
rights of various Chinese vessels will face even greater practical chal­
lenges [22]. This has directly challenged the legitimacy of China’s
navigation rights in the SCS. Furthermore, some regional States have
enacted domestic laws imposing varying degrees of restrictions on the
navigation rights of foreign vessels, some of which go beyond the pro­
visions of UNCLOS. For example, there are additional restrictions on the
innocent passage rights of warships in territorial seas and archipelagic
waters [7]. This adds another layer of complexity for China’s vessels
navigating in the SCS, as they are subject to the impact of different
regional States’ domestic laws.
To evaluate whether all types of Chinese vessels have the right to
navigate in the SCS, a comprehensive assessment is necessary, based on
the provisions of international law, particularly UNCLOS, and regional
States’ domestic laws regarding the right to navigate of all vessels.
Furthermore, during the implementation of the law, it is also necessary
to consider which international regulations and which State’s domestic
law may affect the navigational rights of vessels in each specific mari­
time zone in the SCS.

2. Navigation status of Chinese vessels in the SCS
The SCS is a semi-enclosed sea bordered by China, the Philippines,
Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei. Despite disputes over the
sovereignty of maritime features in the SCS and unresolved maritime
demarcation, the sea’s crucial role in the global shipping system remains
undisputed [8]. The area’s strategic significance has significantly
increased due to continuous developments in oil, gas, and other natural
resources [9,10]. In order to protect China’s rights and interests in the

3. The international legal basis for Chinese vessels sailing in the
SCS
The law of the sea, particularly UNCLOS, establishes a fundamental
legal framework for the right of navigation. This framework, originating
from Hugo Grotius’ "the Freedom of the Seas," asserts the principle that,
in essence, navigation on the seas should be free [23]. Despite the

1

See China Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf Act 1998, Article 11.
2
See ITLOS, The M/V "SAIGA" Case (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines v.
Guinea), Prompt Release, Judgment of 4 December 1997, para.59.
2

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

territorial seas.9 In the EEZ and continental shelf, if activities of a foreign
vessel beyond the right of navigation which fall within the scope of
sovereign rights or exclusive jurisdiction of the coastal State under Ar­
ticles 56 or 77 of UNCLOS, the coastal State can unilaterally restrict the
navigation activities of vessels and, in certain circumstances, detain
vessels. Cases such as the "M/V Saiga" and "M/V Virginia G" involve
situations where certain activities of vessels fall within the scope of the
coastal State’s sovereign rights and exclusive jurisdiction, impacting the
navigation rights of vessels due to the coastal State’s jurisdiction.10
Even in the high seas, vessels are not necessarily subject only to the
jurisdiction of the flag State; UNCLOS provides a clear legal basis for
other States to intervene in the navigation of vessels on the high seas in
the Part VII. Firstly, if a vessel is engaged in activities such as slavery,
piracy, drug trafficking, or illegal broadcasting that harm the overall
maritime interests of humanity, all States have the right to board and
inspect the vessel and take other jurisdictional measures to prevent such
illegal activities.11 Secondly, if a vessel has previously violated the laws
and regulations of a coastal State in its jurisdictional waters, the coastal
State, based on the right of hot pursuit, can pursue the foreign vessel
navigating on the high seas.12 These situations allow non-flag States,
based on the right of hot pursuit, to have enforcement jurisdiction over
vessels in specific circumstances, thereby imposing certain restrictions
on the freedom of navigation of vessels on the high seas.
Therefore, while UNCLOS affirms and explicitly supports freedom of
navigation, it does not imply that States, especially coastal States,
cannot interfere with the navigation rights of foreign vessels in different
maritime zones. The provisions in UNCLOS providing coastal States with
some space to take unilateral actions interfering with vessels’ activities,
which may also impact their navigational rights.

unprecedented expansion of coastal States’ jurisdiction in the oceans
with the birth of UNCLOS, where approximately 40% of the waters fall
under the jurisdiction of various coastal States [24], the protection of the
right of navigation has consistently received widespread recognition
globally, which, in territorial seas, although these waters are considered
a component of the coastal State’s territory, foreign vessels have the
right of innocent passage through these waters.3 Once outside territorial
seas, foreign vessels generally enjoy the freedom of navigation. This
applies to various types of private vessels as well as official vessels,
represented by warships, all of which fall within the legal regime of the
right of navigation under UNCLOS.
While the right of navigation for vessels remains a core institution in
the law of the sea, other intricate legal regimes established by UNCLOS
inevitably has various implications on the exercise of the right of navi­
gation. Generally, navigation itself is not the final purpose of vessels;
rather, it is a means for vessels to achieve their other purposes [25]. For
instance, for fishing vessels, navigation is an indispensable means to
reach ideal fishing grounds and secure a bountiful catch. For warships,
navigation is a means to reach a destination and accomplish specific
military objectives. Therefore, although the right of navigation for
vessels is not directly affected by the expansion of coastal States’ sov­
ereign rights and jurisdictional authority, and these vessels may not
necessarily navigate solely for the above-mentioned objectives, some of
the objectives of vessel navigation may fall directly within the scope of
coastal States’ sovereignty, sovereign rights, and exclusive jurisdiction.
As a result, various treaties and regulations, including UNCLOS itself,
the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS),4the
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREGS),5
the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from ves­
sels (MARPOL),6 the International Convention on Standards of Training,
Certification, and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW),7 as well as other
jurisdictional regimes arising from general international law, are closely
related to the exercise of the right of navigation for vessels.

3.2. The navigation regime of foreign vessels in IMO conventions
Besides UNCLOS, various international conventions from the Inter­
national Maritime Organisation (IMO), including SOLAS, COLREGS,
MARPOL, and STCW, also contain a series of provisions related to the
navigation rights of vessels. Furthermore, it is worth noting that due to
the existence of the renvoi provisions in UNCLOS, the provisions of these
conventions need to be considered combine with UNCLOS to clarify how
the navigation rights of vessels from different States are affected when
navigating in different waters [26].
As a fundamental international legal framework to ensure maritime
safety, SOLAS aims to provide a set of safety standards for the con­
struction, equipment installation, and operation of vessels.13 Chapter V
of SOLAS contains a series of provisions regarding the right to navigate,
including search and rescue services, hydrographic services, ship route
delineation, and ship traffic services.14 Although SOLAS is typically

3.1. The navigation regime of foreign vessels in UNCLOS
UNCLOS establishes various jurisdictional regimes for different
maritime zones, and these regimes involve the navigation rights of
vessels at different levels. In the territorial sea, as stipulated in Article 21
of UNCLOS, coastal States can impose certain restrictions on innocent
passage to ensure safe and orderly navigation, protect and preserve the
marine environment, and safeguard submarine cables and pipelines. 8 In
the contiguous zone, coastal states exercise control over "customs,
immigration, fiscal, and sanitary", and regulations within its territory or
3
4

3.

UNCLOS, Article 17.
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, 1184 U.N.T.S.

9

See UNCLOS, Article 33.
“It has already been indicated that laws or regulations on bunkering of
fishing vessels may arguably be classified as laws or regulations on activities
within the scope of the exercise by the coastal State of its sovereign rights to
explore, exploit, conserve and manage the living resources in the exclusive
economic zone.” See ITLOS, The M/V "SAIGA" Case (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines v. Guinea), Prompt Release, Judgment of 4 December 1997, para.63.
“The Tribunal is of the view that article 58 of the Convention is to be read
together with article 56 of the Convention. The Tribunal considers that article
58 does not prevent coastal States from regulating, under article 56, bunkering
of foreign vessels fishing in their exclusive economic zones.” See ITLOS, The M/
V "Virginia G" Case (Panama/Guinea-Bissau), Judgment of 14 April 2014,
paras.220–223.
11
UNCLOS, Articles 99–109.
12
UNCLOS, Article 111.
13
IMO. International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), 1974.
https://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/Pages/International-Conven­
tion-for-the-Safety-of-Life-at-Sea-(SOLAS),-1974.aspx
14
SOLAS, Chapter V.

5

10

Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at
Sea, 1972, 1050 U.N.T.S. 16.
6
Protocol of 1978 relating to the International Convention for the prevention
of pollution from ships, 1973, 2057 U.N.T.S. 68
7
The International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978, 1361, 1362, U.N.T.S. 23001.
8
“The coastal State may adopt laws and regulations, in conformity with the
provisions of this Convention and other rules of international law, relating to
innocent passage through the territorial sea, in respect of all or any of the
following: (a) the safety of navigation and the regulation of maritime traffic; (b)
the protection of navigational aids and facilities and other facilities or in­
stallations; (c) the protection of cables and pipelines; (d) the conservation of the
living resources of the sea; (e) the prevention of infringement of the fisheries
laws and regulations of the coastal State; (f) the preservation of the environ­
ment of the coastal State and the prevention, reduction and control of pollution
thereof; (g) marine scientific research and hydrographic surveys; (h) the pre­
vention of infringement of the customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and
regulations of the coastal State. ” See UNCLOS, Article 21.
3

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

based on flag State jurisdiction and does not explicitly define the status
of coastal States, most regulations in Chapter V, like hydrographic ser­
vices, vessels’ routeing, and vessel traffic services cannot take legal ef­
fects without the participation of the coastal State, and all of them can
directly impact the exercise of navigation rights of vessels [27]. There­
fore, SOLAS implicitly grants coastal States the authority to impose
specific requirements on foreign vessels in their waters under specific
circumstances, including certain restrictions on the navigation rights of
foreign vessels [28].
COLREGS, which aimed to provide a safe navigation circumstance of
vessels, many of its provisions also directly or indirectly related to the
right of navigation, such as the rules for traffic separation schemes, the
rule of safe speed, and the actions to be taken to avoid collisions.15 Those
provisions further incorporated by UNCLOS through renvoi and become
a part of jurisdictional rights of coastal States. For example, in the ter­
ritorial sea regime, the provisions of COLREGS serve as rules of reference
absorbed by the regulations of innocent passage in Article 21.16 In the
regime of archipelagic waters, ships are explicitly required to comply
with COLREGS when exercising the right of transit passage. Beyond the
territorial sea, Article 221 of UNCLOS grants coastal States the right to
take necessary measures to prevent maritime incidents, with COLREGS
being the primary set of rules of reference for such measures.17 In the
“Enrica Lexie” case, the arbitral tribunal emphasises that “the widely
accepted status of COLREGS and its close relationship with UNCLOS, so
violation of COLREGS may be considered a violation of UNCLOS.”18; It is
worth noting that because COLREGS applies to all vessels, warships and
non-commercial government vessels are equally subject to its legal
binding force.19
MARPOL is currently the most widely accepted international
convention for the protection of the marine environment. Similar to
most of other IMO conventions, MARPOL primarily relies on the juris­
diction of the flag State and, does not explicitly define the legal status of
coastal States [29]. However, due to the legal effect of renvoi in UNCLOS,
the provisions of MARPOL, especially those in its first two mandatory
annexes concerning oil pollution and the noxious liquid substances in
bulk, can be internalised under Articles 211 and 220 of UNCLOS. This
viewpoint has also received explicit support from the "Duzgit Integrity
Arbitration" tribunal. 20Consequently, these provisions become part of
the system under UNCLOS and serve as a basis for coastal States to
interfere with the navigation of foreign ships.
Finally, the Manila Amendments to the STCW will also impose
certain restrictions on the navigation rights of vessels under its juris­
diction. The Convention establishes standards for the deck department,
engine department and radio department and deals with all members of
the ship’s complement. In each case the Convention prescribes mini­
mum age levels, minimum periods of sea-going service and certification
requirements [30]. If a coastal State determines that the crew of a ship
navigating in a maritime area under its jurisdiction does not meet the
requirements of the Manila Amendments to the STCW, it can restrict the
ship’s navigation on these grounds [31]. This situation also happened in
the "Duzgit Integrity Arbitration" case.21
While most of the aforementioned IMO conventions do not explicitly
define the legal status of coastal States, on the one hand, these con­
ventions have been widely accepted by the vast majority of States

worldwide and have acquired universal binding force [32]. Therefore,
ships from nearly all States worldwide are required to comply with these
IMO conventions during their navigation, and their navigational rights
inevitably face corresponding constraints. On the other hand, the pres­
ence of renvoi provisions in UNCLOS amplifies the effectiveness of these
IMO conventions, further becoming the basis for coastal States to restrict
specific activities of foreign ships in their jurisdictional waters.
3.3. The navigation regime of foreign vessels in general international law
UNCLOS and IMO conventions jointly provide the legal basis for
coastal States to regulate the navigational rights of foreign ships at the
treaty level, but this is not exhaustive. According to general interna­
tional law, coastal States also have the right to further restrict the
navigational activities of foreign ships in the area under or beyond their
national jurisdiction based on forms such as protective jurisdiction and
objective territorial jurisdiction.
Protective jurisdiction refers to a State’s right to exercise jurisdiction
over foreign subjects, objects, and activities beyond its national territory
based on the protection of its significant interests [33]. In the historical
development of maritime law, the introduction of protective jurisdiction
came relatively late. In the "Torrey Canyon" oil pollution damage case in
1967, as UNCLOS had not yet been adopted, the jurisdictional waters
where States could claim sovereignty and jurisdiction were generally
considered limited to territorial seas and contiguous zones [34]. Ships
beyond territorial seas and contiguous zones were, in principle, subject
to the jurisdiction of the flag state (Liberia). As the most directly affected
State by the oil pollution, the United Kingdom requested the predecessor
of IMO—the International Maritime Consultative Organization—to
determine whether it had the right to intervene in the case based on
protective jurisdiction. In the end, the UK received the support of IMCO
[35]. As one of the widely accepted extraterritorial jurisdictional rights,
protective jurisdiction can also serve as an important legal basis for
States to intervene in the navigation rights of foreign ships, especially
when facing threaten to State’s security.
Due to the relatively high threshold for the exercise of protective
jurisdiction, some coastal States have attempted to incorporate objective
territorial jurisdiction into the maritime legal system to lower the
threshold for the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction [36]. Objective
territorial jurisdiction, also known as the "effects doctrine," does not
consider where the damaging actions originated; instead, it focuses on
whether they have a tangible impact on the interests of the State
asserting jurisdiction [37]. In the field of marine environmental pro­
tection, some marine powers, have applied objective territorial juris­
diction, significantly lowering the thresholds for asserting jurisdiction
over foreign entities, objects, and actions [38].
Additionally, even practices lacking clear jurisdictional foundations
may, if adopted by more States, become part of customary international
law or be absorbed into future treaties agreed upon by the international
community, thereby acquiring legitimate binding force [39]. For
instance, before UNCLOS was established, Canada declared a 100-nauti­
cal-mile anti-pollution zone in arctic waters under the 1970 Canadian
Environmental Protection Act. This domestic practice was incorporated
into UNCLOS ice-covered waters regime in Article 234 [40], and became
a part of customary international law eventually. A detailed analysis of
this situation will be provided in the subsequent sections, and it will not
be reiterated in this part.
In summary, despite UNCLOS explicitly establishing the core status
of the right of navigation for vessels, States still retain considerable
leeway to impose restrictions on the navigation rights of foreign vessels.
On the one hand, this may be based on provisions within international
treaties and general international law, with considerations for maritime
traffic safety or marine environmental protection and conservation,
leading to non-discriminatory restrictions on the navigation rights of
vessels from various States. On the other hand, some restrictions stem
from the aim to safeguard national security and other maritime

15
IMO. Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions
at Sea, 1972 (COLREGs). https://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/Pages/
COLREG.aspx
16
UNCLOS, Article 21.
17
UNCLOS, Article 221.
18
The ’Enrica Lexie’ Incident (Italy v. India), Award on May 21, 2020. para.566.
19
COLREGs, Article 1.1.
20
The Duzgit Integrity Arbitration (Malta v. São Tomé and Príncipe), Award on
Sep 5, 2016. para.316, 321.
21
Id, para. 289.

4

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

entitlements, which may get support from general international law.
Therefore, while UNCLOS grants basic navigation rights to Chinese
vessels in the SCS, Chinese vessels still need to pay attention to relevant
treaties, general international law, and domestic laws of SCS States to
accurately assess whether their navigation rights or related actions are
subject to any restrictions.

stipulates that within the scope of China’s EEZ and continental shelf
(including territorial sea, contiguous zone and other waters within
China’s jurisdiction), Chinese competent authorities have the power to
take necessary measures to safeguard various sovereign rights and
jurisdictional rights, including the right to board, inspect, arrest, detain,
pursue, and exercise suitable judicial procedures.24
For the second category, the Maritime Traffic Safety Law,25 this is the
most important domestic legal basis for the navigation of Chinese ves­
sels. The law provides detailed provisions on vessel seaworthiness, ob­
ligations during vessel navigation, and the jurisdictional scope of
competent authorities.26 As the legal binding force of the Maritime
Traffic Safety Law is limited to waters under Chinese jurisdiction, it does
not have extraterritorial effect on waters clearly outside China’s juris­
diction. 27
Finally, there are other laws related to the right of navigation to
vessels, mainly the Marine Environmental Protection Law,28 and the
Coast Guard Law.29 The former outlines a series of environmental pro­
tection obligations during vessel navigation, while the latter empowers
the coast guard to take enforcement measures corresponding to any
violations of Chinese laws and regulations within China’s jurisdictional
waters, including the use of force to a certain extent [22]. It is note­
worthy that the extraterritorial application scope of these two laws is
broader. For the Marine Environmental Protection Law, any act causing
pollution within waters under Chinese jurisdiction can directly trigger
the application of this law.30 As for the Coast Guard Law, it authorises
cooperation between the Chinese coast guard and law enforcement
agencies of other States, thereby granting greater enforcement powers in
a wider range of waters.31
In the latest official map released by China in 2023, the vast majority
of the SCS is encompassed within the "Ten-Dash Line" [44]. To date,
China has not officially explained or clarified the meaning of the
Ten-Dash Line, and the publication of this map has led to unanimous
opposition from claimant States in the SCS and external nations such as
the United States [45]. However, from a domestic law perspective, as the
aforementioned Chinese domestic laws explicitly state that their legal
effects extend to all maritime zones under China’s jurisdiction, so when
Chinese vessels navigating within the Ten-Dash Line, they are subject to
comply with such domestic laws based on the dual standards of terri­
torial jurisdiction and flag State jurisdiction imposed by these laws.
Outside the Ten-Dash Line, as all aforementioned laws lack pro­
visions based on flag State jurisdiction, only the Marine Environmental
Protection Law establishes extraterritorial jurisdiction based on the
protective jurisdiction. Therefore, Chinese domestic laws lack extrater­
ritorial applicability, and there is no explicit legal binding force for
Chinese vessels outside the Ten-Dash Line.

4. Domestic regulations that exert practical constraints on the
navigation of Chinese vessels
Based on the analysis above, it can be seen that States in the SCS have
the right to impose certain restrictions on the navigation rights of
foreign vessels within the scope of sovereignty, sovereign rights, and
jurisdiction as defined by treaties and general international law. In order
to effectively exercise the rights granted to coastal States by the inter­
national legal mechanisms mentioned above, including China, States in
the SCS have each established their own regulations on the navigation
rights of vessels in different waters. However, it is important to note that
although States can impose various direct or indirect restrictions on the
navigation rights of vessels through legislation, these domestic laws
should may not have direct binding force on Chinese vessels without the
support of enforcement jurisdictional bases [41].
4.1. The Regulation of vessel navigation in domestic laws among regional
states
Under the legal regimes established and recognised by UNCLOS,
States in the SCS region should implemented rules regarding vessel
navigation in their domestic law. The reason of this phenomenon, on the
one hand, in their role as contracting parties fulfilling treaty obligations
under UNCLOS and IMO conventions. Since UNCLOS and IMO con­
ventions are all non-self-executing treaties [42,43], implementing them
through domestic laws is the basic form of fulfilling pacta sunt servanda
for contracting parties. On the other hand, some SCS States have enacted
legislation that may goes beyond the scope of existing international law
authorizations, like the restriction of the right of innocent passage of
warships in territorial seas. The main purpose of such legislation is to
safeguard their existing maritime interests and lend support to other
claims of sovereignty and maritime rights.
4.1.1. Domestic laws of China
For the navigation rights of Chinese vessels in the SCS, China’s do­
mestic legal provisions undoubtedly have the most direct binding force.
Within the territorial seas of China, Chinese vessels naturally need to
comply with the regulations of China’s domestic law and submit to
competent authorities based on territorial jurisdiction. In other SCS
waters beyond China’s territorial seas, if the relevant domestic laws
concerning navigation rights have extraterritorial applicability, then
based on the authorization of UNCLOS and the general principle of
jurisdiction in international law, Chinese vessels also have the obligation
to comply with the relevant provisions of Chinese domestic laws.
The Chinese domestic laws concerning the right of navigation for
vessels can be categorised into three types: laws governing maritime
zones under China’s jurisdiction, laws related to maritime traffic safety,
and other laws relevant to the right of navigation. For the first category,
there are two major domestic laws related to navigation regimes, which,
the Law of the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone,22 and the Law of the
Exclusive Economic Zone and the Continental Shelf.23 Both of the laws

4.1.2. Domestic laws of the Philippines
The Philippines is one of the States with the most intense sovereignty
disputes with China in the SCS, and it was the petitioner in the South

24

Id, Article 12.
Maritime Traffic Safety Law of the People’s Republic of China. Order No. 79
of the President of the People’s Republic of China.
26
Id, Article 1, 2.
27
Id, Article 2.
28
Marine Environment Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China.
Order No. 12 of the President of the People’s Republic of China.
29
The Coast Guard Law of the People’s Republic of China, Feb 1st, 2021,
Order No. 71 of the President of the People’s Republic of China.
30
Marine Environment Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China,
Article 2 (3).
31
The Coast Guard Law of the People’s Republic of China, Articles 63–65.
25

22
The Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Territorial Sea and the
Contiguous Zone. Order No. 55 of the President of the People’s Republic of
China.
23
The Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Exclusive Economic Zone
and the Continental Shelf. Order No. 6 of the President of the People’s Republic
of China.

5

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

China Sea Arbitration.32 In this case, the Philippines opposed the navi­
gation and other activities of various types of Chinese vessels, arguing
that these activities violated international regulations such as UNCLOS
and COLREGS.33 The claims made by the Philippines in the Arbitration
are not solely directed at the navigation activities of Chinese vessels. The
primary objective of the Philippines is to challenge China’s "nine-dash
line" and a series of sovereign and maritime claims. Based on the views
of the arbitral tribunal, certain actions by Chinese vessels have been
deemed to have caused harm to the sovereign rights of the Philippines.34
Following the SCS Arbitration, the Philippines has continued to protest
against the navigation activities and related activities of Chinese vessels
in the SCS [46]. Therefore, when Chinese vessels navigate in the waters
of the SCS, especially in areas under the jurisdiction or actual control of
the Philippines, it is important for Chinese vessels to pay attention to
their obligations under domestic laws of the Philippines.
As a typical archipelagic State, the Philippines explicitly asserts
sovereignty and jurisdiction over its jurisdictional waters including
archipelagic waters based on the provisions of UNCLOS and other treaty
laws. It claims sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the waters, over­
lying airspace, and underlying submarine areas, further recognizing the
legal status of archipelagic waters as equivalent to internal waters.35
This assertion is evidently different from UNCLOS, but the Supreme
Court of the Philippines eventually acknowledged the right of innocent
passage in archipelagic waters as part of customary international law.36
So the right of innocent passage in archipelagic waters is also recognised
and incorporated into domestic laws of the Philippines, implying that
Chinese vessels can exercise the right of innocent passage in the archi­
pelagic waters of the Philippines. And what is noteworthy is that the
Pilipino domestic law does not provide separate regimes for innocent
passage rights concerning warships.
According to domestic laws of the Philippines, closely related to the
navigation rights of foreign vessels are a series of executive orders
adjusting navigation rights and special laws regulating various activities
of ships. Regarding the former, such as Executive Order No. 656 issued
on February 26, 1981, explicitly establishes a specialised committee in
the Philippines to investigate whether foreign vessels have illegally
entered Philippine waters and whether violations of legal provisions
have occurred after entering Philippine waters.37 For the latter, the
Philippine Fisheries Code of 1998 (Republic Act No. 8550) is the most
direct legislation specifically addressing the navigation of foreign vessels
in the Filipinos waters. It proclaimed that the fisheries resources in

Philippine waters should, in principle, be utilised by Filipinos and
foreign vessels navigating in Philippine waters also bear additional
environmental protection obligations.38 Further, in the Marine Pollution
Decree of 1976, it further specifies that in navigable waters of the
Philippines, any vessel is obligated to refrain from dumping oil, waste,
and various types of pollutants.39
Overall, the provisions of the Filipinos domestic law regarding the
navigation rights of foreign vessels largely align with the principles set
forth in international treaty law, primarily UNCLOS. Although the Fili­
pinos domestic law does not possess significant extraterritorial appli­
cability to maritime areas beyond its sovereignty and jurisdiction, as the
maritime areas claimed by the Philippines for jurisdiction overlap with
those claimed by China and other claimant States in the SCS, so when
Chinese vessels navigating in disputed waters related to the Philippines,
domestic laws above may have direct binding force to them. The
Philippines may, based on the principles of territorial sovereignty and
international treaties like UNCLOS, trigger the application of its do­
mestic law, potentially adversely affecting the navigation rights of
Chinese vessels.
4.1.3. Domestic law of Vietnam
Vietnam is another State in the SCS region with significant sover­
eignty and maritime rights disputes with China, and tensions have
escalated recently [47]. Some provisions in Vietnam’s domestic law
differ from those in UNCLOS, when Chinese vessels navigating in Viet­
namese jurisdictional waters, those Vietnamese domestic laws require
special attention.
Firstly, the 2003 Law on the National Border in Vietnam specifies
legal regimes for innocent passage in territorial seas. It explicitly stip­
ulates that Vietnamese competent authority can, for reasons of defense,
security, and other special reasons or at the suggestion from the gov­
ernment, temporarily suspend or restrict the entry and exit of personnel,
vehicles, or goods from the national border.40 This includes the exercise
of innocent passage rights. In the 2012 Law of the Sea of Vietnam further
clarified that foreign warships must notify Vietnamese authorities in
advance when exercising innocent passage rights in Vietnam’s territorial
seas.41
Apart from additional restrictions on innocent passage rights at the
territorial sea level, Vietnam’s regulations on the navigation system
generally follow UNCLOS. For example, vessels must respect Vietnam’s
territorial sovereignty, sovereign rights, and jurisdiction during navi­
gation. Even in the EEZ, activities that threaten territorial sovereignty
and Vietnam’s national security are prohibited.42 While Vietnam’s legal
system mentioned above does not demonstrate extraterritorial applica­
bility, similar to the Philippines, Vietnam emphasises in legislative
documents such as the Statement of 12 November 1982 that it in­
corporates the Paracel Islands and the Spratly Islands, as well as related
waters, into its jurisdiction.43 Therefore, the spatial effectiveness of its
domestic law aligns significantly with the maritime areas claimed by
China and other States. For Chinese vessels, navigating and take part in
specific maritime activities in the waters of the Paracel Islands or the
Spratly Islands may directly trigger the application of Vietnamese do­
mestic law. The more stringent navigation regulations in territorial seas
and EEZs pose considerations that various types of Chinese vessels,
especially warships, need to assess carefully during navigation.

32
On 22 January 2013, the Republic of the Philippines instituted arbitral
proceedings against the People’s Republic of China under Annex VII to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (the “Convention”). The
arbitration concerned the role of historic rights and the source of maritime
entitlements in the South China Sea, the status of certain maritime features in
the South China Sea, and the lawfulness of certain actions by China in the South
China Sea that the Philippines alleged to be in violation of the Convention.
China adopted a position of non-acceptance and non-participation in the pro­
ceedings. See the South China Sea Arbitration (PCA), https://pca-cpa.org/en/
cases/7/.
33
The South China Sea Arbitration (PCA), Award on 12 July 2016, para.1067.
34
Id, para. 716, 757, 814, 992.
35
1973 Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines, Article 1. AN ACT TO
AMEND CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 3046, AS AMENDED BY
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 5446, TO DEFINE THE ARCHIPELAGIC BASELINE OF THE
PHILIPPINES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, Section 3.
36
Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs,
United States Department of State, Limits in the Seas, No. 142, Philippines:
Archipelagic and Other Maritime Claims and Boundaries, September 15, 2014,
https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/LIS-142.pdf.
37
AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 81, SERIES OF 1976, CREATING A
COMMITTEE TO COORDINATE THE INVESTIGATION, HANDLING AND
DISPOSITION OF APPREHENDED ILLEGAL ENTRANTS AND FOREIGN VESSELS
VIOLATING PHILIPPINE LAWS. https://lawphil.net/executive/execord/
eo1981/eo_656_1981.html.

38
The Philippine Fisheries Code of 1998 (Republic Act No. 8550), Section 5.
https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/phi16098.pdf.
39
The Marine Pollution Decree of 1976, https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/
1976/08/18/presidential-decree-no-979-s-1976/.
40
The 2003 Law on the National Border in Vietnam, Article 17.
41
The 2012 Law of the Sea of Vietnam, Article 12 (2).
42
Id, Article 22.
43
Statement of 12 November 1982 by the Government of the Socialist Re­
public of Vietnam on the Territorial Sea Baseline of Vietnam.

6

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

4.1.4. Domestic laws of other regional states
Compared to the Philippines and Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, and
Brunei do not have prominent sovereignty and maritime rights disputes
with China in the SCS in the past. However, after the South China Sea
Arbitration and the release of China’s official maps in 2023, these States
shifted their positions sharply to opposing China’s claims [48]. This has
escalated the disputes, increasing the practical risks for Chinese vessels
navigating in the corresponding national waters and disputed areas.
In terms of Malaysia’s domestic legislation, its legal framework for
territorial waters and EEZs doesn’t significantly differ from UNCLOS.
However, certain jurisdictional aspects have been detailed, such as the
1984 Exclusive Economic Zone Act refines jurisdiction over marine
environmental protection and marine scientific research.44 It in­
corporates not only UNCLOS, but also some provisions from IMO con­
ventions, and emphasises that foreign vessels conducting marine
scientific research need government approval and must comply with
subsequent obligations.45
Indonesia enacted the Indonesia Maritime Law 2014 to regulate
various maritime affairs, including maritime jurisdiction and navigation
rights, along with specific provisions for marine environmental protec­
tion and maritime safety.46 These regulations broadly adhere to
UNCLOS. Apart from this law, Indonesia also has specific legislation,
some of which directly adjusts navigation rights. For example, Regula­
tion No.36 of Foreign ships Innocent Passage in the Indonesia Waters in
1962, requires prior notification for military and non-commercial
governmental vessels passing through territorial seas to exercise inno­
cent passage.47 Fishing vessels and marine scientific vessels also have
specific obligations when they navigating in the jurisdictional waters.48
The Act of the Republic relating to the Indonesian Waters (Act No. 6 of
1996) further divides innocent passage rights and separately regulates
innocent passage rights in archipelagic waters, requiring foreign vessels
to follow Indonesia’s designated sea lanes; otherwise, passage is not
considered innocent.49 Further, the design of sea lanes also has led to
some controversies, with the United States challenging Indonesia’s
maritime claims by military aircraft [49].
Brunei has historically maintained a relatively mild attitude towards
China, and its domestic maritime legislation has been relatively slow to
develop. In order to protect its domestic fisheries resources, Brunei has
regulations stipulating that even if foreign vessels obtain fishing permits,
they are only allowed to operate in the third and fourth fishing zones and
are prohibited from conducting activities in other fishing zones [50,51].
When foreign vessels, especially fishing vessels, navigate in the corre­
sponding waters of Brunei, they will be subject to restrictions and in­
spections as a result.
In summary, it can be observed that the basic regulations on navi­
gation rights in the domestic legislation of the SCS regional States
generally align with the fundamental provisions of UNCLOS. The dif­
ferences primarily lay in the innocent passage of warships in territorial
seas (Vietnam, Indonesia) and the innocent passage rights of warships in
archipelagic waters (Philippines, Indonesia). Additionally, based on
UNCLOS granting sovereignty over territorial seas and sovereign rights
and jurisdiction over EEZs, some regional States have made more
detailed provisions in their domestic laws regarding the protection of

fisheries resources, marine scientific research, marine environmental
protection, and other aspects. These regulations, in various ways, may
directly or indirectly impact the navigation rights of Chinese vessels in
the SCS.
4.2. Do Chinese vessels need to comply with the domestic laws of regional
states when navigating in the SCS
While States in the SCS region have established various restrictive
domestic laws for the navigation rights of foreign vessels, these domestic
laws may not necessarily have binding force on foreign vessels. Specif­
ically, regarding territorial seas and archipelagic waters, even though
they are integral parts of respective States’ territories with sovereignty
and jurisdiction, UNCLOS explicitly establishes the right of innocent
passage. Therefore, if States wish to impose restrictions on the right of
innocent passage for specific vessels such as warships, these restrictive
measures must be supported by other legitimate legal basis.
For restrictions imposed by States on navigation rights in waters
beyond territorial seas or on other maritime activities that may affect
navigation rights, such restrictions must have legal justification pro­
vided by UNCLOS and other international legal rules. Otherwise, these
regulations may not achieve legally binding force to foreign vessels
through the enforcement jurisdiction [52]. This section will analyse
whether these domestic legislations can be upheld through enforcement
jurisdiction.
4.2.1. Analysis of the right of innocent passage in territorial seas and
archipelagic waters
According to UNCLOS provisions, both territorial seas and archipe­
lagic waters are integral parts of the coastal State’s territory. Apart from
the right of innocent passage, the coastal state enjoys full sovereignty
over both water areas. There is no disagreement over the right of
innocent passage for various private vessels in these waters. However,
for official ships, as UNCLOS itself does not clearly specify whether
warships and non-commercial government vessels have the right of
innocent passage, approximately 40 States have enacted legislation
restricting the right of innocent passage for warships [53,54]. These
States are mostly located in Asia, Africa, and other developing and un­
derdeveloped regions. Historically, many of these developing States
have faced challenges from warships of maritime powers, leading to the
adoption of legislation and policies restricting the right of innocent
passage for warships as a result of lessons learned from historical ex­
periences [55]. In the SCS, including China, Vietnam, the Philippines,
and Indonesia, there are arrangements that impose restrictions on the
innocent passage rights of warships.
Therefore, whether further restrictions on the right of innocent
passage for warships can be supported by existing national maritime
laws needs to be analysed from the perspectives of enforcement juris­
diction. If a State imposes restrictions on the innocent passage rights of
warships only at prescriptive jurisdiction but without implementation,
even though its assertion lacks an international legal basis at the level of
prescriptive jurisdiction, it would not trigger state responsibility. As
discussed in the "Lotus" case by the PCIJ, a State’s prescriptive juris­
diction is not necessarily constrained by existing international law.50
However, if a State expects its domestic laws imposing additional re­
strictions on the right of innocent passage to be effectively implemented
without violating international law and incurring State’s responsibility,
support must be found according to enforcement jurisdiction from
existing international law rules. The most direct legal basis is UNCLOS,
where Article 21 explicitly allows coastal States to impose restrictions
for categories such as traffic safety, marine environmental protection,
marine scientific research, and hydrographic measurements.51

44
Exclusive Economic Zone Act, 1984, Act No. 311. An Act pertaining to the
exclusive economic zone and certain aspects of the continental shelf of Malaysia and
to provide for the regulations of activities in the zone and on the continental shelf and
for matters connected therewith. Part II.
45
Id, part V.
46
Law of the Sea (Law No. 32 of 2014).
47
Regulation No.36 of Foreign Ships Innocent Passage in the Indonesia Waters
in 1962, part IV.
48
Id, part II and part III.
49
The Act of the Republic relating to the Indonesian Waters (Act No. 6 of
1996), Article 19.

50
51

7

Lotus Case (France v. Turkey), PCIJ, the judgment of 7 September 1927, p.20.
UNCLOS, Article 21.

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

However, restrictions on warships are not specified among these rea­
sons. Other provisions, such as Article 19 of UNCLOS, allow coastal
States to restrict the innocent passage of warships if they pose a threat to
the peace of the coastal state or use force against the coastal state.52 Still,
direct and undifferentiated restrictions on the innocent passage of all
warships cannot be justified within the scope of Article 19.
Clearly, UNCLOS does not provide a clear basis for coastal States to
limit the right of innocent passage of warships. However, this does not
mean that coastal States cannot find enforcement jurisdictional bases to
support their domestic legislation. General international law can serve
as an important basis for enforcement jurisdiction to some extent. The
preamble of UNCLOS states, "affirming that matters not regulated by this
Convention continue to be governed by the rules and principles of
general international law,"53 indicating that UNCLOS provisions do not
exhaust all rules of the law of the sea, and it provides a direction for
finding enforcement jurisdiction regarding restrictions on the innocent
passage of warships.
Considering that the territorial sea is an integral part of the coastal
State’s territory, coastal States, for the purpose of protecting its sover­
eignty and national security, may require prior notification from war­
ships. This is due to the unique nature of warships, making it difficult for
coastal States to determine whether their activities go beyond the scope
of innocent passage. Based on the characteristics of the difficulty in
detecting the actions of warships and the significant threat to national
sovereignty, there is an opinion advocating that the passage of warships
is inherently non-innocent [56]. This argument has persisted since
Grotius. Although Article 21 of UNCLOS lists numerous circumstances
that should not be considered as innocent passage, and this argument
has become an important legal basis for States like the United States to
exercise Freedom of Navigation Operations (FONOPs) [57], it is still
doubtful whether this article can exhaust all non-innocent circum­
stances, especially in the current dynamic development stage of the law
of the sea [58]. This view has received considerable support, and also a
major reason why over 40 coastal States have enacted regulations
restricting the innocent passage of warships. For instance, apart from the
basic requirements that warships need to follow, such as weapons not in
firing position and submarines must be on the surface, the abundance of
weapons and equipment carried by warships makes them potentially
threatening to coastal States—especially in situations where there is a
real conflict of interest between the flag State and the coastal State.
Some restrictions of warships, while recognizing the basic principle of
innocent passage for warships, falls within the scope of Article 2(4) of
the United Nations Charter,54 as it aims to prevent warships from
engaging in activities that could jeopardise the territorial integrity and
national security of the coastal state without its knowledge.
Moreover, the navigation of warships itself may have negative im­
pacts on the coastal state’s management of its territorial sea and the
navigation of other foreign vessels. the presence of naval fleets may
exert practical pressure on maritime traffic order, and COLREGS may be
a source for coastal States to impose restrictions on the right of innocent
passage of warships in order to maintain its maritime traffic order. These
factors can be considered as legitimate reasons for coastal States to
impose certain restrictions on the innocent passage of warships.
In addition to the support provided by general international law for
enforcement jurisdiction, according to ILC’s Draft Conclusions on
Identification of Customary International Law, domestic laws of various
States can themselves serve as a basis for the establishment of customary
international law,55 or be absorbed by international treaties related to
the navigation of warships in the future, thereby formally becoming a

binding international legal system. For example, in the aviation domain,
around 20 States currently assert air defense identification zones
(ADIZs), and these claims may potentially become part of customary
international law with universal legal binding force in the future [59].
Some practices, such as the additional requirements imposed by the
former Soviet Union and Canada on navigation in Arctic waters, were
later absorbed by Article 234 of UNCLOS [40]. Hence, there is no need to
doubt that the international legal system governing the navigation of
foreign vessels may evolve in the future as more States engage in prac­
tices that go beyond existing treaties and general international law
provisions. In this sense, coastal States that harbor concerns about the
passage of warships in their territorial seas, by explicitly constraining
the innocent passage of warships at the level of prescriptive jurisdiction
within their domestic laws, may generate externalities that extend far
beyond the practice itself [60]. These constraints may contribute to the
development of international law specifically addressing issues related
to the navigation of warships.
For Chinese warships, considering that China itself supports to limit
the right of innocent passage of warships,56 and the navigation of war­
ships has sensitive impacts on the security and stability of regional States
in the SCS. Therefore, if other SCS States impose restrictions on the
innocent passage of warships within their domestic laws, Chinese war­
ships should, to the greatest extent possible, respect the requirements of
those coastal States’ domestic laws. On one hand, this would not
fundamentally deprive warships of their right of navigation, and on the
other hand, showing respect for the domestic laws of other regional
States may encourage foreign vessels reciprocal compliance with
China’s domestic laws, which can achieve a win-win situation.
4.2.2. Analysis of the navigation rights of Chinese vessels in disputed waters
Compared to potential restrictions on warships in the territorial seas
of some regional States, something more practical for Chinese vessels is
the uncertainty of their rights of navigation in disputed waters of the
SCS. Disputed waters refer to areas where two or more States claim
sovereignty, sovereign rights, and jurisdiction [61]. While territorial
disputes over maritime areas are can be found globally, the issue is
particularly irreconcilable in the SCS [8]. This is primarily due to
China’s long-standing claim, represented by the nine-dash line and
ten-dash line, asserting rights over the majority of the SCS—a claim not
recognised by regional States and most States with interests in the SCS,
such as the United States [62].
Since the 1970s, China’s claims over maritime features have been
occupied by different regional States, particularly the Philippines,
Vietnam, and Malaysia, among others [8]. This situation making it
challenging for any single State, including China, to exert complete
control over the Spratlys and Paracels. In 2013, frustrated with the lack
of progress in negotiations with China over the disputes in the SCS, the
Philippines unilaterally initiated arbitration under Annex VII of
UNCLOS. While the arbitration did not directly address the issue of
sovereignty over maritime features in the SCS, many of its rulings were
seen to have a negative impact on China’s sovereignty and maritime
entitlement claims [63]. These included rulings which denied the legal
status of the nine-dash line and China’s historical rights, the tribunal
also proclaimed that China had infringed the sovereign rights and
jurisdiction of the Philippines’ EEZ.57 Despite the arbitration ruling,
China refused to recognise or enforce it, leading to increased tensions in
the regional order of the SCS. After China released its official map in
2023, reiterating its claims in the SCS, it faced intensified opposition
from regional States, further complicating the situation.

52

56

Id, Article 19.
Id, Preamble.
54
UN Charter, Article 2(4).
55
Draft Conclusions on Identification of Customary International Law, Con­
clusions 5, 6 and 10.

The Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Territorial Sea and the
Contiguous Zone. Order No. 55 of the President of the People’s Republic of
China, Article 6.
57
The South China Sea Arbitration (PCA). Award on July 12th, 2016.
para.1203.3 (2)(9)(10).

53

8

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

Another major reason for the complexity and difficulty in resolving
the disputes in the SCS’s disputed waters is China’s longstanding unclear
altitude to the meaning of its nine-dash line (and subsequent ten-dash
line) [64]. Despite the arbitral tribunal of the SCS rejecting the sover­
eign nature of the waters within the nine-dash line, China’s official
stance, along with unofficial proclaims represented by the Chinese So­
ciety of International Law, has consistently opposed the tribunal’s views
[65]. Furthermore, China has emphasised its historical rights in the SCS
without providing specific details about the content of these historical
rights. This lack of clarity makes it unambiguous whether China con­
siders the SCS as internal waters, territorial waters, EEZs, or other types
of maritime areas [66].
While the complex disputes in the SCS do not inherently deny vessels
basic rights of navigation in the region, the uncertainty of maritime
sovereignty requires Chinese vessels navigating through disputed waters
to consider the domestic laws of all the interested States in a disputed
zone. The activities of various types of vessels may fall within the
jurisdictional scope of the domestic laws of multiple States simulta­
neously. Regarding China’s domestic laws, despite lacking jurisdictional
provisions based on a territorial connection, major maritime laws such
as the Coast Guard Law, the Marine Environmental Protection Law, and
Maritime Traffic Safety Law explicitly state they should apply to "all
waters within China’s jurisdiction." These disputed waters inside the
ten-dash line would fall within this scope [67]. For the Philippines and
Vietnam, other two major claimant States in the SCS, both have specified
their jurisdiction in domestic maritime laws, covering activities such as
fishing, marine scientific research, and exploration and exploitation of
natural resources in their respective regions. Therefore, when Chinese
vessels navigate through disputed waters—especially those contested by
China itself—compliance with specific navigation regulations and the
ability to undertake certain maritime activities become crucial issues.
Evidently, solely from the perspective of domestic law, the domestic
laws of these three States do not provide specific responses to the SCS
disputes. Therefore, activities falling within the sovereign rights and
jurisdictional scope stipulated in Articles 56 and 77 of UNCLOS will
directly trigger jurisdictional conflicts at the domestic law field. Clearly,
the attribution of disputed areas in the SCS and other conflicts is chal­
lenging to resolve in the short term. Under this situation, the most
effective strategy for Chinese vessels to protect their navigation rights
and participate in other maritime activities is to assess the actual law
enforcement capabilities of each coastal state in specific disputed wa­
ters. If Chinese law enforcement capabilities is stronger in an area,
Chinese vessels should primarily adhere to Chinese domestic law while
have due regard to the rights of other States as per UNCLOS provisions
[68,69].58 In regions where Chinese law enforcement capabilities are
weaker, vessels should avoid to take actions that violate the domestic
laws of States with stronger law enforcement. This by no means implies
that Chinese vessels can disregard international law or the domestic laws
of other States in waters where China’s law enforcement capabilities are
stronger. Instead, it only refers to situations where there is a conflict
between the domestic laws of different States in disputed waters (such as
exercising the right of innocent passage or engaging in fishing, marine
scientific research, etc.). For example, when navigating near the Spratly
Islands, which simultaneously claimed by China, the Philippines, Viet­
nam, and Malaysia, if Vietnam’s law enforcement capabilities are
stronger in a specific maritime area, Chinese fishing vessels should
better avoid navigating and participating in fishing activities in this
maritime area to minimise their potential risks of navigation. Consid­
ering that the domestic laws of regional States regarding navigation
regimes are not far away from UNCLOS, simultaneously adhering to the
regulations of each State’s domestic law is not likely to significantly

impede the navigational rights of vessels.
In addition to the efforts made by Chinese vessels themselves to
ensure their rights of navigation, it is more crucial that authorities of
China and other regional States should jointly strive to protect and
maintain basic navigation rights of vessels. From the perspective of
domestic law, China has left room for international cooperation. For
instance, both the Coast Guard Law and the Marine Environmental
Protection Law explicitly stipulated that to reach effective international
cooperation as a fundamental principle.59 Avoiding enforcement con­
flicts that could impact the navigation rights of vessels is naturally an
important cooperative objective. During the process of law enforcement
jurisdiction, States should also consider the actual connections of
jurisdiction between different States [70]. If other States have clearer
actual connections compared to them, it should be considered to either
relinquish jurisdiction or at least allow joint jurisdiction with relevant
States. This approach can be a means to ensure respect for jurisdictional
rights by other parties in corresponding situations, as well as to safe­
guard overall navigation order and regional order.
It must be acknowledged that, following the "Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea," there has not been significant
progress in resolving the regional disputes. Some attempts to address the
disputes, such as the Philippines’ unilateral initiation of the South China
Sea Arbitration, proved to escalate tensions instead [71]. Undoubtedly,
disputes over sovereignty are not issues that can be effectively resolved
in a short period. However, ensuring the right of navigation for vessels in
disputed waters is something that could be resolved relatively quickly.
This depends, on the one hand, on the responses of the ships themselves
and, on the other hand, on the cooperation of States regarding the issue
of navigation rights. Therefore, Chinese vessels should adopt flexible
strategies to maximise the protection of their navigation rights in
disputed waters. The competent authorities of China and other regional
parties should also achieve breakthrough cooperation on safeguarding
navigation rights in disputed waters as soon as possible.
4.3. Immunity of non-commercial government ships
Another issue closely related to the navigation rights of Chinese
vessels is what kinds of Chinese vessels can enjoy immunity which may
not classified as warships. UNCLOS establishes a set of specific pro­
visions for non-commercial government ships, including the immunity
within territorial seas and on the high seas.60 Moreover, noncommercial government ships are legitimate entities for the exercise
of boarding and hot pursuit rights, which are major jurisdictional rights
possessed by States in the high seas.61
China currently operates two main types of non-commercial gov­
ernment vessels in the SCS: law enforcement vessels excluding warships,
and vessels engaged in scientific research and other activities [72]. For
the former, a significant number of Coast Guard vessels have become
central to regional disputes in recent years. Some States even argue that
China’s coast guard vessels essentially fall within the category of war­
ships [73]. The legal status of Coast Guard vessels primarily affects their
innocent passage rights in the territorial seas of other States, rather than
significantly impacting their immunity. Besides those Coast Guard ves­
sels, there are also Chinese militia vessels participate in different ac­
tivities in disputed waters. These militia vessels also serve as the
frontline in conflicts between China and other claimant states in the SCS
[74]. Although these militia vessels are largely influenced by the Chi­
nese government, their operators are often not government officials, and
the vessels do not possess documentation showing requisition by the
59

The Coast Guard Law of the People’s Republic of China, Feb 1st, 2021, Article
63–65. Marine Environment Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China,
Article 10 (2).
60
UNCLOS, Article 32.
61
Id, Articles 109, 110.

58
The principle of due regard is one of the fundamental principle in UNCLOS,
which means that States, while exercising maritime rights and fulfilling their
obligations, take into account the rights and maritime interests of other States.

9

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

Chinese government [75]. As a result, these militia vessels find it chal­
lenging to receive the protection of immunity provided by UNCLOS
[76].
For the latter, such as vessels involved in activities such as scientific
research, because many of China’s research vessels are not directly
owned or operated by the government but are belonged to various in­
stitutions, including public universities [66]. In the event of a dispute,
can these vessels claim jurisdictional exemptions based on UNCLOS
provisions?
Although public universities and other public institutions are not a
branch of the Chinese government, the 2021 Regulations on the
Administration of State-owned Assets of Administrative Institutions
stipulate that assets owned by public institutions through ’financial
allocation, allocation, transfer, or replacement, and donation’ should be
recognised as state-owned assets.62 As China is a unitary State, there is
no difference in ownership between State-owned assets owned by public
institutions and government assets. Therefore, public universities’ sci­
entific research vessels can obtain the immunity specified in Article 32
of UNCLOS by analogy with governmental non-commercial vessels. So if
a public university’s scientific research ship can be deemed a stateowned asset, even if it violated international rules like UNCLOS or do­
mestic laws of a coastal State, it can use immunity as a shield to avoid
detention or litigation. Conversely, if research vessels are owned by
private research institutions, they do not fall within the scope of
immunity.
In the situation where a significant number of Chinese vessels
involved in maritime activities in the SCS are either warships or noncommercial government ships, there are two aspects to consider. On
the one hand, these vessels may face certain restrictions due to addi­
tional regulations by coastal States regarding innocent passage rights.
On the other hand, immunity can, at least, safeguard them from most
enforcement measures. For other States in the SCS, they should also
respect and implement the immunity status of non-commercial gov­
ernment vessels, avoiding enforcement measures against Chinese vessels
that go beyond the scope of UNCLOS.

numerous non-commercial government ships in China. It is essential to
ascertain whether there are additional restrictions on their navigation in
the jurisdictional waters of other States and, when encountering law
enforcement measures beyond UNCLOS provisions, promptly inform the
authorities of the coastal State by themselves and the relevant Chinese
authorities. Due to the difficulty of resolving the current sovereignty and
maritime rights disputes in the SCS in the short term, when navigating in
disputed waters, it is necessary for all types of Chinese vessels to flexibly
comply with the domestic legislation of different States based on their
navigation purposes and a comparison of law enforcement capabilities
in the disputed waters of the regional States, thus ensuring their navi­
gation rights to the maximum extent possible and avoid some potential
legal risks. If there is no conflict among the domestic laws of various
coastal States in the areas involved in navigation and other maritime
activities, Chinese vessels should comply with the domestic laws of all
related coastal States. However, if conflicts arise, such as in the exercise
of innocent passage rights or engaging other maritime activities like
fishing and marine scientific research, where vessels cannot clearly
ascertain the attribution of maritime entitlements in the waters, it is
necessary to assess which coastal State’s domestic law to comply with
based on law enforcement capabilities. Further, when Chinese vessels
may engage in activities beyond mere navigation within a disputed
maritime zone, especially any activities that could fall within the scope
of sovereign rights and jurisdiction of coastal States, they should further
notify Chinese authorities to assess the legal and political risks associ­
ated with their actions. Both the Chinese government and other
competent authorities bear the responsibility of minimising the poten­
tial adverse effects of navigation and related activities on regional sta­
bility. The objective is to proactively maintain normal navigation
procedures and prevent any disruption to the stability of disputed
maritime regions resulting from navigation and other maritime
activities.
Second, concerning Chinese domestic law, although current Chinese
domestic law theoretically covers all waters within the ten-dash line, it
lacks crucial legislation based on flag State jurisdiction. Flag State
jurisdiction is one of the fundamental jurisdictional rights in maritime
navigation regimes, particularly for vessels navigating outside territorial
seas. For China, flag State jurisdiction holds additional significance,
serving as a critical pathway for fulfilling its treaty obligations under
UNCLOS and IMO conventions. For instance, Article 94(7) of UNCLOS
and almost all IMO convention obligations require flag State jurisdiction
for their execution. Furthermore, as China has not explicitly clarified the
legal status of the nine-dash line/ten-dash line, the jurisdictional rights
of waters inside the dash-lines are unknown. The stipulation of flag State
jurisdiction can ensure that Chinese vessels navigate in all SCS waters in
compliance with China’s domestic laws, particularly in the absence of
clear legal status for the discontinuous line and waters within the line.
Therefore, it is imperative for China to promptly legislate flag State
jurisdiction and the corresponding legal regimes at the domestic law
level.
Third, the right of navigation of Chinese vessels in the SCS should be
further consolidated through regional cooperation. In such cooperation,
States should prioritise the fundamental goal of safeguarding the right of
navigation. Even if some vessels are engaged in activities that may
violate sovereign rights and jurisdiction, coastal States should not
directly expel them in the absence of direct evidence. Instead, they
should distinguish the right of navigation from other activities, funda­
mentally ensuring that different vessels all have basic navigational
rights. Although many States in the SCS have significant differences in
their sovereignty claims over the maritime features of the SCS and
related maritime entitlements, it is in the common interest of all States to
protect the right of navigation of vessels [77]. At present, States in the
SCS have cooperated on disaster rescue in the region [78]. In the future,
cooperation should be further expanded to protect the right of naviga­
tion, in order to reduce the interference of law enforcement activities of
various States on normal navigation. Different international treaties,

5. Suggestions on the right of navigation of Chinese vessels in
the SCS
In summary, whether from the perspective of international law or
domestic law, Chinese vessels, as well as vessels from all States world­
wide, should enjoy the rights of navigation in the SCS. This includes the
right of innocent passage in the territorial seas of other States and
freedom of navigation beyond territorial seas. Under the authorization
of UNCLOS, IMO conventions, and other general international laws,
domestic laws have the space to regulate maritime navigation rights
additionally.
Generally speaking, the regulations in domestic laws of regional
States regarding vessel navigation rights do not significantly violate
UNCLOS or other international legal rules. However, due to the vast
disputed waters in the SCS, Chinese vessels still inevitably face chal­
lenges such as uncertainty in jurisdictional authorities and unclear
compliance with laws during navigation. To more effectively safeguard
the basic navigation rights of Chinese vessels, maintain the fundamental
order of navigation in the region, and achieve cooperation and coordi­
nation among regional States in terms of navigational rights, this article
proposes the following recommendations:
First, regarding the vessels themselves, various types of Chinese
vessels should clearly understand their legal status under international
law and the domestic laws of regional States in the SCS, as well as the
navigation rights they are entitled to. This is especially crucial for the
62
2021 Regulations on the Administration of State-owned Assets of Admin­
istrative Institutions. Order of the State Council of the People’s Republic of
China, No.738, Article 2.

10

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229

References

including UNCLOS, stipulate that all States should notify the flag State in
a timely manner when they take measures such as the arrest or detention
of foreign vessels.63 However, due to the fragmentation of various
cooperation and coordination mechanisms, the law enforcement on
specific vessels cannot be known to the flag State on time. Considering
the importance of the SCS to world shipping, the article suggested that a
law enforcement communication mechanism be established among the
coastal States around the SCS to ensure navigation rights, re-examine
law enforcement processing procedures, eliminate misunderstandings
and ensure the navigation order in the SCS.
Fourth, State in the region should further expand the path of SCS
cooperation based on the right of navigation, including reaching a new
agreement which aimed to provide resolution of the current disputes. As
the article mentioned before, since the "Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea", there has been a lack of breakthrough
progress in maintaining the order in the SCS by regional State, with most
adopting unilateral measures. Indeed, some unilateral measures may
contribute to the short-term maximization of a State’s maritime in­
terests, but in the long-term, if major regional States cannot reach a
consensus on the distribution of interests, it will be challenging to
effectively safeguard the interests of all the regional States [79]. The
right of navigation is currently the most easily agreed-upon aspect
among State in the SCS region. Not only is the SCS itself a global com­
mon maritime passage, but the right of navigation is also the funda­
mental path for regional State to further implementing their maritime
claims. Therefore, State can attempt to use cooperation in safeguarding
the right of navigation as a breakthrough. After the "Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea", they can further establish
new regional treaties, clarifying the obligations and direction of coop­
eration that regional State will shoulder in resolving SCS disputes.

[1] Z.H. Zheng, What do contradictory statements made by the Philippines and the
United States reveal for the South China Sea? South China Sea Strateg. Situat.
Probing Initiat. (SCSPI) (2021). 〈http://www.scspi.org/en/dtfx/what-do-contrad
ictory-statements-made-philippines-and-united-States-reveal-south-china-sea-0〉.
[2] Aljazeera, Philippines accuses China of targeting fishing boats in South China Sea,
Dec. 9, 2023. Available in: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/12/9/
philippines-condemns-chinese-actions-in-south-china-sea#:~:text=Manila%
20says%20Chinese%20coastguard%20shot,in%20disputed%20South%20China%
20Sea.&text=The%20Philippines%20has%20accused%20the,in%20the%20South
%20China%20Sea.
[3] NBC News, China says U.S. warship ‘illegally’ entered waters in the South China
Sea. Available in: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/china-says-us-navyship-illegally-intruded-waters-south-china-sea-rcna127859.
[4] L. Kuok, How China’ s actions in the South China Sea undermine the rule of law,
Global China, November 18 (2019). Available in: 〈https://www.brookings.edu/w
p-content/uploads/2019/11/FP_20191118_china_scs_law_kuok.pdf〉.
[5] C. Wirth V. Schatz, South China Sea “Lawfare”: Fighting over the Freedom of
Navigation, (GIGA Focus Asien, 5). Hamburg: GIGA German Institute of Global and
Area Studies - Leibniz-Institut für Globale und Regionale Studien, Institut für AsienStudien, 5 (2020) 11. Available in: https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168ssoar-69366-1.
[6] The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Statement of the
Government of the People’s Republic of China on China’s Territorial Sovereignty
and Maritime Rights and Interests in the South China Sea, July 12 (2016).
Available in: 〈https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/nanhai/eng/snhwtlcwj_1/201607/t2
0160712_8527297.htm#:~:text=China%20is%20the%20first%20to,in%20the%
20South%20China%20Sea〉.
[7] U.S. Navy Destroyer Conducts Freedom of Navigation Operation in the South China
Sea, From Commander, U.S. 7th Fleet Public Affairs, November 27 (2023).
Available in: 〈https://www.cpf.navy.mil/Newsroom/News/Article/359842
0/us-navy-destroyer-conducts-freedom-of-navigation-operation-in-the-south-c
hina-s/〉.
[8] Z. Gao, B.B. Jia, The nine-dash line in the South China Sea: history, status, and
implications, Am. J. Int. Law 107 (1) (2013) 98–123, https://doi.org/10.5305/
amerjintelaw.107.1.0098.
[9] B. Hayton, The South China Sea: the Struggle for Power in Asia, Yale University
Press, 2014.
[10] M.E. Herberg, The role of energy in disputes over the South China Sea, Marit.
Aware. Proj. (28) (2016). 〈https://map.nbr.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/an
alysis_herberg_062816.pdf〉 (Available in).
[11] Q.R. Wang, China’s maintenance of the rights and interests of the South China Sea
since the 18th CPC national congress, Acad. J. Jiny-.-. 4 (2021) 85–93, https://doi.
org/10.16392/j.cnki.14-1057/c.2021.04.010.
[12] S. Burgess, Confronting China’s maritime expansion in the South China Sea,
J. Indo-Pac. Aff. 3 (3) (2020) 122.
[13] X. Hu, Joining hands with ASEAN states to promote cooperation and governance in
the South China sea, South China Sea Strateg. Situat. Probing Initiat. (SCSPI),
Novemb. (24) (2023). 〈http://www.scspi.org/en/dtfx/joining-hands-asean-Statespromote-cooperation-and-governance-south-china-sea〉 (Available in).
[14] M. Ernst, Control through cooperation? Assessing China’s economic and militarystrategic interests in the South China Sea, J. Territ. Marit. Stud. 9 (2022) 7.
[15] Y.C. Chang, et al., Legal or illegal?—Transferring jurisdiction in the course of
maritime law enforcement, Heliyon 10 (4) (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
heliyon.2024.e26265.
[16] U.S. Embassy Manila, Joint Statement on the Philippines-United States Bilateral
Strategic Dialogue, April 25 (2024). Available in: 〈https://ph.usembassy.gov/joint
-statement-on-the-philippines-united-states-bilateral-strategic-dialogue/〉.
[17] U.S. National Security Council, Statement from National Security Advisor Robert C.
O’Brien, October 23 (2020). Available in: 〈https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov
/briefings-statements/statement-national-security-advisor-robert-c-obrien102320/〉.
[18] Y. Yan, 2020, Legal Boundaries of U.S. Coast Guard Operations in the South China
Sea, Dec. 24, 2020. Available in: http://www.scspi.org/en/dtfx/legal-boundariesus-coast-guard-operations-south-china-sea.
[19] The Maritime Executive, China Coast Guard Cutter Hits Philippine Supply Boat in
S. China Sea, OCT 22, 2023. Available in: 〈https://maritime-executive.com/
article/china-coast-guard-cutter-hits-philippine-supply-boat-in-s-china-sea〉.
[20] Reuters, Philippine legislator proposes law to keep Chinese boats, planes in check,
October 26, 2022. Available in: 〈https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/p
hilippine-legislator-proposes-law-keep-chinese-boats-planes-check-2022-10-26/〉.
[21] Reuters, Chinese Ships Leave Vietnam Waters After Hanoi Protest, June 6, 2023.
Available in: https://www.usnews.com/news/world/articles/2023-06-06/chineseships-leave-vietnam-waters-after-us-china-talks.
[22] Y.C. Chang, Analysis of maritime law enforcement under the circumstances of
jurisdiction transfer, Asia-Pac. Secur. Marit. Aff. 6 (2022) 49–50, https://doi.org/
10.19780/j.cnki.ytaq.2022.6.3.
[23] H. Grotius, The Freedom of the Seas, or, The Right Which Belongs to the Dutch to
take part in the East Indian trade, The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd, 2001.
[24] R.P. Pedrozo, Military activities in the exclusive economic zone: East Asia focus,
Int. Law Stud. 90 (1) (2014) 15.
[25] J.J. Gao, The meaning and scope of freedom of navigation — examination of
tribunal practice under the United Nations convention on the law of the sea, Stud.
Law Bus. 38 (1) (2021) 193.

6. Conclusion
Undoubtedly, whether based on international law or domestic laws,
the fundamental navigational rights of various types of Chinese vessels
in the SCS should be safeguarded. However, due to conflicts among
regional States over sovereignty and maritime rights, these navigational
rights are to some extent affected. Therefore, in the short term, Chinese
vessels should adapt their navigation strategies to the current conflict
situation in the SCS, ensuring compliance with the domestic laws of the
interested States and international legal provisions. Looking ahead,
regional States should also engage in various cooperative mechanisms to
safeguard navigational rights. The cooperation can serve as a crucial
starting point for the improvement of regional relations, thereby pro­
moting more extensive and profound cooperation in the region over the
long term.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ling Yang: Funding acquisition. Xingyi Duan: Writing – original
draft. Yen-Chiang Chang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of Competing Interest
This is a short statement to confirm that there is no conflict of interest
for this piece of work. All authors agree with the terms and the name
order that places in the paper.
Data Availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

63

UNCLOS, Article 94 (6).
11

Y.-C. Chang et al.

Marine Policy 165 (2024) 106229
[51] Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China, Overview of Brunei
Fisheries Development (in Chinese), April 3, 2007. Available in: 〈http://bn.
mofcom.gov.cn/article/ztdy/200704/20070404527129.shtml〉.
[52] V.A.M.F. Ventura, Sovereignty and Jurisdiction in the Law of the Sea.
Environmental Jurisdiction in the Law of the Sea, Springer, Cham, 2020,
pp. 85–108, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-50543-1_4.
[53] The U.S., Office of Ocean Affairs, LIS No. 112 - United States (US) Responses to
Excessive National Maritime Claims, (1992) 61.
[54] A.D. Ton, Innocent passage of warships: international law and the practice of East
Asian littoral states, Asia-Pac. J. Ocean Law Policy 1 (2) (2016) 210–243.
[55] C. Bianco, et al., What is innocent? Freedom of navigation versus coastal states’
rights in the law of the sea, Ocean Dev. Int. Law 54 (3) (2023) 349–374, https://
doi.org/10.1080/00908320.2023.2267406.
[56] G.R. Ballester, The right of innocent passage of warships: a debated issue, Rev. De.
Derecho Puertorriqueño 54 (2014) 96.
[57] J.G. Odom, FONOPs to preserve the right of innocent passage? Despite popular
misconception, that is hardly mission impossible, Diplomat 2 (2016). 〈https://ssrn.
com/abstract=2741238〉.
[58] M. Ge, On the innocent passage of warships, Chin. J. Marit. Law 2 (2019) 32.
[59] Q. Cao, Practice of air defense identification zones and the rules of customary
international law, Mar. L. Pol. ’Y. 1 (2022) 96.
[60] Z. Liu, X. Duan, The application of bilateral investment treaty in non-territorial
waters: a study on the issue of the protection of sea-related investments,
J. Shanghai Univ. Int. Bus. Econ. 272 (1) (2024) 94.
[61] S. Mirski, The South China Sea Dispute: A Brief History, Foreign Relations &
International Law, June 8 (2015) 2021. Available in: 〈https://huongduongtxd.co
m/SCSdispute_history.pdf〉.
[62] J.A. Cohen, Forecasting the Aftermath of a Ruling on China’ s Nine-Dash Line,
Foreign Policy, 2016.
[63] I.B. Kardon, China can say “no ”: analyzing china’s rejection of the South China Sea
arbitration: toward a new era of international law with Chinese characteristics,
Univ. Pa. Asian Law Rev. 13 (2018) 1.
[64] K. Zou, China’s U-shaped line in the South China Sea revisited, Ocean Dev. Int. Law
43 (1) (2012) 18–34.
[65] Chinese Society of International Law, The South China Sea Arbitration Awards: A
Critical Study, Chin. J. Int. Law 17 (2) (2018) 207–748, https://doi.org/10.1093/
chinesejil/jmy012.
[66] R. McLaughlin, The law of the sea and PRC gray-zone operations in the South
China Sea, Am. J. Int. Law 116 (4) (2022) 821–835.
[67] B.B. Jia, Historic Rights in International Law: Current State of the Law and Two
Issues, Chinese Yearbook of International Law, 2019, pp. 30–63.
[68] R.E. Fife, Obligations of ‘due regard’ in the exclusive economic zone: their context,
purpose and state practice, Int. J. Mar. Coast. Law 34 (1) (2019) 43–55.
[69] China officially insists the principle of due regard when taking any maritime
activities in the South China Sea. Available in: 〈https://www.un.org/Depts/los/
clcs_new/submissions_files/mys_12_12_2019/20210816ChnNvUNch.pdf〉.
[70] K. Załucki, Extraterritorial jurisdiction in international law, Int. Community Law
Rev. 17 (4-5) (2015) 403–412, https://doi.org/10.1163/18719732-12341312.
[71] F. Zhang, Assessing China’s response to the South China Sea arbitration ruling,
Aust. J. Int. Aff. 71 (4) (2017) 440–459.
[72] Y.C. Chang, S.R. Xin, X. Zhang, A proposal for joint marine scientific research
activities in the disputed maritime areas of the South China Sea, Coast. Manag. 50
(3) (2022) 215–236.
[73] D. Guilfoyle, E.S.Y. Chan, Lawships or warships? Coast guards as agents of (in)
stability in the Pacific and South and East China Sea, Mar. Policy 140 (2022)
105048.
[74] H. Zhang, S. Bateman, Fishing militia, the securitization of fishery and the South
China Sea dispute, Contemp. Southeast Asia 39 (2) (2017) 288–314.
[75] P.F. Matthew, H. Brian, P.R. Aidan, Surveying the Seas–China’s Dual-Use Research
Operations In the Indian Ocean, Cent. Strateg. Int. Stud. (2024).
[76] K. Furuya, Law enforcement measures against Chinese maritime militia, Int. Law
Stud. 100 (1) (2023) 20.
[77] J. Ma, Conflict and coordination of national jurisdiction for navigation safety in the
South China Sea, Soc. Sci. J. 6 (2016) 46–53.
[78] M. Zhang, Cooperative rescue in the South China Sea: experience and
enlightenment, N. Orient 1 (2011) 32–36, https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1004700X.2011.01.006.
[79] Y. Sun, et al., The construction and governance of regional maritime security order
in the South China Sea: conference report, Mar. Policy 126 (2021) 104438.

[26] P. Tzeng, Supplemental jurisdiction under UNCLOS, Houst. J. Int. Law 38 (2016)
499–535.
[27] I. Parlov, Coastal state jurisdiction over ships in need of assistance, maritime
casualties and shipwrecks. Coastal State Jurisdiction over Shipwrecks, 8, Brill
Nijhoff, 2022, pp. 239–294, 10.1163/9789004515079_009.
[28] International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), 1974. IMO.
Available in: 〈https://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/Pages/Internation
al-Convention-for-the-Safety-of-Life-at-Sea-(SOLAS),-1974.aspx〉.
[29] J. Huang (Jeanne), J.X. Hu, Can free trade agreements enhance MARPOL 73/78
compliance? Tulane Marit. Law J. 43 (2018) 59–89.
[30] IMO, IMO and the safety of navigation, January 1998. Available in: 〈https://www
cdn.imo.org/localresources/en/OurWork/Safety/Documents/SAFETYOFNAVIGAT
ION21998final.pdf〉.
[31] STCW Manila Amendments and updated training, Warsash Maritime School.
Available in: 〈https://maritime.solent.ac.uk/maritime-industry/stcw-manila-amen
dments〉.
[32] H. Zhang, Q.W. Wang, Maritime safety management of foreign vessels in China:
new institutional developments and potential implications, Ocean Coast. Manag.
218 (2022) 106023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2021.106023.
[33] J. Crawford, Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law, 9th Edition, Oxford
University Press, 2019, p. 447.
[34] A.E. Utton, Protective measures and the torrey canyon, Boston Coll. Ind. Commer.
Law Rev. 9 (1967) 613.
[35] C.C. Emanuelli, The right of intervention of coastal states on the high seas in cases
of pollution casualites, Univ. N. Brunsw. Law J. 25 (1976) 79–81.
[36] J. Zhang, Judicial Approach of Extraterritorial Application, in: Public Law in the
United States, 19, Nanjing University Law Journal, 2023, p. 133.
[37] Z. Gao, Z. Liu, Extraterritorial Application of China s Marine Environmental
Protection Laws: International Practices, Major Issues, and Feasible Suggestions,
Chinese Journal of Maritime Law, 2024. 〈https://link.cnki.net/urlid/21.1584.
d.20231228.0014.002〉.
[38] N.L. Dobson, C. Ryngaert, Provocative climate protection: EU ’extraterritorial’
regulation of maritime emissions, Int. Comp. Law Q. 66 (2) (2017) 295–333.
[39] J. Kolasa, Unilateral acts of a state in the process of forming customary
international law, Wroclaw Rev. Law, Adm. Econ. 8 (2) (2018) 59–71.
[40] S. Li, Unilateral actions in the development of the law of the sea, Mar. Policy 153
(2023) 105658.
[41] S.P. Liao, Administrative law enforcement from the perspective of extraterritorial
applicable law system of China, Adm. Law Rev. 2 (2023) 55–67.
[42] IMO, A maritime treaty is adopted or amended – what happens next? International
treaties can only become law when implemented into national legislation, Sep. 28,
2017. Available in: 〈https://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/PressBriefings/Page
s/24-legal-workshop.aspx#:~:text=%E2%80%8BIMO%20treaties%20are%20not,
(IMO)%20are%20well%20known〉.
[43] United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea (ICP), 10th session, 〈https://www.un.org/depts/los/consultative_pr
ocess/documents/10_A.Blanco-Bazan.pdf〉.
[44] China Daily, 2023 edition of national map released, Aug. 28th, 2023. Available in:
〈https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202308/28/WS64ec91c2a31035260b81ea5b.
html〉.
[45] Global Voice, The Chinese 2023 map has nothing new, But why are China’ s
neighbours mad about it?, Sep. 5th, 2023. Available in: 〈https://globalvoices.org
/2023/09/05/the-chinese-2023-map-has-nothing-new-but-why-are-chinas-ne
ighbours-mad-about-it/〉.
[46] M.F.A. Quintos, The Philippines: hedging in a post-arbitration South China Sea?
Asian Polit. Policy 10 (2) (2018) 261–282.
[47] A. Waddell, Domestic Challenges and International Policy of Vietnam and China in
the South China Sea Dispute, PhD Diss., UNSW Sydney, (2020). Available in: 〈htt
ps://doi.org/10.26190/unsworks/22179〉.
[48] Aljazeera, Malaysia rejects new China map claiming entire South China Sea, Aug.
31th, 2023. Available in: 〈https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/8/31/malaysia
-rejects-new-china-map-claiming-entire-south-china-sea〉.
[49] United States Department of State, Bureau of Oceans and International
Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Limits in the Seas, No. 141 Indonesia:
Archipelagic and other Maritime Claims and Boundaries, 141 (2014) 5. Available
in: 〈https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/LIS-141.pdf〉.
[50] High Commission of Brunei Darussalam in Australia, Business in Brunei, QUICK
FACTS ON BRUNEI DARUSSALAM. Available in: 〈https://www.mfa.gov.bn/aus
tralia-canberra/SitePages/businessinbrunei.aspx〉.

12

