Joint Statement of the 14th ASEAN-China Summit to Commemorate the 20th Anniversary of Dialogue Relations

Bali, Indonesia, 18 November 2011

Further Advancing the Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity

WE, the Heads of State/Government of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People’s Republic of China, gathered on 18 November 2011 in Bali, Indonesia, on the occasion of the 14th ASEAN-China Summit, to commemorate the Twentieth Anniversary of the ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations;

SATISFIED with the ever strengthened relationship and the significant progress and substantive achievements recorded in the wide-ranging dialogue relations and cooperation between ASEAN and China in various areas since 1991 when the dialogue relations were first started;

WELCOMING the successful conclusion of the first Plan of Action for the period 2005-2010 and the adoption of the new Plan of Action for the period 2011-2015 to Implement the Joint Declaration on the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity 2003;

APPRECIATING China being the first Dialogue Partner to accede to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia in 2003;

WELCOMING China’s firm and consistent support for ASEAN integration and Community building process as well as for ASEAN’s central role in East Asia cooperation and in an evolving regional architecture;

ACKNOWLEDGING the progress in the implementation of the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), including the recent adoption of the Guidelines for the Implementation of the DOC;

INSPIRED by the progress made in realising the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) since 1 January 2010, which has enhanced trade and investment linkages, and economic cooperation between ASEAN and China, contributing significantly to the economic development of individual countries;

WELCOMING the meaningful activities undertaken to commemorate the 20th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations during the year of 2011;

RECALLING with commitment the Joint Statement of the Meeting of the Heads of State/Government of the Member States of ASEAN and the President of the People’s Republic of China in 1997, and the Joint Declaration on the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity 2003, and other joint declarations and cooperation documents, which lay the foundation for friendly relations, good neighbourliness, comprehensive and mutually beneficial cooperation between ASEAN and China;

CONSIDERING the challenges and opportunities presented by the changing international and regional environment;

STRESSING the importance of further advancing and enhancing the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership in all areas in this context;

REAFFIRMING the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the ASEAN Charter, the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and relevant international laws, treaties, and conventions which will continue to guide ASEAN-China dialogue relations and cooperation;

CONFIDENT that strengthening dialogue relations and comprehensive cooperation, and enhancing mutual trust and understanding between ASEAN and China will greatly benefit our peoples as well as contribute significantly to peace, stability, prosperity and progress in the region and the world at large;

HEREBY adopt the following:

1. We are determined to remain good neighbours, good friends and good partners, and advance the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership to a new height by promoting cooperation in areas of political and security, economic, socio-cultural and regional and international affairs

2. We will exert efforts and cooperate to effectively implement the 2011-2015 Plan of Action to Implement Joint Declaration on the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity.

3. China will support and cooperate closely with ASEAN to realise the ASEAN Community in 2015, comprising three pillars, namely, the ASEAN Political Security Community, the ASEAN Economic Community and the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community.

Political and Security Cooperation

4. We are committed to enhancing mutual understanding and friendship through close high-level contacts and exchange and will continue to strengthen regular bilateral and multilateral dialogue and consultation at different levels on various regional and international issues of common interests.

5. We continue to uphold the spirit of the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC) and the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence to enhance regional peace, security, prosperity and mutual confidence and trust.

6. We reaffirm our mutual respect for each other’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity in accordance with international law, and the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other states. We remain committed to resolving disputes peacefully through dialogue and negotiations without resorting to the threat or use of force.

7. We will work closely together in the areas of disarmament and non-proliferation through regional and international mechanisms and frameworks. In this regard, China reaffirms its strong support for ASEAN’s efforts towards realising a Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, and its readiness to sign the Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon Free Zone.

8. We will make use of existing bilateral and multilateral frameworks and mechanisms such as the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM Plus) and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) to promote defence and military exchanges and cooperation.

9. We are firmly committed to fully and effectively implementing the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), and work towards the eventual adoption, on the basis of consensus, of a code of conduct in the South China Sea, so as to further contribute to peace, security, stability and cooperation in the region.

10. We will cooperate to enhance maritime security, including to ensure freedom of commerce, safety of navigation and maritime traffic, in accordance with international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

11. We will strengthen cooperation, through the implementation of the Plan of Action for the ASEAN-China Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in the field of Non-Traditional Security Issues, in addressing non-traditional security issues and transnational crimes.

12. We will collaborate on human rights and support the work of ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR) aimed at enhancing the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Economic Cooperation

13. We are committed to further deepening and expanding mutually-beneficial economic cooperation, in the context of economic globalization and regional integration, for the benefits of our peoples and the region.

14. We are determined to fully and effectively implement the agreements under the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) in order to bring about greater prosperity for our peoples and development of our economies, and to realise the goal of bilateral trade volume of US$500 billion by 2015 and increased new direct investment from China.

15. We will continue to work towards improved market access and progressive liberalisation and facilitation of trade in goods and services in accordance with the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China, and raise awareness among the public and business community of the benefits of the ACFTA. We will also work towards the establishment of an open and competitive investment regime that facilitates and promotes investment within the ASEAN-China FTA in accordance with the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China.

16. We will work together to enhance cooperation in tourism and achieve the goal of increasing two-way tourist arrivals to 15 million by 2015.

17. We welcome the launch of the ASEAN-China Centre in Beijing and support the effective functioning of the Centre, which would contribute to the expansion of trade and investment under the ACFTA as well as the increase of SME business, tourism, and people and cultural exchanges between ASEAN and China.

18. We will work closely to strengthen integration efforts and enhance connectivity within ASEAN and between ASEAN and China, through supporting the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity and ASEAN-China connectivity projects. We are determined to cooperate and make the best use of all available resources, including financial and technical assistance, investment and public-private partnership to achieve physical, institutional and people-to-people connectivity of ASEAN and those with China.

19. We will make collective efforts to prevent the recurrence of financial and currency crisis in the region through enhanced macroeconomic and financial cooperation under the ASEAN Plus Three framework.

20. We will continue to enhance cooperation in agricultural and food production, in order to ensure food security, and strengthening cooperation in energy security particularly in renewable and alternative energy resources.

21. We are committed to providing assistance to support ASEAN’s narrowing the development gap and integration efforts by implementing the IAI Work Plan II.

22. We encourage further cooperation between ASEAN and China in support of sub-regional developments including within the framework of BIMP-EAGA, CLV DTA, CLMV, IMT-GT, GMS and the ASEAN Mekong Basin Development, and other areas.

Socio-Cultural Cooperation

23. We will strengthen socio-cultural cooperation and promote greater people-to-people interaction through increasing cultural, education, youth, sports and scholarly exchanges, and enhancing greater contacts between parliamentarians, media personnel, civil society, academics and Track II institutions.

24. We will promote efforts and share experiences to address challenges such as climate change, environmental protection and sustainable development, and strengthen dialogue and cooperation in the international climate change negotiations.

25. We will work together to enhance cooperation in sustainable water resource management and utilization in the Mekong River, which are important to the livelihood and food security of our respective countries.

26. We will further strengthen practical cooperation on disaster management, including emergency preparedness, risk reduction, humanitarian relief, reconstruction and rehabilitation, while taking into account the existing ASEAN agreements and mechanisms.

27. We will continue to cooperate closely in public health, including strengthening national preparedness and responses, where appropriate, in addressing the challenges of emerging infectious diseases and other public health emergencies.

28. We will further enhance our cooperation in alleviating poverty and protecting vulnerable groups, including women, children and persons with disabilities.

Regional and International Cooperation

29. We will continue to consult closely on sub-regional, regional and international issues and to cooperate in sub-regional, regional and international fora.

30. We reaffirm our commitment to further intensifying regional cooperation in East Asia and building a regional architecture that is open, transparent and inclusive. China reaffirms its continued support for ASEAN’s centrality in the evolving regional architecture, including the ASEAN Plus Three, East Asia Summit, ASEAN Regional Forum, ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus and other regional processes.

31. We reaffirm that the ASEAN Plus Three process would continue as a main vehicle towards the long-term goal of building an East Asian community with ASEAN as the driving force. We look forward to the outcome of the East Asia Vision Group II as part of the efforts to lay down a new vision of East Asia cooperation and community building in light of 15th Anniversary of the ASEAN Plus Three Cooperation in 2012.

32. We reiterate our commitment to the objectives and principles of the East Asia Summit (EAS) as a Leaders-led, open, transparent and inclusive forum for dialogue and cooperation on broad strategic, political and economic issues of common interest and concern with the aim of promoting peace, stability and prosperity in East Asia. We welcome the progress of and support for the continued strengthening of the EAS cooperation.

33. China supports ASEAN’s determination to develop an ASEAN common platform on global issues and enhance ASEAN’s capacity to respond to key regional and global issues, the regular participation of the ASEAN Chair in the G-20 Summit, and will coordinate with ASEAN in this endeavour.

34. ASEAN reaffirms One-China Policy and appreciates China’s active contribution to the promotion of peace, stability and development in the region. ASEAN supports China’s pursuit of peaceful development and stability which is conducive to peace, stability, cooperation and sustainable development in the region and beyond.

Adopted in Bali, Indonesia, on the Eighteenth Day of November in the Year Two Thousand and Eleven, in two original copies in the English language.