plan of Action for the Memorandum of Understanding Between the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and the Government of the people’s Republic of China
on Cooperation in the field
of Non-Traditional Security
Issues
Bali, Indonesia, 12 October 2011On the occasion of the 20th Anniversary of the ASEAN-China Dialogue,
we, Representatives of the leading law enforcement departments from
China and ASEAN Member States, gather here in Bali, Indonesia, for
the Second ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime Plus
China (2nd AMMTC + China) Consultation.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the
People’s Republic of China (hereinafter referred to as “the Parties”),
note with satisfaction that since the signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding on Cooperation in the Field of Non-traditional Security
Issues, their law enforcement cooperation has steadily contributed
toward the maintenance of peace, stability and prosperity of the
region.
This Plan of Action is formulated in accordance with the principles
and objectives set forth in the Memorandum of Understanding on
Cooperation in the Field of Non-Traditional Security Issues renewed
in 2009, and will serve as a master plan for the next three years
(2011-2014) for the purpose of promoting all-dimensional and in-depth
development of the law enforcement cooperation between the two
sides and further enriching the ASEAN-China strategic partnership for
peace and prosperity.
The Parties recognize the great significance and broad prospects
of their law enforcement cooperation and believe that the two sides
should strengthen communication and coordination to jointly work for
even greater progress in law enforcement cooperation.
The Parties hold the view that with the establishment of the China ASEAN Free Trade Area and the progress of the construction of
connectivity networks, it is necessary to build a law enforcement and
security cooperation network that is more pragmatic, highly-efficient
and convenient.
The Parties will further enhance law enforcement cooperation within
the frameworks of the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational
Crime Plus China (AMMTC + China) and the ASEAN Senior Officials
Meeting on Transnational Crime Plus China (SOMTC + China), and
agreed to carry out concrete cooperation in the following areas in
accordance with the domestic laws and policies of the respective
Parties:1. Information Exchange. The Parties will strengthen cooperation in countering terrorism,
drug trafficking, people smuggling, and trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, arms smuggling, sea piracy,
money laundering, international economic crime and cyber
crime, and enhance intelligence exchange and information
sharing within the limits of their respective laws and policies.
b. To establish contact persons between ASEAN member states
and China in each concrete field of crime of mutual concern to
exchange information quickly between countries.2. Personnel Exchange and Training. Law enforcement officials from ASEAN and China will continue
to strengthen people-to-people exchanges through mutual
visits, correspondence and meetings at the sidelines of major
global and regional conferences, and exchange views on major
law enforcement and security issues.
b. The Parties shall advance visit exchange of officials with the
commanding knowledge on transnational crime and security
issues in relevant sectors to share experiences and best
practices on law enforcement cooperation and establish
working meeting mechanisms (Director-General level) in areas
of common interest such as countering terrorism, terrorism
financing, people smuggling, cyber crime, trafficking in illegal
drugs and trafficking in persons, especially women and
children.
c. The Parties will strengthen cooperation through exchange of
visits by law enforcement officers in the capital cities of the
ASEAN Member States and China, and encourage closer
interaction between law enforcement authorities in Guangxi
Autonomous Region and the provinces of Yunnan, Guangdong,
Fujian and Hainan of China with their ASEAN counterparts.
d. China will organize and host training courses for 300 law
enforcement officers from ASEAN Member States every year to
enhance the capacity of Member States in drug control, forensic
sciences, immigration administration, cyber crime investigation
and crackdown on telecommunications fraud and advance
relevant cooperation between participating countries.
e. The Parties shall strengthen exchanges and cooperation in the
information technology (IT) development and other areas of
high-technology police application in raising the efficiency and
effectiveness of professional work of both sides.
f. The Parties shall promote cooperation among law enforcement
training institutions.
g. China shall continue to provide police assistance particularly
in the field of capacity building to the least developed ASEAN
Member States within the realm of its capability at the request
of the respective countries.3. law Enforcement Cooperation. The Parties shall work actively together in joint operations,
investigation of criminal cases, evidence gathering, tracing of
crime proceeds, prosecution, apprehension and repatriation
of criminal fugitive suspects as well as other practical law
enforcement cooperation to share experiences, improve
operational capability and effectively crack down on transnational
crimes, within the limits of their respective laws and policies.
b. The Parties shall seek to establish a focal point network on
emergency management in order to enhance coordination and
collaboration among different parties to provide appropriate
response to transnational crimes and incidents in the region c. In the view of damage to the safety of people’s property caused
by criminal cases of transnational telecommunications fraud
in the region in recent years, the Parties shall jointly explore
effective measures to combat telecommunications fraud
through intensified exchanges of information intelligence and
experiences among their law enforcement.
d. The Parties shall step up their law enforcement cooperation to
effectively prevent and eradicate illicit drugs and its cultivation
and carry out joint law enforcement operations on drug control
in accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding on
Cooperation in the Field of Non-traditional Security Issues.
e. In accordance with respective domestic laws and policies,
the Parties will strengthen criminal investigation cooperation;
encourage the signing of bilateral cooperation agreements
between ASEAN Member States and China, and advance
cooperation within the existing frameworks at appropriate
times.
f. The Parties shall mutually share experience and lessons learned
from past security maintenance cooperation in major events
including the Beijing Olympic Games, the Shanghai Expo, the
Guangzhou Asian Games and the Shenzhen Universiade, and
intensify security exchanges and cooperation in future major
events.4. Joint Research The Parties shall expand network of contacts and mutual visits among
relevant experts and scholars to support joint research and share
research findings in the field of non-traditional security issues.5. Review Mechanisms The Parties will hold regular review of the Plan of Action, through the
ASEAN Plus China Senior Officials Meeting, to ensure the needs of
both sides are met, and emerging and urgent areas of cooperation will
be included in light of evolving regional and global environment.6. Institutional Arrangements. Relevant agencies and departments of ASEAN Member States
and China will, with the assistance of the ASEAN Secretariat,
jointly implement various actions and measures laid out by the
Plan of Action. Contact Point of China: International Cooperation Department, Ministry of Public Security Tel: 86-10-66263329Fax: 86-10-58186022Email: icdofmps@sina.comContact Point of ASEAN: Political Security Community Department, Political and Security Directorate, ASEAN Secretariat Tel: 62-21-7262991Fax: 62-21-7398234Email: SecurityCooperationDivision@asean.org
b. In accordance with the annual cooperation plan, the expenses
of international travels for the purpose of the workshops,
training courses and other cooperation projects organized by
The Government of the People’s Republic of China shall be
borne by the sending country. The Government of the People’s
Republic of China shall be responsible for other expenses,
including those for transport and accommodation in China as
well as payments to lecturers, unless otherwise agreed upon
by the Parties. Expenses related to the workshops, training
courses and other projects organized by ASEAN Member
States according to the Plan of Action shall be determined by
the Parties on the basis of consensus.
Done on 12 October 2011 in Bali, Indonesia, in two original copies,
both in the English language.