CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT OF THE 15TH ASEAN-CHINA SUMMIT
PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA, 19 NOVEMBER 2012

1. The 15th ASEAN-China Summit chaired by Samdech Akka Moha Sena
Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, was
held on 19 November 2012, in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. The Heads of
State/Government of the Member States of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) had a substantive meeting with H.E. Wen Jiabao,
Premier of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
2. We expressed our deepest sympathy and condolences to the people and the
Royal Government of Cambodia and especially to His Majesty Preah Bat
Samdech Preah BOROMNEATH NORODOM SIHAMONI, King of Cambodia
and Her Majesty Queen Mother NORODOM MONINEATH SIHANOUK, for
the passing away of His Majesty Preah Bat Samdech Preah NORODOM
SIHANOUK, the late King-Father of Cambodia, on 15th October 2012. We
shared our sadness of this great loss with the people of Cambodia during
this mourning period. Cambodia expressed gratitude to the respective
ASEAN Leaders and Premier of China for their share of condolences to His
Majesty Preah Bat Samdech Preah NORODOM SIHAMONI, King of
Cambodia, Her Majesty Queen Mother, the Royal Government of Cambodia
and the people of Cambodia.
3. The ASEAN Leaders expressed sincere appreciation to H.E. Wen Jiabao for
his active contribution to expanding and strengthening ASEAN-China
Strategic Partnership. This has been his significant and invaluable personal
contribution for the purpose of promoting peace, security, and stability in the
region and for building close ties, friendship and cooperation between
countries and peoples of ASEAN and China. The ASEAN Leaders also
ASEAN: One Community, One Destiny.
3f
Final
2
expressed optimism that ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership will continue to
be further enhanced and deepened.
4. We acknowledged that ASEAN and China are dynamic and important
strategic dialogue partners, significantly contributing to the development and
the promotion of peace, stability and prosperity in the region. In this context,
we reaffirmed our strong commitment to deepen our strategic partnership as
well as enhance and expand our cooperation in all sectors, particularly in the
eleven priority areas, namely agriculture, information and communication
technology, human resource development, mutual investment, Mekong
development, transportation, energy, culture, tourism, public health and
environment.
5. ASEAN Leaders welcomed the establishment of China’s Mission to ASEAN
based in Jakarta and the appointment of the first resident Ambassador of
China to ASEAN this year which is important for further promoting mutual
communication and coordination as well as for advancing the ASEAN-China
Strategic Partnership to a new height.
6. We noted with pleasure the significant progress made in the implementation
of the Plan of Action for the period of 2011-2015 to implement the Joint
Declaration on the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership. We also reaffirmed
our firm commitments and exerted efforts to ensure the full and effective
implementation of various concrete projects and activities under the Plan of
Action.
7. We underscored the significant importance of DOC as a historic document
which reflects the collective commitment of ASEAN Member States and
China to promote peace, stability, mutual trust and confidence in the South
China Sea.
8. We reaffirmed our commitment to continue to effectively implement the DOC
in full, to enhance maritime security, and to encourage the parties
concerned to resolve territorial and jurisdictional disputes by peaceful
means, in accordance with the universally recognized international law,
including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
9. We emphasized the importance of exercising self-restraint by all parties
concerned in the conduct of activities which may complicate or escalate
disputes and affect peace and stability in the region, and to resolve their
differences peacefully.f
Final
3
10. We agreed to use the existing dialogue mechanisms between and among
the ASEAN Member States and China at all levels to promote mutual trust
and confidence. We agreed to enhance favorable conditions for a peaceful
and durable solution of differences and disputes among the countries
concerned.
11. We reaffirmed that ASEAN Connectivity is the first priority and fundamental
in the development of an enhanced connectivity between ASEAN and the
wider region, including ASEAN with China. ASEAN Leaders appreciated
China’s support for the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity, in particular the
additional US$10 billion credit, including US$4 billion preferential loans, to
finance the infrastructure and related projects. We welcomed the convening
of the First Meeting between ASEAN Connectivity Coordinating Committee
(ACCC) and the Chinese Working Committee on Connectivity at the ASEAN
Secretariat on 7 November 2012. We tasked the ACCC and the Chinese
Working Committee on Connectivity to identify key areas for connectivity
cooperation and work out a list of prioritised projects, and coordinate technical
and financial resource mobilization from both ASEAN and China to better
support financing for connectivity cooperation projects. ASEAN Leaders also
looked forward to China’s continuing support for the implementation of the
Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) Work Plan II, which is important for the
ASEAN community-building process.
12. We welcomed China’s proposal to set up of the China-ASEAN Maritime
Cooperation Fund, with RMB3 billion, to provide financial support to ASEAN-
China cooperation in the areas of maritime scientific research, connectivity
and navigation safety, particularly to implement agreed cooperative activities
and projects within the DOC framework.
13. The Leader of China welcomed the adoption of the Declaration on Drug-Free
ASEAN 2015 by the ASEAN Leaders at the 20th ASEAN Summit in Phnom
Penh, in April 2012. The ASEAN Leaders looked forward to enhance
cooperation with China to address the trafficking of illegal drug and narcotics.
14. We welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration at the
21st ASEAN Summit in Phnom Penh on 18 November 2012 and emphasized
our continuing support to realize an ASEAN Community based upon the
adherence to the rule of law, democracy, promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
15. We also noted that in spite of the global economic difficulties, ASEAN-China
economic relations continue to show encouraging developments. Chinaf
Final
4
continued to maintain its position as ASEAN’s largest trading partner since
2009, while ASEAN has now become China’s third largest trading partner,
stepping from fourth place in 2010. ASEAN statistics showed that our
bilateral trade raised by 20.9% from US$232 billion in 2010 to US$280.4
billion in 2011 and the foreign direct investment flow from China to ASEAN
also had doubled from US$2.7 billion in 2010 to US$5.9 billion in 2011.
16. We reiterated our shared commitment to work closely to further deepen and
expand our economic ties, including the timely implementation of
agreements under the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area framework. Through
this endeavor, we are strongly confident that our common goals to achieve
our two-way trade volume of US$500 billion by 2015 will be realized in a
balanced, sustained and mutually beneficial manner.
17. We welcomed the signing of two protocols: (1) the Third Protocol to Amend
the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
between ASEAN and China, to provide the ASEAN-China Free Trade
Agreement (ACFTA) Joint Committee (JC) a legal standing; and (2) the
Protocol to Incorporate Technical Barriers to Trade and Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures into the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between
ASEAN and China, which will further facilitate, strengthen and promote our
trade and economic cooperation and effectively eliminate technical barriers
for trade between ASEAN and China.
18. We welcomed Hong Kong’s desire to join the ASEAN-China Free Trade
Area, and took note of the findings of the study on the implications of Hong
Kong’s Accession conducted by ASEAN. We tasked our ministers to
expedite the domestic consultations and assessment of each individual
member country. We need to ensure that the conclusion of Hong Kong
would provide mutual benefits to all parties.
19. We recalled the official launch of the ASEAN-China Centre last year and
welcomed the appointment of the first Secretary-General of this Centre as
well as the successful convening of the First Meeting of the Joint Council of
ASEAN-China Centre in Beijing, in May 2012. We also welcomed the
commitments of Indonesia and Thailand to send their officials to serve in the
position of Director of Education, Culture and Tourism Division, and Director
of Information and Public Relations Unit at the ASEAN-China Centre in
Beijing in the first semester of 2013, respectively. We expressed our strong
confidence that the full operation of the centre would deeply advance ourf
Final
5
mutual trade and investment, tourism, cultural exchanges and people-to-
people contacts.
20. We congratulated the successful convening of the 9th China-ASEAN EXPO
(CAEXPO), in Nanning, on 21-25 September 2012, which served as an
international significant event and platform for economic and trade
exchanges to further help promote the ASEAN-China FTA and providing
opportunities for cooperation and development for both sides. We also noted
with pleasure the fruitful outcome of the Forum on ASEAN-China Free Trade
Area held in Nanning, China on 21 September 2012, which is conducive to
the future implementation of ASEAN-China FTA.
21. We noted with satisfaction the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) between the Governments of the Member States of the Association
of the Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Government of the
People’s Republic of China on Health Cooperation by Ministers of Health of
ASEAN and China in Phuket, Thailand, on 6th July 2012, to promote ASEAN-
China health cooperation. In this regard, we tasked our ministers and senior
officials to fully implement this MOU.
22. We commended China’s designation this year as the China-ASEAN Year of
Cooperation in Science and Technology and the convening of the First
ASEAN-China Science and Technology Ministers’ Meeting on 21 September
2012, at the 9th CAEXPO, particularly the launching of the ASEAN-China
Science and Technology Partnership Program at that meeting. We tasked
our relevant ministers to speed up their deliberations towards the early
signing of the ASEAN-China Agreement on Science and Technology
Cooperation.
23. We noted with appreciation the establishment of ten ASEAN-China Education
and Training Centers in six provinces of China, which further contribute to
the ASEAN Community building efforts and promote the solidarity,
development and cooperation in the East Asia Region as well as to assist
ASEAN’s efforts to promote socio-economic and human resources
development.
24. ASEAN Leaders welcomed new initiatives proposed by China at this Summit
to strengthen ASEAN-China cooperation in the political, economic and trade,
connectivity, science and technology, cultural and people-to-people
dimensions, including joint celebration of the 10th anniversary of ASEAN-
China Strategic Partnership, establishing ASEAN-China Maritime Cooperation
Partnership, continued implementation of the ASEAN-China Science andf
Final
6
Technology Partnership Program, mapping out an overall plan for ASEAN-
China connectivity, convening a ASEAN-China Forum on Tourism
Cooperation, launching ASEAN-China Plan of Private Sectors Cooperation,
launching ASEAN-China Think-Tank Network. ASEAN Leaders highly
appreciated China’s decision to provide an additional US$ 5 million to the
ASEAN-China Cooperation Fund to support wide-ranging cooperation
between China and ASEAN Member States.
25. We welcomed Thailand as the Country Coordinator for ASEAN-China
Dialogue Relations from July 2012 to July 2015. We looked forward to
enhancing the multi-faceted cooperation and advancing the ASEAN-China
strategic partnership.
----000----