2013 JOINT STATEMENT OF THE 16TH ASEAN-CHINA SUMMIT ON COMMEMORATION OF THE 10TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE 
ASEAN-CHINA STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP
Adopted in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam on 9 October 2013

WE, the Heads of State/Government of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People’s Republic of China gathered on 9 October 2013 in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam, at the 16th ASEAN-China Summit, to commemorate the 
10th Anniversary of the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership;
RECALLING our commitment under the Joint Declaration of the Heads of State/Government of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the People's Republic of China on Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity, signed on 8 October 2003 in Bali, Indonesia, to foster friendly relations, mutually beneficial cooperation and good neighbourliness between ASEAN and China;
RECOGNISING that for the past ten years, the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership has significantly boosted economic and social development of both sides as well as contributed significantly to peace, stability and prosperity of the region;
WELCOMING the celebration of the 10th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership, and appreciating the series of commemorative activities held by the two sides to jointly celebrate the auspicious occasion in a meaningful way, which demonstrated the vigorous, dynamic and mutually beneficial relations between ASEAN and China, including, among others, the Special ASEAN-China Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in Beijing and the High-Level Forum on 10th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership in Bangkok in August, and the ASEAN Economic Ministers’ Roadshow to China in October 2013;
REAFFIRMING the importance for China to continue supporting ASEAN Community building efforts, ASEAN Connectivity, as well as ASEAN’s unity and centrality in the evolving regional architecture;
APPRECIATING China as the first among ASEAN's Dialogue Partners to accede to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), establish a Strategic Partnership and complete a Free Trade Agreement with ASEAN;
REAFFIRMING that the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the ASEAN Charter, the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), the Bali Declaration on ASEAN Community in a Global Community of Nations (Bali Concord III), the Declaration of the East Asia Summit on the Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations (the Bali Principles), the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and other universally recognized principles of international law, will continue to guide ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations and friendly cooperation;
REAFFIRMING further that the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) is a milestone document which embodies the collective commitment of ASEAN Member States and China to promote peace, stability and mutual trust, as well as peaceful settlement of disputes in the 
South China Sea in accordance with the universally recognized principles of international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982 UNCLOS);

WELCOMING the progress in the implementation of the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), the issuance of the ASEAN-China Joint Statement on the 10th Anniversary of the Declaration of Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) in 2012, the adoption of the Guidelines to implement the DOC in 2011, and the commencement of official consultations on a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC);
HEREBY agree with the followings:
1.	We are committed to advancing, enhancing and deepening the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for mutual benefit, and will continue to fully and effectively implement the 
2011-2015 Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity and work for greater achievements of ASEAN-China relationship in the next 10 years.

2.	China reaffirms that ASEAN that is united, prosperous and dynamic is in China's strategic interests. China views ASEAN as a priority in its relations with neighboring countries and is committed to consolidating and developing a strategic partnership with ASEAN and resolving differences with relevant ASEAN countries through peaceful means and friendly consultations.

3.	ASEAN reaffirms that China's development is an important opportunity for this region. ASEAN supports China’s peaceful development. The ASEAN countries reaffirm their adherence to 
one-China policy.

POLITICAL AND SECURITY COOPERATION
4.	We are committed to promoting strategic relations and maintaining close high-level exchanges and contacts, and in this respect, both sides agree to explore ways to continue to deepen political mutual trust and confidence through good neighbourliness, friendship and cooperation. 
ASEAN countries note with appreciation China’s proposed treaty on good-neighbourliness and friendly cooperation.

5.	We reaffirm our mutual respect for each other’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity in accordance with international law, and the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other states. We remain committed to resolving disputes peacefully in accordance with international law without resorting to the threat or use of force.
 
6.	We agree to deepen and support defence exchanges and security cooperation, strengthen communication and coordination, which will enhance ASEAN-China engagement, contribute towards mutual understanding, and promote peace, stability and prosperity of the region. 
ASEAN notes China's proposal to hold an Informal ASEAN-China Defence Ministers' Meeting in China at a convenient time in the future.

7.	China firmly and fully supports ASEAN's efforts to realize the Southeast Asian 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ) and stands ready to sign the SEANWFZ Protocol at an early date.
 
8.	China is ready to provide development assistance to ASEAN and its relevant institutions to support its community building efforts. We agree to continue to strengthen cooperation in disaster prevention and relief. China is ready to expand exchanges and cooperation with the 
ASEAN Coordinating Center for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management.

9.	We emphasize the importance of maintaining peace and stability, respecting maritime security and upholding freedom of navigation, ensuring peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS and enhancing maritime cooperation, as well as adhering to the principles stated in the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) and the Joint Statement on the 10th Anniversary of the DOC. We reiterate our commitment and strong determination to fully and effectively implement the DOC in all its aspects. In this regard, we will work towards the conclusion of a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) on the basis of consensus.

10.	In this connection, we welcome the positive outcomes of the 6th Senior Officials' Meeting and the 9th Joint Working Group Meeting on the Implementation of the DOC on 14-15 September 2013 in Suzhou, China, including the progress made on strengthening practical maritime cooperation and the official consultations on a COC. We look forward to the development of hotline communications in order to respond expeditiously to situations at sea, including search and rescue of persons and vessels in distress. We agree to promote trust, build confidence, and encourage concerned parties to prevent incidents at sea if they occur. We will continue to strengthen the implementation of the DOC and maintain the momentum of the regular official consultations and work towards the adoption of the COC as provided for by the DOC, so as to enhance confidence, mutual trust and maintain peace, stability and prosperity in the region, among others.

ECONOMIC COOPERATION
11.	We reaffirm our opposition to trade protectionism and will actively uphold this position at multilateral and regional trade negotiations. We highly appreciate the positive role that the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) has played in promoting economic and trade relations, and welcome the initiative for the upgrading of the ACFTA by, among others, improving market conditions and trade balance between both sides as well as expanding the scope and coverage of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China. We task our officials to commence discussions on the upgrading of the ACFTA as early as possible.

12.	We will endeavor to achieve the goal of two-way trade of USD 500 billion by 2015 and 
USD 1 trillion by 2020, and two-way investment of USD 150 billion in the next eight years.

13.	We will work together to actively push forward the negotiations of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) to ensure conclusion of the negotiations in accordance with the RCEP work programme, endorsed by the first RCEP Ministers’ Meeting in August 2013, in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam, contributing to vigorously promote economic integration of East Asia.

14.	We support the work of the ASEAN-China Centre in facilitating trade, investment and tourism between ASEAN and China, to achieve two-way trade and investment goals by 2020.

15.	We reiterate the significance of the ASEAN Economic Ministers’ Roadshow to China on 
23-25 October 2013, which would boost the confidence of the Chinese central and local government officials and business people, in the opportunities arising from the various initiatives not only under the robust ASEAN-China economic relations but also from ASEAN’s economic integration.

16.	We believe that the China-ASEAN EXPO is an important platform for economic and trade exchange and cooperation, and will continue our support and active participation in the 
China-ASEAN EXPO.

17.	We will join hands in promoting sustainable development and narrowing ASEAN’s development gap, especially through effective implementation of the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) Work Plan II (2009-2015) and sub-regional cooperation such as the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) Economic Cooperation, the ASEAN Mekong Basin Development Cooperation (AMBDC), and the Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA). We agree to conduct the further maintenance and improvement of Lancang-Mekong River navigation channel. We encourage local governments to give full play to their advantages and actively participate in ASEAN-China cooperation. China is ready to discuss with ASEAN countries on establishing cross-border economic cooperation zones in border areas.

18.	We will continue joint efforts to strengthen financial cooperation, deepen cooperation on the "Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization”, and continue to improve the early-warning and liquidity support facilities to prevent regional financial risks. The two sides will give better play to the role of the China-ASEAN Inter-Bank Association.

19.	ASEAN appreciates China's continued support to the implementation of the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC) and better connectivity by road, rail, air and water between ASEAN countries and China through active engagements of the Chinese Working Committee of the 
China-ASEAN Connectivity Cooperation Committee with the ASEAN Connectivity Coordinating Committee. We welcome the convening of the Special ASEAN-China Transport Ministers' Meeting in Nanning, China on 2 September 2013. To ease the financing bottleneck for infrastructure projects, we agree to work towards the set-up of a financing platform for infrastructure development in Asia. In this regard, ASEAN appreciates China's proposal on an Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank to give priority support to ASEAN connectivity projects. We will look for early and substantive progress in the construction of the Pan-Asia Railway.

20.	We will strengthen civil aviation cooperation under the ASEAN-China Air Transport Agreement (AC-ATA) which was signed at the 9th ASEAN-China Transport Ministers’ Meeting in November 2010 to deepen connectivity between China and ASEAN countries in support of the establishment of the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area.

21.	We support the work towards developing the ASEAN-China Maritime Cooperation Partnership, including the utilization of the ASEAN-China Maritime Cooperation Fund and strengthening cooperation in ports connectivity, fishery, marine science and technology, environment protection, safety of navigation, search and rescue, oceanic culture, etc. We agree to promote dialogue and exchanges between maritime law-enforcement agencies of ASEAN countries and China, and consider the possible set-up of relevant mechanisms.

22.	We will enhance cooperation in the fields of environment, agriculture, information and communication technology (ICT), human resource development (HRD) mutual investment, Mekong basin development, tourism, transportation and energy. We will formulate a framework for ASEAN-China cooperation in environmental technology and industry and set up an ASEAN-China demonstration base for exchange and cooperation on environmental technology and industry.

23.	We will work together to implement the ASEAN-China Science and Technology Partnership Programme and strengthen cooperation in technology transfer, capacity building and innovation, including SMEs. We are open to exploring the establishment of an ASEAN-China Innovation Center and an ASEAN-China Science, Technology and Innovation Policy Research Center and formulate an action plan for ASEAN-China cooperation on new and renewable energy.


SOCIO-CULTURAL COOPERATION
24.	We will work closely to promote socio-cultural exchange and cooperation, particularly in the fields of youth, culture, media, education, tourism, social development, public health, disaster management, and support the building of the Network of ASEAN-China Think-tanks.

25.	We agree to designate the year 2014 as the “ASEAN-China Cultural Exchange Year.” 
ASEAN appreciates China's decision to provide 15,000 government scholarships to young students from ASEAN Member States in the next three to five years starting from 2014.

26.	We are committed to supporting the work of the ASEAN-China Centre as platform for better understanding, communication and cooperation through cultural exchanges and education.

27.	We welcome the use of the ASEAN-China Cooperation Fund, the ASEAN-China Investment Cooperation Fund and the ASEAN-China Public Health Cooperation Fund and agree to make good use of the Special Fund for Asian Regional Cooperation set up by the Chinese government, in order to support cooperation and exchanges between the two sides in various fields.

REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
28.	We agree to enhance region economic cooperation through the RCEP, and welcome proposals to cooperate on a possible Asian financial stability system, an Asian investment and financing cooperation system, and an Asian credit system.

29.	China reaffirms its commitment to working closely with ASEAN through the various ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ASEAN Plus Three, East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus), in supporting the long-term goal of building an East Asia community. China reaffirms its continued support for ASEAN’s centrality in the evolving regional architecture.

30.	Recognising the global dimension of the prevailing economic situation, we encourage all countries to adopt responsible economic policies and sustain the momentum of global economic recovery.

31.	We will enhance communication and cooperation in international and regional affairs, particularly on issues of common interest. China will continue to support ASEAN in playing a bigger role in the United Nations, the G20, and the APEC.
