Chairman’s Statement of the 16th ASEAN-China Summit
Bandar Seri Begawan,
Brunei Darussalam, 9 October 2013

1. The 16th ASEAN-China Summit chaired by His
Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah, the Sultan and
Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam, was held
on 9 October 2013 in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei
Darussalam. The Summit was attended by all Heads
of State/Government of the Member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
H.E. Li Keqiang, Premier of the State Council of the
People’s Republic of China.
2. The ASEAN Leaders welcomed H.E. Li Keqiang to the
Meeting, who attended the ASEAN-China Summit for
the first time since taking up the post of Premier of
the State Council of the People’s Republic of China.
3. We acknowledged that China continues to be one of
ASEAN’s most active dialogue partners as it contributes
to the development and the promotion of peace,
stability and prosperity in the region. In this context,
the ASEAN Leaders appreciated China’s continued
support for ASEAN Centrality in the evolving regional
architecture through ASEAN-led processes, including
the ASEAN Plus Three (APT), the East Asia Summit
(EAS), the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus
(ADMM-Plus) and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) in
the ASEAN Community building process towards the
long-term goal of building an East Asia community.
4. The ASEAN Leaders also encouraged China to
support the implementation of the Roadmap for
an ASEAN Community (2009-2015) as well as the
Bali Declaration on ASEAN Community in a Global
Community of Nations (Bali Concord III). As ASEAN
is embarking towards an ASEAN Community, we
acknowledged the need to deepen and enhance
ASEAN’s dialogue partnership and external relations,
with the aim of having an equal, mutually beneficial
and meaningful partnership. We noted ASEAN’s
initiative to develop an ASEAN Community Post2015 Vision and welcomed the Bandar Seri Begawan
Declaration on the ASEAN Community’s Post-2015
Vision.
5. We reaffirmed our strong commitment in further
strengthening the ASEAN-China Strategic
Partnership particularly in the eleven priority areas,
namely agriculture, information and communication
technology, human resource development,
investment, Mekong Basin Development,
transportation, energy, culture, tourism, public health
and environment.
6. We welcomed the progress made in the
implementation of the Plan of Action for the period of
2011-2015 to implement the Joint Declaration on the
ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace and
Prosperity. In this regard, we noted the third progress
report for the implementation of the 2011-2015 Plan
of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration of the
ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace and
Prosperity.
7. We recognised that this year marks the 10th Anniversary
of the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership and we
welcomed its various commemorative activities held
in ASEAN Member States and China, including the
High Level Forum on the 10th Anniversary of the
ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership on 2 August
2013 in Bangkok, the Special ASEAN-China Foreign
Ministers’ Meeting on 29 August 2013 in Beijing
and the Workshop on the 10th Anniversary of the
ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership: Achievements,
Challenges, Opportunities and Future Direction
on 17-18 September 2013 in Siem Reap. We
underscored the importance of the discussions of
the said meetings, especially in reviewing the past
achievements and charting the future direction of the
ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership.
8. We agreed to adopt the Joint Statement of the 16th
ASEAN-China Summit on Commemoration of the
10th Anniversary of the ASEAN-China Strategic
Partnership which expresses ASEAN and China’s
collective commitment in further strengthening the
ASEAN-China relationship.
9. We recalled the successful outcomes of the 19th
ASEAN-China Senior Officials’ Consultation held
on 2 April 2013 in Beijing where it was agreed that
ASEAN and China could deepen existing cooperation
in trade and investment facilitation, connectivity, and
maritime cooperation, while expanding the scope of cooperation to encompass other areas such as
food and energy security, science and technology,
transportation, and education.
10. We are committed to promoting strategic relations
and maintaining close high-level exchanges and
contacts, and continuing to deepen political mutual
trust and confidence. We noted with appreciation
China’s proposed treaty on good-neighbourliness
and friendly cooperation. We acknowledged
Indonesia’s idea in having a treaty of friendship and
cooperation that includes a wider Indo-Pacific region,
beyond ASEAN and China.
11. We agreed to step up dialogue and cooperation
among our defence establishments, and looked
forward to holding an informal ASEAN-China defence
ministers meeting in China at a convenient time in
the future. We appreciated China’s contributions in
ensuring the success of the ADMM-Plus Humanitarian
Assistance and Disaster Relief and Military Medicine
Exercise (ADMM-Plus HADR and MM Ex) that was
held in Brunei Darussalam in June 2013 especially
in enhancing confidence building, regional capacity,
interoperability and coordination in addressing nontraditional security challenges, in particular disaster
management. In other areas of non-traditional
security, we also looked forward to enhancing
cooperation with China under the Plan of Action
to Implement the Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) on Cooperation in the Field of NonTraditional Security Issues, particularly in addressing
transnational crime, especially the trafficking of illegal
drugs and narcotics.
12. We welcomed the adoption of the Terms of Reference
of the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Centre (ARMAC)
by ASEAN Leaders, which would serve as a centre of
excellence to encourage efforts to address explosive
remnants of war for interested ASEAN Member
States, and shall facilitate cooperation with relevant
institutions, including the United Nations Mine Action
Service and the Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining.
13. We noted with satisfaction the substantive work
undertaken by China’s Mission to ASEAN in Jakarta
and the Committee of Permanent Representatives
to ASEAN (CPR), as well as the ASEAN Secretariat,
in further strengthening the ASEAN-China Strategic
Partnership.
14. We welcomed China’s proposal to establish an
ASEAN-China Port Cities Cooperation Network
to promote exchanges and cooperation in port
development, port-related industries, international
trade, culture and tourism. The ASEAN Leaders
appreciated China’s comprehensive plan for
utilising the ASEAN-China Maritime Cooperation
Fund to provide financial support to ASEAN-China
cooperation in the areas of maritime connectivity,
marine science and technology as well as maritime
scientific research, search and rescue, disaster
management, and navigation safety.
15. We reaffirmed the importance of the maintenance
of peace, stability and maritime security in the
region. We further stressed the importance of the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South
China Sea (DOC), the Joint Statement of the 15th
ASEAN-China Summit on the 10th Anniversary of
the DOC in 2012 and the adoption of the Guidelines
for the Implementation of the DOC in 2011. In this
regard, we reaffirmed our commitment to continue
to fully and effectively implement the DOC, to
build trust and confidence in order to enhance
maritime security, and encourage the concerned
parties to resolve their disputes by peaceful means,
in accordance with the universally recognised
principles of international law, including the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), without resorting to the threat or use of
force, while exercising self-restraint in the conduct of
activities that would complicate or escalate disputes
and affect peace and stability.
16. We welcomed the positive outcomes achieved in the
first official consultations on the Code of Conduct in
the South China Sea (COC) and the implementation of
the DOC at the successful convening of the 6th Senior
Officials’ Meeting (SOM) on the Implementation of the
DOC and the 9th Joint Working Group (JWG) on the
Implementation of the DOC on 14-15 September 2013
in Suzhou, China. We will continue to maintain the
momentum of the regular official consultations and
work towards the adoption of the COC as provided
for by the DOC. We welcomed with appreciation the
idea of developing hotlines of communications in order to respond expeditiously to incidents at sea,
including search and rescue.
17. We noted that China continues to be ASEAN’s largest
trading partner since 2009, while ASEAN continues to
be China’s third largest trading partner since 2010.
We also noted that, based on ASEAN statistics, the
two-way trade volume has expanded at an annual
growth rate of 21.6% from 2009. We expressed
confidence in our goal to achieve bilateral trade of
US$500 billion by 2015.
18. We reaffirmed our opposition to trade protectionism.
We welcomed the progress achieved in implementing
the ASEAN-China Free Trade Agreement (ACFTA). In
view of the changing circumstances after the signing
of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China
in 2002, we believed it is necessary to explore ways
on how the ACFTA could be further improved so as
to better respond to the evolving global economic
architecture. In this regard, we welcomed the
initiative for an upgraded ACFTA by, among others,
improving overall market access conditions and trade
balance between both sides as well as expanding the
scope and coverage of the Framework Agreement
on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between
ASEAN and China and therefore, tasked our officials
to commence discussions within this year with an aim
to conclude the process as early as possible.
19. We noted the progress of negotiations on the
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
(RCEP) which would build upon the ASEAN Plus
One Free Trade Agreements, including the ACFTA.
We acknowledged that the RCEP recognises
ASEAN Centrality in the emerging regional economic
architecture and contribute to economic integration,
equitable economic development, and strengthening
economic cooperation among participating countries.
In this regard, we agreed to actively push forward the
negotiations of the RCEP for the greater economic
integration of East Asia.
20. We welcomed the convening of the first ASEAN
Economic Ministers (AEM) Roadshow to China on
23-25 October 2013 as a landmark in ASEAN-China
trade relations. We looked forward to showcasing
ASEAN as a single investment destination featuring
the benefits and advantages of the ASEAN Trade in
Goods Agreement (ATIGA), ASEAN Comprehensive
Investment Agreement (ACIA) and ASEAN Framework
Agreement on Services (AFAS), as well as fruitful
dialogue between private sectors and investors from
ASEAN and China.
21. We welcomed the 10th China-ASEAN Expo (CAEXPO)
that was held on 3-6 September 2013 in Nanning,
China under the theme of “Regional Cooperation
and Development: New Opportunities, New Impetus,
New Stages.” We commended the success of the
CAEXPO in boosting trade and investment relations
between ASEAN and China.
22. We congratulated Indonesia for its able Chairmanship
of APEC in 2013. We welcomed China’s Chairmanship
of APEC in 2014 and hoped that the synergy between
ASEAN and APEC would be further strengthened. We
also underlined the importance of the continuation
of connectivity, infrastructure development and
investment agenda in APEC in 2014 and other issues
of common concern.
23. The ASEAN leaders appreciated China’s strong
support for the implementation of the Master Plan
on ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC). We welcomed the
Special ASEAN-China Transport Ministers’ Meeting
on Connectivity on 2 September 2013 in Nanning
and the 2nd Meeting between the ASEAN Connectivity
Coordinating Committee (ACCC) and the Chinese
Working Committee on China-ASEAN Connectivity
Coordinating Committee (CWC-CACCC) on 28
August 2013 in Bandar Seri Begawan, and would
work together to determine and implement key
projects to support ASEAN Connectivity.
24. We prioritised connectivity as an important area
of cooperation under the ASEAN-China Strategic
Partnership. In this regard, we agreed to accelerate
regional infrastructure connectivity efforts as well
as welcomed China’s initiative to set up an Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank to provide financial
support to regional infrastructure projects, with
priority on ASEAN connectivity.
25. We welcomed the work of the ASEAN-China Centre
in Beijing in facilitating trade, investment, tourism,
and cultural exchanges between ASEAN and China. 
We noted the work of the Joint Council of the ASEANChina Centre in ensuring the effective work of the
ASEAN-China Centre to promote economic and
cultural cooperation.
26. We agreed to designate the year 2014 as the ASEANChina Cultural Exchange Year. We noted the great
progress that ASEAN and China have achieved in
tourism and that China has become the second
biggest source of tourists for ASEAN countries,
where in 2012, ASEAN received almost 8.76 million
tourists from China while China received nearly 5.9
million tourists from ASEAN. In this regard, we looked
forward to China’s initiative to hold a China-ASEAN
Tourism Forum in China and the ongoing efforts to
increase further two-way tourists visits between
ASEAN and China.
27. We noted the progress made in ASEAN and China
collaboration on health in the areas of communicable
diseases, emerging infectious diseases, and
traditional and complementary alternative medicine.
We looked forward to further strengthening the joint
collaboration in health development as agreed in the
signed ASEAN-China MOU on Health Cooperation.
28. We recognised that the launching of the ASEAN-China
Science and Technology Partnership Programme
(STEP) in 2012 was an important milestone in ASEANChina Science and Technology Cooperation. We
recognised that the launching of the ASEAN-China
Science and Technology Partnership Programme
(STEP) in 2012 was an important milestone in
ASEAN-China Science and Technology Cooperation.
We noted with satisfaction that under STEP, 4 major
cooperation programs including 10 ASEAN-China
joint laboratories, ASEAN-China Remote Sensing
Satellite Data Sharing and Service Platform, ASEANChina Technology Transfer Center, and Talented
Young Scientist Visiting China have yielded concrete
progress. We looked forward to the finalisation of the
MOU on ASEAN-China Cooperation on Science and
Technology. We looked forward to the finalisation of
the MOU on ASEAN-China Cooperation on Science
and Technology.
29. We welcomed the establishment of the Network of
ASEAN-China Think Tanks (NACT) and expressed
our hope that this would provide a good platform for
the increase of academic exchanges between ASEAN
and China.
30. We congratulated Thailand for a successful first
year as the Country Coordinator for ASEAN-China
Dialogue Relations. We looked forward to further
enhancing the ASEAN-China relationship.