Joint Press Statement of the 4th ASEAN-China Ministerial Meeting on Quality Supervision,
Inspection and Quarantine
(SPS Cooperation)
Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar
25 September 2014The ASEAN Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry1.and the Minister of the General Administration of
Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine
(AQSIQ) of the People’s Republic of China held
their Fourth Meeting on Quality Supervision,
Inspection and Quarantine (SPS Cooperation) in
Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar on 25 September 2014,
under the co-chairmanship of H.E. U Myint Hlaing,
Union Minister, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation,
Myanmar and H.E. Dr. Zhi Shuping, Minister of
AQSIQ, PR China. The Ministers welcomed the significant progress2.and expressed their support and commitment on the implementation of the Plan of Action for the period
of 2011-2015 to implement the Joint Declaration on
the ASEAN China Strategic Partnership for Peace
and Prosperity in which agriculture is becoming
one of the priority areas.
The Ministers noted the progress of the ASEAN3.China Cooperation on SPS, implemented under
the Plan of Action for 2013-2014. Taking into
consideration the fast growth of ASEAN China’s
trade on food, the need to ensure food safety
becomes the challenges. The Ministers reiterated
the commitment to strengthen SPS cooperation between ASEAN and China as it will significantly contribute to the enhancement of trade opportunity
of food and agricultural products.
The Ministers endorsed the new Plan of Action for4.2015 – 2016, covering cooperation in the areas of i) establishment of information notification and communication system; ii) exchange of visits of
relevant personnel of the Parties; iii) organize
training, seminar, conference and similar activities
for narrowing the development gap within ASEAN
and China; iv) collaborative research in the
areas of mutual interest; and v) establishment of
mechanism for consultation.
The Ministers noted the operationalisation of5.China - ASEAN SPS Cooperation Information
Website (http://www.chinaaseansps.com) and
the China ASEAN Inspection and Quarantine
Information Website (http://caexpo.gxciq.gov.cn)
to facilitate exchange of information, enhance
SPS communication, and support implementation
of the SPS MOU Cooperation as well as support
the implementation of ASEAN China Free Trade
Area (ACFTA).The Ministers reaffirmed their continue support in6.advancing cooperation under the Memorandum
of Understanding between ASEAN and the
People’s Republic of China on Strengthening SPS
Cooperation (MoU on SPS) through the signing
of new MOU on 25 September 2014. The MoU
on SPS is envisaged to contribute to successful
implementation of the ACFTA.
The Ministers agreed to have the Fifth Meeting7.in China on 2016. The Ministers expressed their
sincere appreciation to the Government of the
Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the warm
hospitality and excellent arrangements made for
the Meeting.
The Meeting was attended by:
i. H.E. Pehin Dato Yahya, Minister of Industry and
Primary Resources, Brunei Darussalam; ii. H.E. Ouk
Rabun PhD, Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries, Cambodia; iii. H.E. Dr. Suswono, Minister
of Agriculture, Indonesia; iv. H.E. Dr. Ty Phommasack,
Vice Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, Lao PDR;
v. H.E. Dato’ Sri Ismail Sabri bin Yaakob, Minister
of Agriculture and Agro-Based Industry, Malaysia;
vi. H.E. U Myint Hlaing, Union Minister for Ministry
of Agriculture and Irrigation, The Republic of the
Union of Myanmar; vii. H.E. Segfredo R. Serrano,
Undersecretary of the Department of Agriculture,
Philippines; viii. H.E. Dr. Mohamad Maliki bin Osman,
Minister of State for National Development and
Defence, Singapore; ix. H.E. Petipong Pungbun Na
Ayudhya, Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives,
Thailand; x. H.E. Dr. Le Quoc Doanh, Vice Minister
of Agriculture and Rural Development, Viet Nam; xi.
H.E. Zhi Shuping, Minister of General Administration
of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine
(AQSIQ), People’s Republic of China; xii. H.E. Dr. AKP
Mochtan, Deputy Secretary General, Community and
Corporate Affairs, ASEAN Secretariat.