THE THIRTEENTH AEM-­‐MOFCOM CONSULTATIONS
26 August 2014, Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar
JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT
1. The Economic Ministers from the ten ASEAN Member States and the Minister of
Commerce of the People’s Republic of China met on 26 August 2014 for the Thirteenth
AEM-­‐MOFCOM Consultations. The Consultations were co-­‐chaired by H.E. Dr. Kan Zaw,
Union Minister for National Planning and Economic Development, Myanmar and H.E. Gao
Hucheng, Minister of Commerce, China.
2. The Ministers noted the strong economic relationship between ASEAN and China,
and were pleased that China maintained its position as ASEAN’s largest trading partner. By
the end of 2013, ASEAN total trade with China reached US$ 350.5 billion, accounting for14%
of ASEAN’s total trade, and representing an increase of 9.7% year on year. In 2013, ASEAN
received US$8.6 billion foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows from China, a significant
60.8% increase year-­‐on-­‐year and accounting for 7.1% of total inflows to ASEAN. The
Ministers reaffirmed ASEAN’s and China’s commitment to achieving the joint target of
US$500 billion trade by end of 2015, as endorsed by Leaders.
ASEAN-­‐China Free Trade Area
3. The Ministers noted the progress made in implementing the ASEAN-­‐China Free
Trade Area (ACFTA), and were pleased that ASEAN and China agreed to upgrade the ACFTA
to ensure that the ACFTA remained dynamic and commercially relevant. The Ministers
noted that the agreement to the ACFTA upgrade was a testament to the strong positive
relationship between ASEAN and China, and that it would also serve to deepen the
economic interests of both sides in a mutually beneficial manner. The Ministers endorsed
the Elements Paper for the ACFTA upgrade, which laid out the key areas on which the
upgrade would be focused, and tasked senior officials to commence the upgrade
negotiations. Noting the importance of maintaining momentum of ongoing work under the
ACFTA, Ministers urged officials to expedite the conclusion of the Custom Procedures and
Trade Facilitation (CPTF) negotiations and the review of the Sensitive Track and Rules of
Origin, and to report progress made to the next AEM-­‐MOFCOM consultations.
4. The Ministers also welcomed the establishment of the Sub-­‐Committees on Standards,
Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures (STRACAP), and Sanitary and
Phytosanitary (SPS) Measures which convened their inaugural meetings in March 2014. The
key tasks of these Sub-­‐Committees are to develop the work programme to implement the
related Protocol on Technical Barriers to Trade and SPS signed in November 2012, review2
the progress made by parties in implementing their commitments and address
implementation problems.
Other Areas of Cooperation
5. The Ministers noted China's initiatives on the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road and
the plan to establish the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). Ministers exchanged
views on how to further promote China-­‐ASEAN Connectivity cooperation in the future.
6. The Ministers noted the latest development on the Roadmap for the Pan-­‐Beibu Gulf
Economic Cooperation with ADB’s support, which aims to promote economic cooperation
between southern coastal provinces of China with individual ASEAN Member States.
7. The Ministers welcomed China's initiative to set up an Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank to provide financial support to regional infrastructure projects, with
priority on ASEAN connectivity.
8. The Ministers welcomed the commencement of the ASEAN-­‐Hong Kong Free Trade
Area (AHKFTA) negotiations and noted the outcomes of the first AHKFTA Trade Negotiation
Committee meeting held in Hong Kong, China on 10-­‐11 July 2014.
9. The ASEAN Ministers congratulated China for the successful conclusion of the
10th China-­‐ASEAN Expo held in Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region on 3-­‐6
September 2013 which has drawn great interest from business communities on various
economic initiatives being pursued by both ASEAN and China including the ACFTA, and the
opportunities arising from these initiatives. The Ministers look forward to the 11th CAEXPO to
be held in Nanning, Zhuang Autonomous Region on 16-­‐19 September 2014.3
LIST OF MINISTERS
1. The Hon. Pehin Dato Lim Jock Seng, Second Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Trade, Brunei Darussalam
2. H.E. Sun Chanthol, Senior Minister and Minister of Commerce, Cambodia
3. H.E. Gao Hucheng, Minister of Commerce, China
4. H.E. Muhammad Lutfi, Minister of Trade, Indonesia
5. H.E. Mrs. Khemmani Pholsena, Minister of Industry and Commerce, Lao PDR
6. H.E. Dato’ Sri Mustapa Mohamed, Minister of International Trade and Industry,
Malaysia
7. H.E. Dr. Kan Zaw, Union Minister for National Planning and Economic Development,
Myanmar
8. H.E. Gregory L. Domingo, Secretary of Trade and Industry, the Philippines
9. H.E. Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry, Singapore
10. H.E. Ms. Chutima Bunyapraphasara, Permanent Secretary, Acting for the Minister of
Commerce, Thailand
11. H.E. Dr.Vu Huy Hoang, Minister of Industry and Trade, Viet Nam
12. H.E. Le Luong Minh, Secretary-­‐General of ASEAN