CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT OF THE 17 ~ ~ASEAN-CHINA SUMMIT
13 November 2014
Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar
1. The 17fi ASEAN-China Summit chaired by President of the Republic
of the Union of Myanmar, H.E. U Thein Sein, was held in Nay Pyi Taw,
Myanmar, on 13 November 2014. The Summit was attended by all Heads of
State/Government of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and H.E. Li Keqiang, Premier of the State Council of the
People's Republic of China.
2. We acknowledged that China is one of ASEAN7s most active
Dialogue Partners contributing to the development and promotion of peace,
stability and prosperity in the region. In this context, the ASEAN Leaders
appreciated China's support for ASEAN Centrality in the evolving regional
architecture, including through ASEAN-led processes, such as the ASEAN Plus
Three (APT), the East Asia Summit (EAS), the ASEAN Defence Ministers'
Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus) and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), in the
ASEAN Community building process.
3. The ASEAN Leaders also welcomed China's support for the
implementation of the Roadmap for an ASEAN Community (2009-2015) and
the Bali Declaration on ASEAN Community in a Global Community of Nations
(Bali Concord 111). With ASEAN striving towards the ASEAN Community. We
welcomed China's support for the ASEAN Community Post-2015 Vision.
4. ASEAN Leaders noted with appreciation China's initiative to build up
ASEAN-China Community of Common Destiny and to work together towards
building the Maritime Silk Road of the 21" Century. We reaffirmed our strong
commitment to W h e r strengthen the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership
particularly in the eleven priority areas, namely agriculture, information and
communication technology, human resource development, investment, Mekong Basin development, transportation, energy, culture, tourism, public health and
environment. In this regard, we welcomed the progress made in the
implementation of the Plan of Action (20 11-2015) to implement the Joint
Declaration on the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace and
Prosperity and looked forward to the successful conclusion of its Two-Year
Implementation Programme (20 13-2014).
5. We noted with satisfaction the substantive work undertaken by China's
Mission to ASEAN in Jakarta and the Committee of Permanent Representatives
to ASEAN (CPR), as well as the ASEAN Secretariat, to further strengthen the
ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership.
6 . We welcomed China's proposals and initiatives under the 2+7
Cooperation Framework for ASEAN-China relations, and looked forward to
working closely with China to implement it. In this regard, we recalled the
successful outcomes of the ASEAN-China Foreign Ministers' Meeting in Nay
Pyi Taw, Myanmar, on 9 August, the 20" ASEAN-China Senior Officials'
Consultations (ACSOC) in Pattaya City, Thailand, from 21 to 22 April 2014,
and the Special ASEAN-China Senior Officials Meeting in Guilin, China, from
14 to 15 September, where ASEAN and China agreed to deepen existing
cooperation and to further explore areas of cooperation under the proposed 2+7
Cooperation Framework.
7. We were committed to promoting strategic relations and maintaining
high-level exchanges and close contacts, and continuing to deepen mutual trust
and confidence in the political sphere. In this connection, we looked forward to
m h e r explore China's proposal for a Treaty on Good-Neighbourliness,
Friendship and Cooperation.
8. We agreed to designate the Year 2015 as the "ASEAN-China Year of
Maritime Cooperation". We welcomed China's comprehensive plan for
utilising the ASEAN-China Maritime Cooperation Fund to provide financial
support for ASEAN-China cooperation in the areas of maritime connectivity,
marine science and technology as well as maritime scientific research, search
and rescue, disaster management, and navigation safety. We noted with
satisfaction the commitment to fully operationalise the ASEAN-China
Cooperation Fund.9. We reaffirmed the importance of maintaining peace, stability and
maritime security in the region. We further stressed the importance of the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), the Joint
Statement of the 15" ASEAN-China Summit on the loth Anniversary of the
DOC in 2012 and the adoption of the Guidelines for the Implementation of the
DOC in 201 1. In this regard, we reaffirmed our commitment to continue to fully
and effectively implement the DOC, to build trust and confidence in order to
enhance maritime security, and encourage the sovereign states directly
concerned to resolve their disputes by peaceh.1 means through friendly
consultations and negotiations, in accordance with the universally recognised
principles of international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), without resorting to the threat or use of force,
while exercising self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate
or escalate disputes and affect peace and stability.
10. We reaffirmed our commitment to the full and effective
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea (DOC) in its entirety as well as to work towards the early conclusion of a
Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) based on consensus. We
supported the implementation of early harvest measures, including the adoption
of the first list of commonalities on COC consultation, the establishment of a
hotline platform among search and rescue agencies, a hotline among foreign
ministries on maritime emergencies, and a table-top exercise on search and
rescue to promote and enhance trust and confidence in the region.
1 1 . We welcomed the positive outcomes from the 8" ASEAN-China
SOM on DOC and the 1 2 ' ~Joint Working Group (JWG) on the Implementation
of the DOC in Bangkok, Thailand, from 26 to 29 October 2014. We will
continue to maintain the momentum of regular official consultations and work
towards the early conclusion of the COC.
12. We welcomed the positive outcomes of the 8th ASEAN Defence
Ministers' Meeting (ADMM) held in Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, on 20 May 2014.
We noted with appreciation the establishment of a Direct Communications Link
(DCL) in the ADMM Process to promote quick-response cooperation in
emergency situations. We were also pleased with the successful holding of the
4" ASEAN-China Defence Ministers' Informal Meeting at the sideline of
ADMM.13. We noted that since 2009, China has remained ASEAN's largest
trading partner. And, since 201 1, ASEAN has remained China's third largest
trading partner. We also noted that, based on ASEAN statistics, the two-way
trade volume reached USD 350.5 billion in 2013, accounting for 14% of
ASEAN's total trade and representing an increase of 9.7% year on year. We
underscored the value of regional economic integration and noted the
encouraging progress towards further trade liberalization, including the
upgrading of the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA). In this regard, we
anticipated achieving the two-way trade goal of USD 500 billion by 2015 and
USD 1 trillion by 2020, as well as achieving two-way investment of USD 150
billion by 2020. We further welcomed the progress of negotiations for the
ASEAN-Hong Kong FTA, and looked forward to its early conclusion.
14. We noted the progress of negotiations on the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) which would build upon the
ASEAN Plus One Free Trade Agreements, including the ACFTA. Recognising
ASEAN Centrality in the emerging regional economic architecture, the RCEP
will further contribute to economic integration, equitable economic
development, and strengthening economic cooperation among participating
countries. In this regard, we agreed to actively accelerate negotiations for the
RCEP for greater economic integration in East Asia.
15. We welcomed the 1lth China-ASEAN Expo (CAEXPO) held in
Naming, China, from 16 to 19 September 20 14 under the theme "Building the
Maritime Silk Road of the 2lSt Century". We commended the success of the
CAEXPO to boost the trade and investment relationship between ASEAN and
China.
16. We congratulated China for its successful Chairmanship of APEC in
2014 and believed that the synergies between ASEAN and APEC would be
further strengthened. We underlined the importance of the continuation of the
connectivity, infrastructure development and investment agenda in APEC. In
this regard, we expressed our support for the APEC Blueprint on Connectivity,
which takes into consideration the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity
(MPAC).
17. We appreciated China's continued support for the implementation of
the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC). We were pleased with the signing of the MOU between ASEAN and China on the establishment of the
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) as founding members, and agreed
to work closely towards the operationalisation of the AIIB. We expected the
AIIB to provide financial support to regional infrastructure projects, with an
emphasis on supporting the implementation of the MPAC.
18. We expressed our support for closer sub-regional cooperation among
the countries of the Mekong region and China. In particular, we welcomed
Thailand's initiative on sustainable development of the Lancang-Mekong Subregion, which would contribute to narrowing the development gap in ASEAN.
We also welcomed the countries of the Mekong region and China to explore
possibilities for setting up relevant dialogue and cooperation mechanisms.
19. We welcomed the work of the ASEAN-China Centre in Beijing to
facilitate trade, investment, tourism, and cultural exchanges between ASEAN
and China. We noted the work of the Joint Council of the ASEAN-China
Centre in ensuring the effective operation of the Centre to promote economic
and cultural cooperation.
20. We welcomed the year 2014 as the ASEAN-China Cultural Exchange
Year. We commended the successful opening ceremony of the ASEAN-China
Cultural Exchange Year held in Beijing, China, in April 2014 and looked
forward to the closing ceremony in Myanmar in December this year. We noted
the great progress that ASEAN and China have achieved in tourism, with China
becoming the second largest source of tourists for ASEAN countries. In 2012,
ASEAN received almost 8.76 million tourists from China and China received
nearly 5.99 million tourists from ASEAN. In this regard, we looked forward to
China's initiative to host a ASEAN-China Tourism Forum and the ongoing
efforts to increase further two-way tourism between ASEAN and China.
21. We welcomed the positive outcomes from the 5" ASEAN-China
Health Ministers' Meeting held in Hanoi, Vietnam, on 19 September 20 14. We
looked forward to further strengthening joint collaboration in health
development as agreed in the ASEAN-China MOU on Health Cooperation.
22. We welcomed the notable progress achieved in implementing the
ASEAN-China Science and Technology Partnership Programme (STEP)
including building ASEAN-China joint laboratories, ASEAN-China Remote
Sensing Satellite Data Sharing and Service Platform, ASEAN-China Technology Transfer Center, and Talented Young Scientists Visiting China
have yielded concrete progress. We looked forward to the early signing of the
MOU on ASEAN-China Cooperation in Science and Technology.
23. We welcomed the 1st Country Coordinators' Meeting of the Network
of ASEAN-China Think-Tanks (NACT CCM) which was held in Beijing,
China, on 3 Ju.ly 2014, and looked forward to increased academic exchanges
between ASEAN and China.