2014 PROTOCOL 2 ON FIFTH FREEDOM TRAFFIC RIGHTS
BETWEEN CONTRACTING PARTIES
Adopted in 2014
The Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
comprising Brunei Darussalam, the Kingdom of Cambodia, the Republic of Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, the Republic of the Philippines,
the Republic of Singapore, the Kingdom of Thailand, and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam (hereinafter
referred to collectively as “ASEAN Member States”, or individually as “ASEAN Member State”)
And
the Government of the People’s Republic of China (hereinafter referred to as “China”);
referred to collectively as “the Contracting Parties” or individually as an ASEAN Member State or China
as “a Contracting Party”;
RECALLING the Air Transport Agreement Between the Governments of the Member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of the People’s Republic of China entered
into force on 9 August 2011 (hereinafter referred to as “the Agreement”);
RECOGNISING that Annex III of the Agreement thereof provides for the conclusion of Implementing
Protocols of the Agreement;
DESIRING to remove restrictions on air services with a view to achieving full liberalization between and
beyond ASEAN and China;
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
ARTICLE 1 – ROUTING, FREQUENCIES AND TRAFFIC RIGHTS
1. Each ASEAN Member State shall be entitled to:
(a) full fifth freedom traffic rights on any number of frequencies of passenger and/or cargo
services with any aircraft type, from one of the 10 named points in ASEAN, which
is a point in the ASEAN Member State designating the airline(s), via any of the
10 named points in ASEAN to any of the 28 named points in China and beyond to any of
the 10 names points in ASEAN and vice versa; and
(b) fifth freedom traffic rights for up to 14 weekly passenger and/or cargo services with any
aircraft type from one of the 10 named points in ASEAN, which is a point in the
ASEAN Member State designating the airline(s), via any points outside China and2014 PROTOCOL 2 ON FIFTH FREEDOM TRAFFIC RIGHTS BETWEEN CONTRACTING PARTIES
ASEAN to any of the 10 named points in China and beyond to any points outside China
and ASEAN and vice versa.
2. China shall be entitled to:
(a) full fifth freedom traffic rights on any number of frequencies of passengers and/or cargo
services with any aircraft type from any of the 28 named points in China, via any of the
10 named points in ASEAN to any of the 10 named points in ASEAN and beyond to any
of the 10 named points in ASEAN and vice versa; and
(b) in relation to each ASEAN Member State fifth freedom traffic rights for up to
14 weekly passenger and/or cargo services with any aircraft type from any of the
10 named points in China, via any points outside China and ASEAN to any
10 named points in ASEAN, which is a point in that ASEAN Member State, and beyond
to any points outside China and ASEAN and vice versa.
3. For the purposes of this Article:
(a) “10 named points in ASEAN” means Bandar Seri Begawan, Preah Sihanouk, Mataram,
Luang Prabang, Kota Kinabalu, any one point in Myanmar except Yangon, any one point
in Philippines except Manila, Singapore, Chiang Mai, any one point in Viet Nam except
Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City;
(b) “28 named points in China” means Changchun, Changsha, Chengdu, Chongqing, Dalian,
Fuzhou, Guilin, Guiyang, Haikou, Harbin, Hohhot, Kashgar, Kunming, Lanzhou, Lhasa,
Sanya, Shenyang, Nanning, Ningbo, Urumqi, Wuhan, Xi’an, Xiamen, Xining,
Xishuangbanna, Yanji, Yinchuan, Zhengzhou;
(c) “10 named points in China” means Changsha, Chengdu, Chongqing, Guilin, Kunming,
Nanning, Urumqi, Xi’an, Xiamen or Fuzhou, Zhengzhou.
4. (a) Each Contracting Party shall at least one month prior to the exercise of the traffic rights
by the designated airline(s) of the Contracting Party to the point(s) which are the subject
of the written notification, give written notice to the Secretary-General of ASEAN
(hereinafter referred to as “the Depositary”) of its nomination of:
(i) the one point in each of Myanmar, Philippines and Vietnam as referred to in
paragraph 3(a) of this Article; and/or
(ii) either Xiamen or Fuzhou as referred to in paragraph 3(c) of this Article.
The Depositary shall promptly inform each Contracting Party of such written notification.
(b) Each Contracting Party may revise its nomination of any of the one points in Myanmar,
the Philippines or Viet Nam, or of Xiamen or Fuzhou. Any such revision shall be made in
accordance with the procedure under paragraph 4(a) of this Article.2014 PROTOCOL 2 ON FIFTH FREEDOM TRAFFIC RIGHTS BETWEEN CONTRACTING PARTIES
ARTICLE 2 – FINAL PROVISIONS
1. This Protocol shall be deposited with the Depositary, who shall promptly furnish a certified copy
thereof to each Contracting Party.
2. Each Contracting Party shall ratify/approve Protocol 1 of the Agreement before
ratifying/approving this Protocol.
3. Each Contracting Party shall complete its relevant internal legal procedures necessary for the
entry into force of this Protocol. After the completion of its internal legal procedures, each
Contracting Party shall give written notification to the Depositary, who shall promptly inform each
Contracting Party of such deposit.
4. This Protocol shall enter into force on the date of deposit with the Depositary of:
(a) the written notification from China; and
(b) written notifications from at least two ASEAN Member States,
whichever date is later, and shall enter into force only among the Contracting Parties that have
deposited their written notifications. For each of the Contracting Parties depositing their written
notifications after the Protocol has entered into force, the Protocol shall enter into force for that
Contracting Party on the date of deposit of its written notification.
5. Any amendment to the provisions of this Protocol shall be effected by the consent of all
Contracting Parties, as provided for under Article 22 (Amendment and Modification) of the
Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized to sign by their respective
Governments, have signed Protocol 2 on Fifth (5th) Freedom Traffic Rights between
Contracting Parties, on the dates herein below indicated, in duplicate in the English and Chinese
languages, both texts being equally authentic. In the event of divergence of interpretation, the
English text shall prevail.
For the Government of Brunei Darussalam:
[signed]
Date: 20 Dec 2013
For the Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia:
[signed]
Date: 20 Dec 2013
For the Government of the Republic of Indonesia:
[signed]
Date: 24 Jan 2014
For the Government of the People’s Republic of
China:
[signed]
Date: 25 Dec 20132014 PROTOCOL 2 ON FIFTH FREEDOM TRAFFIC RIGHTS BETWEEN CONTRACTING PARTIES
For the Government of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic:
[signed]
20 Dec 2013
For the Government of Malaysia:
[signed]
Date: 20 Dec 2013
For the Government of the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar:
[signed]
Date: 20 Dec 2013
For the Government of the Republic of the
Philippines:
[signed]
Date: 20 Dec 2013
For the Government of the Republic of Singapore:
[signed]
Date: 20 Dec 2013
For the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand:
[signed]
Date: 19 Nov 2014
For the Government of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam:
[signed]
Date: 20 Dec 2013