Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on ASEAN-China Strategic
Partnership for Peace and Prosperity
(2016-2020)
This Plan of Action aims at implementing the Joint Declaration on ASEAN-China
Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity signed on 8 October 2003 in Bali,
Indonesia to enhance and elevate the strategic partnership, friendly relations, mutually
beneficial cooperation, and good neighbourliness between ASEAN and China for the
period of 2016-2020. The POA also aims to address emerging regional and global
challenges over the next five years.
This POA builds upon the significant achievements made in the relations between
ASEAN and China that began in 1991 and the successful implementation of the POA
2011-2015, promotes the establishment of a peaceful, stable, integrated, prosperous,
and caring ASEAN Community and contributes to the ASEAN Community’s Post-2015
Vision.
This POA also affirms China’s support for ASEAN Centrality in the evolving regional
architecture and all ASEAN-led mechanisms and fora.
ASEAN and China hereby endeavour to pursue cooperation in conformity with their
obligations under international law and in accordance with their respective domestic
laws, regulations, and policies.
1. Political and Security
1.1 Regular High-Level Contacts, Visits, and Interactions
1.1.1 Enhance regular high-level contacts and make good use of all available
opportunities to exchange views on ASEAN-China relations and regional as
well as international issues of common interest and concern.
1.2 Political Dialogue and Cooperation
1.2.1 Deepen ASEAN-China consultations and cooperation through the
following ASEAN-led fora: ASEAN-China Summit, ASEAN Post Ministerial
Conference with China (PMC+1), ASEAN-China Senior Officials Consultations
(SOC) and the ASEAN-China Joint Cooperation Committee (JCC) and other
ASEAN-led fora, such as the East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Plus Three,
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus
(ADMM-Plus);
1.2.2 Deepen existing ASEAN-China cooperation by further exploring areas of
cooperation through proposals and initiatives noted by ASEAN Leaders, such
as China’s proposed 2+7 Cooperation Framework for ASEAN-China relations
and China's initiative to build up ASEAN-China Community of Common
Destiny. Take note of China’s proposal to explore the possibility of a treaty of2
good neighborliness, friendship and cooperation between China and ASEAN
Member States.
1.3 Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in South East Asia
1.3.1 Uphold the purpose and principles of the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in South East Asia (TAC) to enhance regional peace, security and
prosperity as well as to promote mutual confidence and trust, including, among
others, supporting ASEAN in convening workshops and seminars to assess the
progress of the implementation of the TAC.
1.4 Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free
Zone
1.4.1 Support ASEAN’s efforts to preserve Southeast Asia as a Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone in accordance with the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone (SEANFWZ), including through the implementation
of the Plan of Action to strengthen the SEANFWZ Treaty (2013-2017).
1.4.2 Intensify the on-going efforts of States Parties to the Treaty on the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty) and the nuclearweapon States to resolve outstanding issues pertaining to the signing and
ratifying of the Protocol to that Treaty.
1.5 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) and
towards a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC)
1.5.1 Push forward the full and effective implementation of the DOC in its
entirety in order to maintain regional peace and stability and to promote mutual
trust, dialogue and cooperation in the South China Sea, including through the
regular convening of the ASEAN-China Senior Officials’ Meeting (SOM) on the
Implementation of the DOC and the ASEAN-China Joint Working Group on the
Implementation of the DOC (JWG).
1.5.2 Work together to intensify substantive discussions towards the early
conclusion of a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) on the basis of
consensus.
1.5.3 Carry out agreed joint cooperative projects and activities, as well as
mutually agreed Early Harvest-Measures which contribute to the promotion of
mutual trust and confidence in the South China Sea in accordance with the
Guidelines for the Implementation of the DOC.
1.5.4 Continue to work together and cooperate on enhancing maritime security
and maintaining peace and stability in the South China Sea, including to ensure
safety and freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South China Sea,
in accordance with universally recognised principles of international law,
including the 1982 UNCLOS.3
1.5.5 Undertake to exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would
complicate or escalate disputes and affect peace and stability, and have Parties
concerned undertake to resolve their territorial and jurisdictional disputes by
peaceful means, without resorting to the threat or use of force, through friendly
consultations and negotiations by sovereign states directly concerned, in
accordance with universally recognised principles of international law, including
the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
1.5.6 Promote trust, confidence building and encourage concerned parties to
prevent incidents at sea in accordance with the principles of the DOC.
1.5.7 Adhere to universally recognised principles of international law including
the 1982 UNCLOS and other relevant instruments of the International Maritime
Organisation.
1.5.8 Promote joint cooperation and dialogue in areas such as marine
scientific research, protection of the marine environment, safety of navigation
and communication at sea, search and rescue operation, humane treatment of
all persons in danger or distress, fight against transnational crimes, as well as
cooperation among military officials.
1.6 Human Rights
1.6.1 Support ASEAN’s effort to implement the ASEAN Human Rights
Declaration (AHRD), the Phnom Penh Statement on the Adoption of the AHRD,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action and other relevant human rights declarations and
instruments to which all ASEAN Member States are party.
1.6.2 Collaborate to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms through regional dialogues, seminar and
workshops, education and awareness raising activities, as well as exchanges of
best practices and other capacity building initiatives. This includes supporting
the work of the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights
(AICHR), as well as the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection
of the Rights of Women and Children (ACWC).
1.7 Non-Traditional Security
1.7.1 Increase the exchange of visits and enhance cooperation under the
framework of ASEAN-China Ministerial and Senior Officials Meeting on
Transnational Crimes (AMMTC and SOMTC + China) Consultations and
ASEAN Plus Three Ministerial and Senior Officials’ Meeting on Transnational
Crimes, as well as other relevant frameworks to strengthen cooperation in the
field of non-traditional security including the ASEAN-China MOU on
Cooperation in the Field of Non-Traditional Security Issues, and enhance
dialogue on law enforcement and security.4
1.7.2 Promote sharing of information and enhance exchange of experiences
and best practices, as well as capacity building measures through mutual visits,
training courses, workshops, seminars, and video conferencing between
relevant agencies of ASEAN and China on non-traditional security challenges,
such as natural disasters, counter-terrorism, cyber-crimes and transnational
crimes, where possible.
1.7.3 Enhance capacity building efforts between ASEAN and China in the area
of combating trafficking in persons and promote cooperation on the exchange
of information between concerned agencies in ASEAN Member States and
China so as to effectively prevent and combat human trafficking, prosecute
offenders and protect victims, including by initiating victim support programmes
in order to assist and repatriate victims to the origin countries.
1.7.4 Promote cooperation and participation in activities in the region,
including within the framework of the Bali Process on People Smuggling and
Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime (Bali Process), as the
region-wide forum that involves source, transit and destination countries.
1.7.5 Explore the possibility to link activities within the POA and the Bali
Process, such as capacity building and exchange of information between
concerned agencies, where appropriate, and with a view to ensure
complementarities and avoid duplications.
1.7.6 Collaborate to enhance competency and explore further cooperation in
drug control and drug trafficking, criminal forensic technology, border control
management, anti-money laundering, countering terrorism including its
financing, investigation into international economic crimes and cybercrimes,
including through exchange of best practices, experiences, and capacitybuilding. This includes promoting cooperation in accordance with their
respective laws in fields such as evidence gathering, tracing of crime proceeds,
asset recovery, apprehension and investigation of criminal fugitives and
encourage each other to enter into bilateral legal arrangements therein.
1.7.7 Promote closer cooperation and coordination of law enforcement
agencies between ASEAN and China through, among others, use of existing
regional and international facilities and mechanism, where applicable, including
cooperation between maritime law enforcement agencies on combating
transnational crimes at the sea in line with respective laws and regulations.
1.7.8 Strengthen cooperation on criminal investigation and prosecution in
accordance with domestic law and policies.
1.7.9 Promote mutual visits and exchange among police academies, law
enforcement agencies and law enforcement academies in ASEAN and China.
1.7.10 Promote linkages and increase exchange of visits of experts and
scholars on specific areas and support joint research in the field of nontraditional security and share research results.5
1.7.11 Promote cooperation on law and legal matters, including among relevant
judicial and prosecutorial authorities, where applicable, through the ASEANChina Prosecutors-General Conference.
1.7.12 Promote cooperation in addressing humanitarian aspects of landmines
and other explosive remnants of war issues in the region through the ASEAN
Regional Mine Action Centre (ARMAC) including financial and technical
supports, where appropriate, to the Centre.
1.7.13 Strengthen cooperation in combating extremism.
1.8 Military Exchanges and Cooperation
1.8.1 Promote dialogue and strengthen practical cooperation in areas
including humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, maritime security,
counter-terrorism, peacekeeping, military medicine and humanitarian demining
through the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) framework
including through the ASEAN-China Defense Ministers’ Informal Meeting, so as
to enhance mutual trust and confidence building and maintain regional peace
and stability.
1.8.2 Continue to strengthen exchanges involving high-level military
personnel, professional groups and academies, and vigorously conduct joint
training and personnel exchanges at appropriate levels.
2. Economic Cooperation
2.1 ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA)
2.1.1 Implement the ACFTA agreements and outcomes from upgrading the
ACFTA agreements to further strengthen ASEAN-China relations, with an aim
to improve trade balance between ASEAN Member States and China, and
endeavor to achieve the Leaders’ goal of two-way trade of USD 1 trillion and
two-way investment of USD 150 billion by 2020.
2.1.2 Actively implement trade facilitation measures and address non-tariff
barriers.
2.1.3 Monitor problems arising from the implementation of ACFTA agreements
and resolve them amicably and constructively through consultations.
2.1.4 Assist enterprises of both sides to take advantage of the benefits arising
from the various ACFTA agreements to enhance trade, investment, and tourism
between ASEAN and China by optimizing the role of the ASEAN-China Centre,
and encouraging the effective use of ASEAN-China Free Trade Business
Portal.
2.1.5 Actively undertake cooperation in trade and investment facilitation,
transport infrastructure connectivity and construction, human resources6
development through strengthening exchange of expertise and economic and
technical cooperation.
2.1.6 Explore the possibility of establishing economic and trade cooperation
zones between China and interested ASEAN Member States, use various trade
and investment promotion activities in ASEAN and China such as the ASEANChina Expo, ASEAN-China Business and Investment Summit, Western China
International Fair, and China Kunming Import and Export Commodity Fairs as
platforms and, among others, make good use of ASEAN-China Investment
Cooperation Fund to promote mutual understanding, cooperation and
expansion of two-way trade and investments.
2.1.7 Promote exchanges and cooperation among chambers of commerce
and industry associations of ASEAN and China, in coordination with the
ASEAN-China Business Council and ASEAN Business Advisory Council
(ASEAN-BAC), through workshops and other mutually agreed activities.
2.1.8 Consider adopting concrete measures to carry out safety checks on food
and agricultural products.
2.2 Finance
2.2.1 Deepen cooperation under the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation
(CMIM), by improving the Operational Guidelines through test runs and
Economic Review and Policy Dialogue (ERPD) frameworks to further enhance
the operationalization and effectiveness of the CMIM.
2.2.2 Support the development of the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Office
(AMRO), improve the quality of its surveillance activities and analysis of the
regional macroeconomic and financial situation, strengthen its institutional
capacity and ensure effective CMIM decision-making and operation, as well as
actively support the economic review and policy dialogues by the ASEAN+3
parties.
2.2.3 Support the establishment and operation of the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank (AIIB), in accordance with the Articles of Agreement of the
AIIB, and support cooperation between AIIB and other multilateral financial
institutions including the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank to
facilitate regional connectivity.
2.2.4 Support the Asian Bond Markets Initiative (ABMI)’s contribution to the
development of the local currency bond markets across the region, to allow the
region’s large savings to be channeled to finance its own investment needs and
promote the issuance of and facilitating the demand for local currencydenominated bonds, improving the regulatory framework and related
infrastructure for the bond markets, as well as continue exploring the viability of
starting with bilateral linkages and ultimately developing and making transition
into an integrated solution to advance regional settlement infrastructure that
promotes cross-border securities transactions in the region.7
2.2.5 Continue to study possible enhancement of regional financial cooperation
and explore future key areas in strengthening financial cooperation under the
ASEAN+3 framework.
2.2.6 Explore possibility of the local currency usage in trade settlements.
2.2.7 Promote human resource development and capacity building in banking
and financial sectors including through the ASEAN-China Inter-Bank
Association, if appropriate.
2.2.8 Support greater financial inclusion for sustainable growth, through the
promotion of initiatives to improve access to financial services and products for
individuals and Small and Medium Enterprises. This includes areas such as
capacity building and technical assistance in financial literacy, effective
intermediary and distribution channel, various finance facilities, consumer
protection, national and other existing credit guarantee mechanisms, where
applicable, and enhanced dialogues among regulators and stakeholders.
2.2.9 Strengthen cooperation to improve financial infrastructure development in
the region.
2.3 Food, Agriculture and Forestry
2.3.1 Continue strengthening dialogue and exchanges of information in
agricultural sector under the ASEAN Plus Three Framework through
consultations, training, and sharing of best practices.
2.3.2 Further implement the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between
ASEAN and China on Food and Agriculture Cooperation and MOU between
ASEAN and China on Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary Cooperation.
2.3.3 Continue implementing the Agreement on ASEAN Plus Three
Emergency Rice Reserve (APTERR) and organise regular ASEAN Plus Three
Food Security Cooperation Strategic Roundtable Conference to explore the
channel and mechanism for strengthening strategic cooperation in food security
with a view to improving regional food security.
2.3.4 Enhance cooperation related to crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries,
and strengthen exchange of advanced applicable technology and capacity
building, including through the ASEAN-China Action Plan on Comprehensive
Food Productivity Enhancement.
2.3.5 Enhance cooperation in R&D through providing training courses on
agricultural technology and food safety.
2.3.6 Promote responsible fishing practices and to combat illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing, particularly in order to sustain fisheries resources,
ensure food security, alleviate poverty and to optimise the benefit of the people
and economies in the region.8
2.3.7 Enhance cooperation on preventing and controlling cross-border animal
and plant diseases by exchanging information, techniques and experiences on
early warning, epidemic surveillance and development of vaccine to improve
animal and plant disease prevention, control system and disease notification
system.
2.3.8 Explore possible cooperative initiatives on management of forest areas
including wildlife protection and implementation of wildlife-related multilateral
agreements such as the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).
2.4 Maritime Cooperation
2.4.1 Continue to promote dialogue and exchanges in maritime cooperation
through relevant platforms on the basis of the principles of inclusiveness and
mutual benefit. This includes further exploring initiatives such as China’s
proposed Maritime Silk Road of the 21 st Century.
2.4.2 Make use of resources available for ASEAN-China cooperation and
conduct cooperative projects in maritime economy, maritime connectivity,
maritime science and technology promotion and application, maritime
environmental protection, maritime security, maritime cultural and people-topeople exchanges.
2.5 ICT
2.5.1 Continue to strengthen policy dialogue and exchanges through the
ASEAN-China Telecommunications and IT Ministers’ Meeting and other
mechanisms.
2.5.2 Further implement the MOU between ASEAN and China on Cooperation
in Information and Communications Technology, and the Plan of Action to
Implement the Beijing Declaration on ASEAN-China ICT Cooperative
Partnership for Common Development.
2.5.3 Implement the ASEAN-China Computer Emergency Response Teams
Cooperative Mechanism, optimise network security incidence response and
procedures, promote information and data sharing, and conduct capacity
building and project cooperation.
2.5.4 Work together to improve ASEAN-China information and communication
infrastructure connectivity.
2.5.5 Strengthen cooperation in developing rural telecommunications,
expanding networked applications and advancing e-commerce applications.
2.5.6 Support the implementation of ASEAN ICT Master Plan 2020.9
2.6 Science, Technology and Innovation
2.6.1 Build closer cooperation in science, technology and innovation through
mechanisms such as the ASEAN-China Joint Science and Technology
Committee and ASEAN Plus Three Science and Technology Senior Officials'
Meeting, as well as the ASEAN-China Science and Technology Ministers
Meeting.
2.6.2 Vigorously implement the ASEAN-China Science and Technology
Partnership Programme (STEP), which includes conduct of joint research and
development, including through the building of joint laboratories, technology
demonstration, promotion and transfer, including through the ASEAN-China
Technology Transfer Centre and networking of centres of excellence, capacity
building and personnel exchange, including through the Talented Young
Scientists Visiting China Programme.
2.6.3 Strengthen the cooperation, academic exchange and scientific research
in the field of agriculture between ASEAN and China.
2.6.4 Strengthen exchange and cooperation in new and renewable energy
technologies and discuss the formulation of an action plan on new and
renewable energy.
2.7 Space Cooperation
2.7.1 Encourage the peaceful uses of outer space and cooperation in areas
such as the transfer of technologies, joint technological research and
development, capacity building efforts in space technology and its applications
in accordance with international laws, national law and regulations of the
participating states.
2.8 Transport
2.8.1 Further strengthen policy dialogue and exchanges through the ASEANChina Transport Ministers’ Meeting and other relevant mechanisms.
2.8.2 Continue to implement the MOU between ASEAN and China on
Transport Cooperation and the Agreement on Maritime Transport between
ASEAN and China, making use of, among others, the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank and consider using the China-initiated special China-ASEAN
infrastructure loan, where appropriate, for cooperation in transportation
infrastructure connectivity.
2.8.3 Continue to support the implementation of the ASEAN Strategic
Transport Plan 2011-2015 and its successive strategic plan.
2.8.4 Enhance cooperation in maritime transportation and development of
seaports and promote cooperation among port cities with the objective of
improving connectivity in all ASEAN Member States and China.10
2.8.5 Promote cooperation in aeronautical and maritime search and rescue.
2.8.6 Support smooth operationalisation of the ASEAN-China Air Transport
Agreement (ATA) and its protocols at an early date, and strengthen
comprehensive civil aviation cooperation between ASEAN and China.
2.8.7 Continue engagement between ASEAN and China in the area of aviation
cooperation, and eventually putting in place a liberal and substantial air
services framework in support of the upgrading of the ASEAN-China Free
Trade Agreement.
2.8.8 Continue the efforts to improve the use of the Kunming-Bangkok
highway and accelerate the completion of the Singapore-Kunming Rail Link
(SKRL) missing links for early ASEAN-China railway infrastructure connectivity.
2.8.9 Further strengthen cooperation in human resources development in the
field of transport.
2.9 Tourism
2.9.1 Strengthen policy dialogue and cooperation through the ASEAN Plus
Three Ministerial Meeting on Tourism and strengthen cooperation in
implementing ASEAN Plus Three Tourism Cooperation Work Plan 2013-2017
and the ASEAN Plus Three Memorandum of Cooperation on Tourism
Cooperation.
2.9.2 Strengthen ties and cooperation among tourism authorities and
enterprises of ASEAN and China at all levels, encourage exchange of tourismrelated statistics and information, encourage joint development of tourism
products, and conduct relevant cooperation projects.
2.9.3 Encourage each other’s participation in tourism-related events, such as
the annual ASEAN Tourism Forum and the China International Travel Mart.
2.9.4 Promote inclusive tourism development in accordance with ASEAN
Tourism Strategic Plan (ATSP 2016-2025).
2.9.5 Encourage cooperation and explore the development of measures to
facilitate coordination during emergency and crisis situations and to cushion
impacts of unforeseen circumstances on tourism.
2.9.6 Promote the role of ASEAN-China Centre in supporting tourism in the
region.
2.9.7 Train professionals in tourism management for ASEAN countries.11
2.10 Energy and Mineral Cooperation
2.10.1 Strengthen policy exchanges and dialogue on energy particularly on
hydropower, mineral and geosciences and share information and experiences
on clean energy development, particularly on hydrology, hydropower, coal and
clean coal technology, and gas-fired power plant, latest mineral exploration and
conservation technology, and geothermal energy, among others, through
regional fora and seminars.
2.10.2 Enhance energy cooperation and encourage investment in energy
infrastructure development in resource exploration, power generation, power
trade and interconnection between interested ASEAN Member States and
China, downstream oil and gas industry, renewable and alternative energy,
civilian nuclear energy for peaceful use while giving careful and due regard to
the security, environmental, health and internationally recognised safety
standards of the energy source, for mutual benefit, while at the same time also
respecting national’s domestic obligatory standards.
2.10.3 Enhance information sharing, joint research and development and
technical exchange in the development of new and renewable energy sources
and technologies such as bio-energy, hydropower, wind, solar, clean coal
technology, gas-fired power plant, hydrogen and fuel cell.
2.10.4 Boost cooperation in the promotion of energy conservation and sharing
best practices and capacity building in energy efficiency and conservation as
well as explore joint research in energy conservation policy, where possible.
2.10.5 Encourage enterprises from both sides to actively participate and invest
in mineral resource exploration and development for mutual benefit while
ensuring environmental protection and sustainable development.
2.10.6 Enhance geological and mineral cooperation through joint study,
capacity building programmes, development of database and information
exchange and sharing of experiences for mutual benefit.
2.10.7 Strengthen cooperation in research and development, sharing of
experience, and capacity building in sustainable mining.
2.11 Quality Inspection
2.11.1 Implement the MOU between ASEAN and China on Strengthening
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Cooperation.
2.11.2 Hold regular ASEAN-China Ministerial Meeting on Quality Supervision,
Inspection and Quarantine to enhance the exchanges and cooperation between
relevant authorities at different levels.
2.11.3 Continue regular dialogue between ASEAN Consultative Committee on
Standard and Quality (ACCSQ) and General Administration of Quality
Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of the People’s Republic of China12
(AQSIQ), improve website of SPS cooperation to facilitate information sharing
and to explore and undertake joint study and capacity building projects.
2.12 Customs
2.12.1 Deepen exchange and cooperation in customs including through the
ASEAN-China Customs DG Consultation Meeting and Customs Coordinating
Committee Meeting.
2.12.2 Continue to implement cooperation projects and activities under the
areas of cooperation identified in the Memorandum of Understanding between
the Governments of the Member States of ASEAN and the People’s Republic
of China on Customs Cooperation.
2.12.3 Promote trade facilitation cooperation between ASEAN and China
through development of customs techniques and application of ICT in customs
cooperation.
2.12.4 Support efforts to achieve the entry into force of and promote the
implementation of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement with a view to push
for cooperation in trade facilitation for faster clearance of goods.
2.12.5 Promote Implementation of the World Customs Organization (WCO)
SAFE Framework of Standards by considering, among other things, sharing of
best practices and experience and mutual recognition of Authorised Economic
Operator (AEO) programmes, as appropriate.
2.13 Intellectual Property
2.13.1 Strengthen policy dialogue and exchange including through ASEANChina Heads of Intellectual Property Offices Meeting.
2.13.2 Continue to implement the MOU between ASEAN and China on
Cooperation in the Field of Intellectual Property.
2.13.3 Strengthen cooperation in the field of intellectual property and
enhance capacity building, technical assistance and training of intellectual
property professionals on the creation, acquisition, utilisation,
commercialisation, protection, management and enforcement of intellectual
property.
2.13.4 Strengthen information sharing and best practices in protection of
genetic resources and traditional knowledge.
2.14 SMEs
2.14.1 Support the implementation of the ASEAN Strategic Action Plan for SME
Development (2016-2025) including sharing best practices, experiences, and13
capacity building on the development of SMEs and convening of seminars,
workshops, and symposiums.
2.14.2 Strengthen policy consultations and exchange of expertise between the
concerned authorities including relevant stakeholders on SMEs and
pragmatically advance SMEs cooperation.
2.14.3 Support closer ties between SME-support institutions of ASEAN
countries and China, and cooperate in SME trade and investment, personnel
training and the building of industrial parks.
2.14.4 Strengthen SME cooperation in traditional areas including trade,
agriculture and tourism, and explore relevant new areas of cooperation.
2.14.5 Encourage active participation of ASEAN Member States in the China
International SMEs Expo, as well as encourage participation of ASEAN
Member States and China in other relevant trade shows and activities to
promote SMEs of both sides to expand their markets.
2.15 Industrial Cooperation
2.15.1 Enhance productivity by promoting cooperation in upgrading production
facilities, particularly in fields of advance technology, green and creative
industries where applicable.
2.15.2 Encourage industry clusters by promoting supply chain linkages of
industry sectors with mutual interests by both sides.
2.15.3 Promote innovation cooperation by encouraging exchanges of key
technology and its application to business innovation.
2.15.4 Encourage further cooperation and consultation on ASEAN-China trade
issues where necessary.
3. Social and Cultural Cooperation
3.1 Public Health
3.1.1 Enhance policy dialogue and exchanges through ASEAN-China Health
Ministers’ Meeting, ASEAN-China Senior Officials Meeting on Health
Development and other relevant mechanisms.
3.1.2 Implement the ASEAN-China MOU on Health Cooperation, and support
relevant cooperation programmes including through the use of ASEAN-China
Public Health Cooperation Fund.
3.1.3 Deepen cooperation in preventing and controlling emerging and
reemerging infectious and communicable diseases, especially on early14
detection, report, prevention, control and treatment, and conduct exchanges of
technologies, personnel and experiences to enhance response capability.
3.1.4 Cooperate in preparedness and responses against pandemic influenza
and Emerging Infectious Diseases (EIDs).
3.1.5 Strengthen exchange and cooperation in chronic disease prevention and
control, reduce the burden of chronic diseases, and improve health conditions
and living standard of people in the region.
3.1.6 Promote cooperation and exchanges of information and expertise on
non-communicable diseases including mental health.
3.1.7 Promote exchanges on occupational medicine including diagnosis,
treatment and prevention of occupational diseases.
3.1.8 Strengthen cooperation on traditional medicine, complementary and
alternative medicines (TM/CAM) focusing on its protection, development and
integration to healthcare system, subject to the individual member state’s
priorities and domestic regulations.
3.1.9 Strengthen cooperation in the areas of health promotion, including
through the use of information and communication technologies for the
continued development of public health, and the promotion of healthy cities and
sustainable sanitation management.
3.1.10 Continue to cooperate in training of health executives and professionals.
3.2 Education
3.2.1 Promote cooperation to increase exchange of visits by high-level
educational authorities. Make good use of the ASEAN-China Education
Exchange Week and the ASEAN-China Center to conduct comprehensive,
multi-level, and wide-ranging exchanges and cooperation to promote people-topeople and cultural exchanges between ASEAN and China.
3.2.2 Continue to promote student mobility and the provision of Chinese
Government scholarships to ASEAN Member States, including the Double
100,000 Students Mobility Programme, and encourage the creation of
mechanisms to facilitate mutual recognition of academic degrees, where
appropriate.
3.2.3 Continue to deepen practical cooperation between tertiary institutions
with emphasis on talent cultivation, student mobility, and joint research and
language teaching, where appropriate.
3.2.4 Promote cooperation and exchanges among schools and vocational
institutions.15
3.2.5 Continue to promote youth exchanges in the fields of languages, culture,
art and heritage with a view to enhancing mutual understanding and further
deepen friendship.
3.2.6 Continue to hold training courses for professionals at different levels and
in different areas by using relevant educational institutions.
3.2.7 Promote and encourage academic exchanges and the co-hosting of
academic conferences including through the Network of ASEAN-China Thinktanks.
3.2.8 Explore promoting Chinese language classes/courses including in
technical and vocational institutions through providing/increasing the number of
Chinese-speaking teachers.
3.3 Culture
3.3.1 Continue to enhance policy communication and exchanges among
authorities in charge of culture, and encourage further the role of ASEAN-China
Center in promoting cultural exchanges.
3.3.2 Implement the ASEAN-China MOU on Cultural Cooperation and the
Plan of Action on ASEAN-China Cooperation in Culture (2014-2018).
3.3.3 Conduct active exchanges and cooperation in literature, libraries,
archival materials, museums, performing arts, visual arts, art education, other
relevant public cultural facilities and cultural/creative industry.
3.3.4 Encourage and support cooperation between departments of historical
relics, archaeology and cultural heritage preservation, museums, archives,
libraries, and cultural institutes.
3.3.5 Cooperate to explore markets for cultural products and vigorously
develop cultural/creative industry.
3.3.6 Endeavour to support each other in hosting high-profile traditional and/or
contemporary cultural and art events.
3.3.7 Jointly preserve and promote national and traditional festivals as well as
encourage and support exchanges and cooperation in traditional games and
sports.
3.3.8 Continue to hold ASEAN-China Cultural Forum, and explore ways of
jointly hosting the Forum.
3.3.9 Strengthen cooperation on human resources development and training
in the cultural field, including through the exchange of experiences on the
hosting of large scale activities.16
3.3.10 Promote the exchange of experts and expertise in culture, traditional and
contemporary art, heritage and emerging industries (e.g. digital media and
online games).
3.3.11 Encourage the existing China Cultural Centers in ASEAN Member
States to promote regular cultural exchange and cooperation.
3.4 Human Resource and Social Protection
3.4.1 Implement human resources development plans, conduct training for
civil servants and encourage exchange of experiences and joint cooperation in
human resources market building, labour market information, vocational skill
development, labour law and regulations and social security policies.
3.4.2 Continue to strengthen policy exchanges, dialogue, and technical
cooperation through ASEAN Plus Three Labour Ministers’ Meeting (ALMM+3)
and ASEAN Plus Three Conference on Civil Service Matters (ACCSM+3).
3.4.3 Encourage public and public and private sectors to participate in human
resources development and exchanges.
3.4.4 Explore ways to establish social welfare and social protection
cooperation mechanism between ASEAN and China which may include, among
others, exchanges of policy, information and experiences in these areas.
3.4.5 Strengthen cooperation on social welfare, especially on that of senior
citizens, persons with disabilities, women and children, including through
supporting efforts to share experiences/studies on social welfare and protection
policies.
3.4.6 Promote the exchange of information, sharing of experiences, training
and cooperation between government agencies and Disabled People’s
Organisation (DPOs) on issues concerning persons with disabilities, including
measures to strengthen family and community support for persons with
disabilities.
3.4.7 Continue to strengthen policy exchanges, dialogue and technical
cooperation through ASEAN Plus Three Ministerial Meeting on Social Welfare
and Development (AMMSWD+3).
3.4.8 Promote cooperation in the work for the elimination of violence against
women and elimination of violence against children.
3.5 Poverty Reduction
3.5.1 Promote exchange and cooperation among relevant authorities in
implementing relevant poverty alleviation initiatives including the ASEAN-China
Social Development and Poverty Reduction Forum and China’s proposed
initiative on poverty alleviation in East Asia.17
3.5.2 Strengthen cooperation in building the capacity of ASEAN+3 village
leaders and further enhance the rural community development in ASEAN+3
countries.
3.5.3 Continue to hold a series of seminars on poverty reduction policy and
practices and offer academic degree in education on poverty reduction and
rural development for ASEAN Member States, strengthen cooperation on
human resources development in this area.
3.5.4 Continue to strengthen policy exchanges, dialogue, and technical
cooperation through ASEAN Plus Three Senior Officials’ Meeting on Rural
Development and Poverty Eradication (SOMRPDE+3).
3.5.5 Facilitate poverty reduction authorities to establish cooperation through
mutual visits of personnel, knowledge sharing, information exchanges and joint
study.
3.5.6 Render policy consultations and technical support and participate in the
design of poverty reduction projects and formulation of national poverty
reduction strategies in accordance with the needs of ASEAN Member States.
3.5.7 Support rural and community development by encouraging relevant
agencies of ASEAN Member States and China to explore exchange of
information and expertise in land use, planning and development, and
management.
3.6 Environment
3.6.1 Continue to promote environmental cooperation including through the
eventual conclusion and effective implementation of the ASEAN-China Strategy
on Environmental Cooperation 2016-2020, strengthen environmental high-level
policy dialogue, including through the ASEAN-China Environmental
Cooperation Forum and promote environmental cooperation through the work
of the China-ASEAN Environmental Cooperation Centre.
3.6.2 Support the Implementation of the ASEAN-China Cooperation
Framework for Environmentally Sound Technology and Industry, strengthen
exchange and cooperation on environmentally sound technologies and explore
the possibility of demonstration projects based on ASEAN-China
Demonstration Base for Environmental Technology and Industry Cooperation to
support ASEAN and China’s endeavor in pursuing green and environmentally
sustainable development.
3.6.3 Strengthen dialogue and exchange experiences in managing urban and
rural environmental protection and implement demonstration projects on
cooperation in urban and rural environment to improve living environmental
quality in the region, and explore partnership for ecologically friendly urban
development.18
3.6.4 Explore cooperation in environmental data and information sharing,
including, where appropriate, the possibility of establishing a joint platform on
environmental information sharing.
3.6.5 Enhance environmental capacity building and environmental education
cooperation, carry out joint-training courses, joint research, and staff exchange
programmes to enhance capacity and raise the level of regional environmental
management and enhance public environmental awareness in the region.
3.6.6 Carry out cooperation in co-beneficial areas such as joint
study/research, capacity building experience sharing in the field of air and water
quality management, and health and environmental protection and
management.
3.6.7 Promote cooperation to provide the peoples of ASEAN access to clean
water, clean air, basic healthcare, and other social services so that they may
lead healthy and productive lives and thereby contribute to ASEAN and the
global community.
3.6.8 Promote cooperation on environmental protection and preservation with
the objective of attaining environmental sustainability.
3.6.9 Explore possible cooperative initiatives to support the ASEAN Centre for
Biodiversity (ACB).
3.6.10 Promote cooperation which supplement activities under the ASEAN
Action Plan on Joint Response to Climate Change (AAP-JRCC) of the ASEAN
Working Group on Climate Change (AWGCC).
3.6.11 Explore possible cooperative initiatives, among others, on management
of priority biodiversity conservation areas such as ASEAN Heritage Parks and
implementation of biodiversity-related multilateral environmental agreements,
including the Convention on Biological Diversity.
3.7 Media
3.7.1 Continue to strengthen policy communication and dialogue through the
ASEAN-China Ministers Responsible for Information Meeting.
3.7.2 Enhance exchange and discussion between mainstream media of
ASEAN countries and China, promote mutual visits and exchanges of
journalists and strengthen cooperation in news reporting, expand areas of news
coverage and increase the depth of content.
3.7.3 Strengthen cooperation on news network.
3.7.4 Promote Cooperation in producing films; facilitate co-production and
exchanges of films and TV programmes as well as marketing of TV
programmes.19
3.7.5 Encourage exchanges of hosting and active participation in films and TV
festivals and exhibitions and relevant trade events.
3.7.6 Promote exchange and cooperation between technicians and
professionals in television, film, and broadcasting.
3.7.7 Engage and encourage the mainstream media to promote a positive
international image of ASEAN-China relations.
3.8 Disaster Management
3.8.1 Effectively implement the MOU on Disaster Management Cooperation
between ASEAN and China.
3.8.2. Strengthen technical cooperation in disaster management, disaster
prevention, disaster risk monitoring and disaster risk reduction, early-warning,
relief and rehabilitation, conduct emergency response and rescue skills training,
and the sharing of good practices, experiences and information.
3.8.3. Strengthen cooperation in earthquake and tsunami early warning.
3.8.4 Improve hardware and software infrastructure on disaster management
through projects and exchanges involving experts.
3.8.5 Continue to support the implementation of the second phase of the
ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency Response
(AADMER) Work Programme for 2013-2015 and beyond, continue cooperation
with the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster
management (AHA Centre), and promote capacity building in disaster
management.
3.8.6 Promote capacity building on Emergency Medical Service (EMS),
through information sharing, exchanging experiences and knowledge and
providing workshops and training courses on EMS administration and support,
among others.
3.9 Local Government Cooperation and People-to-People Exchanges
3.9.1 Promote dialogue, exchange of visits and sharing of experiences among
local governments, including governors and mayors.
3.9.2 Continue to promote people-to-people exchanges through exchange
programmes among various groups, including women and youth, and through
cooperation in elderly persons affairs and active aging, and among people-topeople friendship organisations.
3.9.3 Promote people-to-people exchanges through various platforms and
programmes, such as ASEAN Plus Three Ministers Meeting on Youth, ASEANChina Youth Camp, GMS Youth Friendship Programme (also known as20
Lancang-Mekong Youth Friendship Exchanges1 ), and encourage both sides to
use other platforms/programmes such as ASEAN-China Youth Exchange and
Activity Center, China-ASEAN Youth Friendship Association, and ChinaASEAN Women Training Center.
3.9.4 Encourage cooperation between local governments in ASEAN and in
China on the improvement people’s quality of life and livelihood in less
developed areas.
3.9.5 Explore the establishment of a network of sister cities/provinces between
ASEAN Member States and China.
4. Connectivity
4.1. Enhance cooperation on ASEAN Connectivity, including through
capacity building and resource mobilization for the Master Plan on ASEAN
Connectivity (MPAC) and the post-2015 agenda for ASEAN Connectivity.
4.2. Continue to enhance the mechanism between the ASEAN Connectivity
Coordinating Committee (ACCC) and the Chinese Working Committee of the
China-ASEAN Connectivity Cooperation Committee (CWC-CACCC) to forge
cooperation and develop flagship projects in enhancing ASEAN Connectivity.
4.3 Strengthen cooperation to improve infrastructure development in the
region, by encouraging sustainable and efficient infrastructure investment
through public and private partnership and other modalities to mobilise private
sector investment, where appropriate.
4.4 Explore ways to Improve connectivity between ASEAN and China by
synergising common priorities identified in the Master Plan on ASEAN
Connectivity and the Post-2015 Agenda for ASEAN Connectivity, and China’s
“One Belt, One Road” initiative.
5. Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) and Narrowing Development Gap
5.1 Intensify support and assistance, financially and technically, for ASEAN’s
narrowing development gap between ASEAN Member States and integration
efforts by implementing the IAI Work Plan II and its successor documents
through enhancing infrastructure development, human resource development,
information and communication technology and regional and sub-regional
development.
6. Mekong River Basin and Sub-regional Development
6.1 Continue to strengthen cooperation under the Mekong-Lancang
Cooperation, the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS) and the ASEAN-Mekong
1 As referred to in the ASEAN-China Plan of Action (2011-2015)21
Basin Development Cooperation (AMBDC) frameworks, as well as under the
Mekong River Commission (MRC) in various areas including law enforcement
and security, transportation, sustainable development, environment and climate
change, information communications, water quality, sustainable usage and
management of water resource, health, tourism, food and agriculture to support
ASEAN Community building efforts.
6.2 Implement the Framework for Economic Cooperation between BIMP-EAGA
and China by strengthening cooperation in the priority sectors identified for
BIMP-EAGA development, namely agriculture, transport, infrastructure, ICT,
natural resources, tourism and SMEs as well as providing technical and capital
assistance for BIMP-EAGA programmes and projects.
7. Cooperation on International and Regional Affairs
7.1 East Asia Cooperation
7.1.1 Remain engaged in discussions and continue coordination on an inclusive
and rules-based regional architecture and support ASEAN efforts in promoting
norms and principles enshrined in among others, the ASEAN Charter and other
ASEAN relevant instruments such as the TAC and the EAS Declaration on the
Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations (Bali Principles) towards the
development of a more rules-based regional architecture.
7.1.2 Continue to support ASEAN Plus Three cooperation as a main vehicle to
realise the long-term objective of establishing an East Asian community with
ASEAN as the driving force, including through effective implementation of the
ASEAN Plus Three Cooperation Work Plan 2013-2017.
7.1.3 Work closely to strengthen the EAS, with ASEAN as the driving force, as
a leaders-led forum for dialogue and cooperation on broad strategic, political
and economic issues of common interest and concern with the aim of
promoting peace, stability and economic prosperity in the region.
7.1.4 Promote common interests in East Asia and cope with common
challenges through the East Asia Forum, Network of East Asia Think Tanks
(NEAT), Network of ASEAN-China Think-tanks (NACT), Economic Research
Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA), and other mechanisms.
7.2 Promotion of Moderation
7.2.1 Support the principles of the Langkawi Declaration on the Global
Movement of Moderates to promote peace, security, upholding rule of law,
sustainable and inclusive development, equitable growth and social harmony.
7.2.2 Encourage cooperation on interfaith and inter-civilisation dialogues and
further contribute internationally and regionally to the promotion of tolerance
and understanding through initiatives including the Global Movement of22
Moderates (GMM) and promoting moderation as a core value to counter
extremism and acts of violence in all aspects.
7.3 Inter-regional Cooperation
7.3.1 Maintain cooperation in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC),
and Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM).
7.3.2 Actively promote the Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) process.
7.3.3 Strengthen cooperation in G20-related matters.
7.3.4 Further promote dialogue and mechanism in South-South Cooperation
such as the G-77 and China, as well as other inter-regional frameworks such as
the Forum of East Asia and Latin America Cooperation (FEALAC), AsianAfrican Conference and New Asian-African Strategic Partnership.
7.4 Cooperation in the UN
7.4.1 Continue to enhance cooperation at the United Nations on issues of
mutual interest and common concern, inter alia, UN reform, matters affecting
international peace and security, counter-terrorism, climate change, and
development agenda.
7.4.2 Enhance closer communication and coordination among the Permanent
Representatives of ASEAN Member States and China at the UN.
7.5 Cooperation within Other International Organization
7.5.1 Promote cooperation on WTO issues, including, but not limited to,
securing a full and balanced implementation of all elements of the Bali Package
as well as formulating a Post-Bali Work Programme, with the aim of concluding
the remaining Doha Development Agenda issues and making the multilateral
trading system more responsive to the priorities of developing and least
developed countries.
8. ASEAN Institutional Strengthening
8.1 Support ASEAN’s efforts to implement measures aimed to build
capacities in the ASEAN Secretariat as well as in other ASEAN institutions and
bodies, particularly in corporate development and project management, in order
to increase support to all ASEAN-centred institutions.23
9. Implementation Arrangements
9.1 This Plan of Action will be implemented under the appropriate funding
support through ASEAN Member States and China, including the ASEANChina Cooperation Fund (ACCF) and other funds.
9.2. Concerned sectoral bodies in ASEAN and agencies in China will jointly
draw up specific work programmes/projects to implement the actions and
measures outlined in this Plan of Action.
9.3. Review of this Plan of Action will be made through appropriate ASEANChina mechanisms, including through the relevant ASEAN-China Ministerial
Meetings, ASEAN-China SOC and ASEAN-China JCC. Progress report of the
implementation of this Plan of Action will be submitted through PMC Session +
1 with China to the annual ASEAN-China Summit.
* * * * *