CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT OF THE 18TH ASEAN PLUS THREE SUMMIT
KUALA LUMPUR, 21 NOVEMBER 2015
OUR PEOPLE, OUR COMMUNITY, OUR VISION
The 18th ASEAN Plus Three Summit was chaired by the Prime Minister of Malaysia, the
Honourable Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib Tun Abdul Razak and was held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
on 21 November 2015. It was attended by all Heads of State/Government of ASEAN Member
States, the People’s Republic of China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
2. We noted with satisfaction the progress in ASEAN Plus Three cooperation over the
past 17 years and reiterated our commitment to further intensify and expand it to include
all areas of cooperation, including cross-cutting issues such as Connectivity and narrowing
the development divide. We reaffirmed ASEAN Plus Three cooperation as a driving force for
enhanced peace, security and prosperity in the East Asian region, with the long term goal of
building an East Asia community.
3. Recalling the East Asia Vision Group (EAVG) II Report which was adopted at the
ASEAN Plus Three Commemorative Summit in Phom Penh, Cambodia on 19 November 2012
recommending the realisation of an East Asia Economic Community by 2020 as the main
pillar of ASEAN Plus Three vision, we adopted the Final Report on the Follow-up to the EAVG
II Recommendations which would pave the way towards greater ASEAN Plus Three
integration, complementing the initiatives of the ASEAN Plus Three Cooperation Work Plan
2013-2017.
4. We acknowledged the importance of maintaining and enhancing peace, security and
stability in the East Asian region and emphasised the need to enhance efforts to address
emerging challenges in the areas of traditional and non-traditional security. Towards this
end, we agreed to strengthen political-security cooperation as contained in the ASEAN Plus
Three Cooperation Work Plan (2013-2017).
5. We welcomed the continued growth in trade and investment relations between
ASEAN and the Plus Three countries. Total trade with Plus Three countries reached US$727.1
billion in 2014, which accounted for 28.8 per cent of total ASEAN trade, while Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) inflow from Plus Three Countries reached US$26.7 billion, which amounted
to 19.6 per cent in 2014. We expressed confidence that through trade and investment
relations, the region would maintain its positive growth trajectory despite on-going global
financial instability.2
6. We acknowledged that collaboration between ASEAN and Plus Three countries
remained important in ensuring the strong economic foundation in the region and
underlined that the full utilisation of the ASEAN Plus One Free Trade Agreement with the
People’s Republic of China, Japan and the Republic of Korea respectively would contribute
significantly to enhancing sustainability of the Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
in the region.
7. We recognised the important role of the private sector in enhancing economic
cooperation in the East Asian region and appreciated the continuous efforts made by the
East Asia Business Council (EABC) in providing private sector feedback to deepen intraregional trade and investment and in strengthening cooperation among the private sectors
in ASEAN, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea through its various initiatives and activities.
We welcomed the positive outcome of the inaugural ASEAN Plus Three interface with the
East Asia Business Council and looked forward to more such dialogues between ASEAN Plus
Three Leaders and the Council.
8. We expressed confidence that the region’s economies will remain resilient and
maintain their positive trajectory despite the volatile global economic environment. Given
the immense potential of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) to
further regional economic integration, uphold ASEAN centrality and further improve the
region’s influence on the global stage, we welcomed the substantial progress achieved in all
areas of negotiations and tasked our Economic Ministers to further intensify efforts towards
the early conclusion of negotiations.
9. Against the backdrop of heightened volatility in the global financial market, we
reaffirmed the importance of strengthening the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation
(CMIM) as part of the regional financial safety net to maintain financial stability in ASEAN
and East Asia. To further complement CMIM, we welcomed the transition of the ASEAN+3
Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO) to an International Organisation, operating as an
independent regional surveillance unit to monitor and analyse regional economies and
support CMIM initiatives.
10. We acknowledged progress made under the Asian Bond Market Initiative (ABMI),
particularly in developing efficient and liquid regional bond markets through the Credit
Guarantee and Investment Facility (CGIF), the Cross-border Settlement Infrastructure Forum
(CSIF), the ASEAN+3 Multi-Currency Bond Issuance Framework (AMBIF) and the ASEAN+3
Bond Market Forum (ABMF) to help alleviate financial volatility and contribute to economic
and financial stability in the East Asia region.
11. We underscored the importance of strengthening and broadening tourism
cooperation in promoting people-to-people linkages in the East Asian region and looked
forward to the signing of the Memorandum of Cooperation on ASEAN Plus Three Tourism
Cooperation in 2016.
12. We emphasised the importance of mitigating the threat of climate change to the
agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors in East Asia. We reaffirmed the important role of
the ASEAN Plus Three Emergency Rice Reserve (APTERR) Agreement as a mechanism to
strengthen regional food security and reducing poverty. To further improve its efficiency, we3
took note of the need to consider alternative staple food crops in addition to rice. To further
complement APTERR, we encouraged the development of technology and a framework to
have early warning information on impending food emergencies in the region through the
ASEAN Food Security Information System (AFSIS). We further welcomed the adoption of the
ASEAN Plus Three Bioenergy and Food Security Framework 2015-2025 with the objective of
supporting ASEAN Member States’ efforts to ensure sustainable, food-secure and climate-
friendly bioenergy for economic development. We also acknowledged the importance of
establishing food value chains through Public-Private Partnership, and encouraged the
sharing of best practices, development and exchanges of agro and agro-industry
technologies, and market management to increase the value of food supply chains.
13. We recognised the need to ensure energy security in the region by promoting energy
diversification through renewable energy development, energy efficiency and conservation
and the use of green technology. We welcomed the enhancement and deepening of
cooperation through knowledge transfer at an affordable cost in the field of renewable
energy and energy efficiency. Further, we took note that clean coal, including high efficiency
coal-fired power generation would contribute towards energy security and the potential
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
14. We recognised youth as an essential asset to a nation’s development and stressed
the importance of continuous engagement at all levels. With over 60% of the ASEAN
population today comprising those under 35 years of age, they will be the driving force in
shaping the future of ASEAN. We welcomed the outcome of the ASEAN Young Leaders’
Summit 2015, held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia on 18-20 November 2015 with the theme
‘Youth Driving the ASEAN Community’, which was an avenue for youth from around ASEAN
to build and leverage networks towards creating a cohesive ASEAN identity.
15. We highlighted the need to address environmental issues effectively, particularly on
trans-boundary pollution and to intensify efforts to ensure sustainable development in the
region. We reaffirmed our commitment to the implementation of sustainable forest
management through enhancing capacity-building and the need to further strengthen
cooperation and joint approaches in addressing forestry and environmental management
issues.
16. The Plus Three Countries welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN Joint Statement on
Climate Change at the 27th ASEAN Summit, which reaffirms ASEAN’s commitment to
collectively work towards addressing climate change under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). We emphasised the commitment to conclude an
ambitious, durable and legally binding global climate agreement acceptable to all at the Paris
Climate Conference in December 2015.
17. We reaffirmed our commitment to enhancing cooperation in education at the
regional level. The Plus Thee Countries welcomed the adoption of the Kuala Lumpur
Declaration on Higher Education at the 27th ASEAN Summit. We noted the progress in
developing the ASEAN Plus Three Guidelines on Student Exchange and Mobility.4
18. We noted with satisfaction the implementation of the ASEAN Conference on Civil
Service Matters Plus Three (ACCSM+3) Work Plan (2012-2015) and looked forward to the
adoption of the ACCSM+3 Work Plan 2016-2020 to further promote good governance.
19. We acknowledged the important role played by the information sector to ensure that
multi-flow of information is in place to raise awareness on ASEAN and in the East Asia region.
Towards this end, we looked forward to the full and effective implementation of the Work
Plan on Enhancing ASEAN Plus Three Cooperation through Information and Media (20122017).
20. We recognised the importance of Science and Technology as powerful enablers of
economic development in the East Asia region and looked forward to the implementation
of the ASEAN Plan of Action on Science, Technology and Innovation (APASTI) 2016-2025 with
clear and effective mechanisms to further cooperation with Dialogue Partners.
21. We expressed concern over the threat of infectious diseases in the region, including
the recent outbreak of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and encouraged the
Plus Three Countries to continue supporting the Emerging Infectious Diseases (EIDs)
Programme, which has engendered fruitful collaboration in the region. We acknowledged
the need to pursue stronger cooperation under the ASEAN post-2015 Health Development
Agenda.
22. We reaffirmed our commitment to further strengthen regional cooperation in the
area of disaster management and emphasised the importance of continued support for the
ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management (AHA
Centre) and the implementation of the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management and
Emergency Response (AADMER), including its post-2015 work programme.
23. We recognised the importance for ASEAN to be better connected in ensuring freer
movement of people, goods, services and capital. The ASEAN Leaders appreciated the Plus
Three countries’ support in the implementation of the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity
and welcomed their support and assistance to further enhance regional connectivity. We
looked forward to the conclusion of a post-2015 ASEAN Connectivity agenda which would
be bold, visionary and contain concrete and feasible measures which would contribute to
seamless connectivity in the East Asia region. Noting that financing mobilisation is an
important factor in moving the ASEAN Connectivity agenda forward, we welcomed progress
in the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank by China as well as the
proposed Partnership for Quality Infrastructure by Japan to address infrastructure financing
needs in the region.
24. We also recognised that regional integration and narrowing the development divide
are priorities in the ASEAN community-building process and welcomed a post-2015 Initiative
for ASEAN Integration (IAI) agenda and a successor document to the IAI Work Plan II. Noting
that IAI is cross-cutting in nature, we called for closer collaboration among the various
ASEAN sectoral bodies in ensuring the full participation and realisation of regional
commitments and initiatives.5
25. We acknowledged the contribution made by Track 1.5 and Track 2 initiatives in
promoting rich discussions on a wide range of issues, including the East Asia Forum (EAF),
which provides a platform for think-tanks, business and academia to provide proposals for
deepening East Asia regional cooperation. We further welcomed the contribution of the
Network on East Asia Think-tanks (NEAT) in supporting East Asian community-building and
noted with interest NEAT Memorandum No. 12.
26. We acknowledged the role played by the ASEAN-China Centre, ASEAN-Japan Centre
and ASEAN-Korea Centre in promoting trade and investment, tourism and cultural
exchanges. We encouraged these Centres to establish greater synergies with other
establishments such as the ASEAN Business Advisory Council (ABAC), East Asia Business
Council (EABC) and the Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat in promoting ASEAN in the East
Asia region in the larger context of the ASEAN Plus Three framework.
27. The ASEAN Leaders congratulated the Leaders of the Plus Three Countries on the
successful convening of the 6th Trilateral Summit, held in Seoul, the Republic of Korea on 1
November 2015 and expressed the view that the positive momentum in China-Japan-ROK
trilateral cooperation would contribute to the promotion and maintenance of peace,
stability and prosperity in the region.
********************************