THE FIFTEENTH AEM-MOFCOM CONSULTATIONS
4 August 2016, Vientiane, Lao PDR
JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT
1. Economic Ministers from the ten ASEAN Member States and Minister of Commerce
of China met on 4 August 2016 in Vientiane, Lao PDR for the Fifteenth AEM-MOFCOM
Consultations. The Consultations were co-chaired by H.E. Mrs Khemmani Pholsena, Minister
of Industry and Commerce of Lao PDR and H.E. Gao Hucheng, Minister of Commerce of
China.
2. China commended the establishment of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) in
2015 as a major milestone in regional economic integration. China also welcomed the new
AEC Blueprint 2025, which envisages an AEC by 2025 that is highly integrated and cohesive;
competitive, innovative and dynamic; with enhanced connectivity and sectoral cooperation;
a more resilient, inclusive, and people-oriented, people-centered community; and
integrated with the global economy.
3. The Ministers noted the importance of coordination on economic and trade
cooperation in the past 25 years since the establishment of the ASEAN-China Dialogue
Relations. Reconising the significance of trade and investment between ASEAN and China,
the Ministers believe that it is timely to strengthen ASEAN-China trade and economic
cooperation, therefore the ASEAN Economic Ministers take note with appreciation toward
China’s Proposals. The Ministers noted the performance of ASEAN-China bilateral trade and
investment, and were pleased that, despite the uncertainty in the global economy, China
maintained its position as ASEAN’s largest trading partner. ASEAN total trade with China
reached USD 346.4 billion in 2015, accounting for 15.2 per cent of ASEAN’s total trade.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) flows from China to ASEAN amounted to USD 8.2 billion in
2015, placing China as ASEAN’s fourth largest source of FDI. According to China’s statistics,
trade between China and ASEAN increased 18.5 per cent on average in the past 25 years
from 1991 to 2015. Trade volume between China and ASEAN was USD 472.16 billion by
2015, equal to 11.9 per cent of China’s total trade. Direct investment from China to ASEAN
reached USD 9.45 billion with a year-on-year increase of 60.8 per cent.
4. The Ministers welcomed the entry into force of the Protocol to Amend the
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Certain Agreements
(ACFTA Upgrading Protocol) between ASEAN and China on 1 July 2016. The Ministers looked
forward to the implementation of the ACFTA Upgrading Protocol, which aims to enhance
trade and economic relations between ASEAN and China. The Ministers also tasked the
officials to continue deliberations in mapping out the detailed work plan of for the furtherFINAL
Page 2 of 3
liberalization of trade in goods, improvement of product specific rules, and approaches to
investment liberalisation and protection.
5. The Ministers agreed to recommend the adoption of a Joint Statement between
ASEAN and China on Production Capacity Cooperation as a deliverable of the ASEAN-China
Commemorative Summit for the 25th Anniversary of the ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations.
The Joint Statement aims at providing opportunities to further strengthen economic and
trade relations through the cooperation on production capacity that will further boost
confidence and engagement of businesses from ASEAN Member States and China.
6. The ASEAN Ministers congratulated China for the successful conclusion of the 12th
China-ASEAN Expo 2015 held in Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region on 18–21
September 2015. This annual event showcased the various economic initiatives being
pursued by both ASEAN and China, including the ACFTA, and the opportunities arising from
these initiatives. The Ministers looked forward to the 13th China-ASEAN Expo to be held in
Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region on 11–14 September 2016.FINAL
Page 3 of 3
LIST OF MINISTERS
1. The Hon. Pehin Dato Lim Jock Seng, Minister at the Prime Minister’s Office and
Second Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Brunei Darussalam;
2. H.E. Pan Sorasak, Minister of Commerce, Cambodia;
3. H.E. Gao Hucheng, Minister of Commerce, China;
4. Mr Iman Pambagyo, Director General of International Trade Negotiations, Ministry of
Trade, Indonesia (representing H.E. Enggartiasto Lukita, Minister of Trade, Indonesia);
5. H.E. Mrs Khemmani Pholsena, Minister of Industry and Commerce, Lao PDR;
6. H.E. Dato’ Sri Mustapa Mohamed, Minister of International Trade and Industry,
Malaysia;
7. H.E. Kyaw Win, Union Minister of Planning and Finance, Myanmar;
8. H.E. Ramon M. Lopez, Secretary of Trade and Industry, the Philippines;
9. H.E. Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry (Trade), Singapore;
10. H.E. Apiradi Tantraporn, Minister of Commerce, Thailand;
11. H.E. Tran Tuan Anh, Minister of Industry and Trade, Viet Nam;
12. H.E. Le Luong Minh, Secretary-General of ASEAN.