JOINT STATEMENT OF THE 19TH ASEAN-CHINA SUMMIT TO COMMEMORATE
THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY OF ASEAN-CHINA DIALOGUE RELATIONS
Towards a Closer ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership
We, the Heads of State/Government of the Member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People’s Republic of China, gathered on 7
September 2016 in Vientiane, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, at the 19th ASEAN-
China Summit to Commemorate the 25th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Dialogue
Relations;
Recalling with satisfaction the growth of ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations over the
past 25 years and our wide-ranging cooperation;
Recognising that ASEAN-China ties are among the most substantial and dynamic,
bring mutual benefits, and contribute to regional peace, stability and prosperity;
Reaffirming the importance of China’s support for ASEAN integration as well as
ASEAN’s efforts in realising ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead Together, including through
narrowing the development gap and enhancing ASEAN Connectivity, as well as
maintaining ASEAN Centrality in the evolving regional architecture;
Reaffirming that the principles, shared values and norms enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, the ASEAN Charter and the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia (TAC), the Bali Declaration on ASEAN Community in a Global
Community of Nations (Bali Concord III), the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence,
and the East Asia Summit (EAS) Declaration on the Principles for Mutually Beneficial
Relations (Bali Principles) as well as universally recognised principles of international
law, will continue to guide ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations and friendly cooperation;
Reaffirming our mutual respect for each other’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity in accordance with international law and the principle of non-
interference in the internal affairs of other states; and our commitment to promote
peace and stability in the region;
Reaffirming that the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea
(DOC) is a milestone document that embodies the collective commitment of the
Parties to promote peace, stability, mutual trust and confidence in the region, in
accordance with the UN Charter and universally recognised principles of international
law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS);
Welcoming a series of commemorative activities to mark the 25th Anniversary of
ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations and jointly celebrate the auspicious occasion;
Hereby agree on the following:
1. We are committed to enhancing the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for
mutual benefit, including through the full and effective implementation of the
2016-2020 Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on the ASEAN-
China Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity.Final
2
2. China welcomes the establishment of the ASEAN Community, and reaffirms its
continued support for ASEAN’s integration process and ASEAN Centrality in the
evolving regional architecture. China also welcomes the 50th Anniversary of
ASEAN in 2017.
3. ASEAN reaffirms that China’s development is an important opportunity for the
region, and supports China's pursuit of peaceful development. ASEAN notes
China’s initiatives such as the “Belt and Road” and the 2+7 Cooperation
Framework. The ASEAN countries also reaffirm adherence to one-China policy.
4. We will continue to strengthen dialogue and cooperation to enhance mutual
understanding and friendship, promote defence exchanges and security
cooperation to address common security issues, including combating terrorism,
transnational threats and other non-traditional security challenges in pursuit of
regional peace and stability through existing frameworks and mechanisms such
as the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM Plus) and the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) and other existing frameworks.
5. We welcome the adoption of the Joint Statement of the Foreign Ministers of
ASEAN Member States and China on the Full and Effective Implementation of
the DOC on 25 July 2016 in Vientiane, Lao PDR. We reaffirm our respect for and
commitment to the freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South China
Sea as provided for by the universally recognised principles of international law,
including the 1982 UNCLOS; and undertake to resolve the territorial and
jurisdictional disputes by peaceful means, without resorting to the threat or use of
force, through friendly consultations and negotiations by sovereign states directly
concerned, in accordance with the universally recognised principles of
international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. We also undertake to exercise
self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate or escalate
disputes and affect peace and stability.
6. We remain committed to the full and effective implementation of the DOC in its
entirety and working substantively towards the early adoption of a Code of
Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) based on consensus. We also welcome
the establishment of the Guidelines for Hotline Communications among Senior
Officials of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of ASEAN Member States and China
in Response to Maritime Emergencies in the Implementation of the DOC, and the
adoption of a Joint Statement on the Application of the Code for Unplanned
Encounters at Sea (CUES) in the South China Sea.
7. We are committed to further deepening and expanding mutually-beneficial
economic cooperation, including through the full and effective implementation of
the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) and Protocol to Amend the
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Certain
Agreements thereunder between ASEAN and China, and working towards the
early and successful conclusion of a modern, comprehensive, high quality and
mutually beneficial Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)
agreement. We also welcome the adoption of the Joint Statement between
ASEAN and China on Production Capacity Cooperation.Final
3
8. We will continue to strengthen cooperation in the area of connectivity that will
bring mutual benefits, including through capacity building and resource
mobilisation for the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025 (MPAC 2025),
exploring ways to improve connectivity between both sides by synergising
common priorities identified in the MPAC 2025 and China’s “Belt and Road”
initiative, and encourage the active involvement of relevant multilateral financial
institutions.
9. We are satisfied with the activities under the ASEAN-China Year of Educational
Exchange, including the successful convening of the 9th ASEAN-China Education
Cooperation Week and the 2nd ASEAN-China Education Ministers’ Roundtable
Conference, the 2nd ASEAN-China Youth Exchange Visit: Education and
Leadership, and are ready to expand educational exchanges and cooperation.
10. We welcome the designation of 2017 as the ASEAN-China Year of Tourism
Cooperation, and look forward to enhancing cooperation and activities between
ASEAN and China with a view to boosting two-way tourist visits.
11. We will continue to strengthen cooperation in environmental protection,
sustainable development and management of land and water resources,
biodiversity conservation as well as address transboundary challenges; and
strengthen dialogue and cooperation in the international climate change and
other environment-related negotiations.
12. We reiterate our commitment to support and assist ASEAN’s efforts to narrow the
development gap between and among ASEAN Member States including through
the implementation of the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) Work Plan III.
13. We welcome the successful convening of the 1st Lancang-Mekong Cooperation
Leaders’ Meeting in Sanya, China, on 23 March 2016. We further welcome the
strengthening of cooperation under existing Mekong sub-regional cooperation
mechanisms, such as the Lancang-Mekong Cooperation (LMC), the Greater
Mekong Sub-region (GMS) and the ASEAN-Mekong Basin Development
Cooperation (AMBDC) and other relevant sub-regional frameworks to support
efforts to narrow the development gap in the region.
14. We reaffirm our commitment to further intensify regional cooperation in East Asia
and remain engaged in discussions and continue coordination on an inclusive
and rules-based regional architecture.
. . . . .