CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT OF THE 20 TH ASEAN-CHINA SUMMIT
13 November 2017, Manila, Philippines
“Partnering for Change, Engaging the World”
1. The 20 th ASEAN-China Summit was held on 13 November 2017 in Manila,
Philippines. The Summit was chaired by H.E. Rodrigo Roa Duterte, President of the
Republic of the Philippines. The Summit was attended by all Heads of State/Government
of ASEAN Member States and H.E. Li Keqiang, Premier of the State Council of the
People’s Republic of China. The Secretary-General of ASEAN was also in attendance.
2. We were pleased to note that ASEAN-China relations have been strong, stable
and mutually-beneficial. Over the years, the strategic partnership has grown rapidly to
become one of ASEAN’s most substantive Dialogue Partners. ASEAN Leaders thanked
China for its continued support for ASEAN since the establishment of the ASEAN-China
dialogue partnership in 1991. China congratulated ASEAN on its 50th Founding
Anniversary and reaffirmed its support to its integration and community-building efforts,
narrowing the development gap and enhancing ASEAN Connectivity, as well as
maintaining ASEAN Centrality in the evolving regional architecture.
3. We noted with satisfaction that ASEAN and China continue to strengthen their
strategic partnership in a wide range of political-security, economic, and socio-cultural
areas through the effective implementation of the 2016-2020 Plan of Action to implement
the Joint Declaration on ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership. As strategic partners,
ASEAN and China continue to further deepen cooperation in all areas identified under the
Plan of Action and through the various ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the EAS, ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) and ADMM Plus.
4. We agreed to further increase high-level exchanges and dialogues across the
three pillars of cooperation to further solidify ASEAN-China strategic partnership and
promote mutual understanding.
5. We expressed confidence that economic ties will continue to grow, supported by
the further deepening of economic linkages. ASEAN Leaders noted with satisfaction that
in 2016 China remained as ASEAN’s largest trading partner with total merchandise trade
reached USD 368 billion, and continued to be ASEAN’s fourth largest external source of
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) valued at USD 9.8 billion.FINAL
Page 2 of 4
6. We welcomed the entry into force of the Protocol to Amend the Framework
Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Co-operation and Certain Agreements
thereunder between ASEAN and the People’s Republic of China (ACFTA Upgrade
Protocol) and looked forward to the early ratification of the Protocol by the remaining
Parties and the completion of the negotiations for trade facilitating Product Specific Rules
(PSR) under Trade in Goods as soon as possible. These will help support the twin goals
to reach two-way trade and investment of US$ 1 trillion, and US$150 billion, respectively
by 2020. We also encouraged concerned Parties to continue to endeavor to resolve
pending issues under the ACFTA, in order to ensure greater economic and trade
cooperation, and to address with urgency the long-standing issue concerning iron and
steel.
7. We welcomed the continued success of the ASEAN-China Expo, which brings
peoples from ASEAN and China together and create new opportunities for trade and
businesses. ASEAN Leaders thereafter looked forward to China’s continued support for
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises of ASEAN Member States, including their
participation in regional and global value chains.
8. We noted the progress made by our joint efforts in advancing the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) negotiations. In view of the large potential
of the RCEP to promote global trade and growth, we urged RCEP Participating Countries
to exercise their best endeavor to swiftly and successfully achieve a modern,
comprehensive, high-quality and mutually-beneficial RCEP agreement.
9. ASEAN Leaders noted China’s support to the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity
(MPAC) 2025. We also noted ongoing efforts to explore synergies between ASEAN’s
MPAC 2025, China’s Belt and Road Initiative, including through deepening the
cooperation of infrastructure connectivity, and connectivity initiatives under the Greater
Mekong Sub-region, and the Mekong-Lancang Cooperation. We further noted such
cooperation should be implemented in a mutually beneficial manner particularly for
promoting respective domestic production. The Joint Statement between ASEAN and
China on Further Deepening the Cooperation on Infrastructure Connectivity that we
issued is a positive step in this direction. ASEAN Leaders looked forward to greater
cooperation with China through the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and the
Silk Road Fund to enhance regional infrastructure projects.
10. We welcomed the continued cooperation in narrowing the development gap within
ASEAN, including through China’s contribution of grant assistance for the Initiative for
ASEAN Integration (IAI) to support the implementation of the IAI Work Plan III.
11. ASEAN Leaders reiterated their commitment to further intensify cooperation in
narrowing the development gap between and among ASEAN Member States. In this
connection, they looked forward to China’s continued support towards the implementation
of the IAI Work Plan III (2016-2020) and Cambodia’s hosting of the 2nd Mekong-LancangFINAL
Page 3 of 4
Cooperation Leaders' Meeting under the theme “Our River of Peace and Sustainable
Development”, which will be held on 10-11 January 2018 in Phnom Penh.
12. We welcomed the positive developments in the South China Sea (SCS) since the
last ASEAN-China Summit. We noted that the Framework of the Code of Conduct in the
South China Sea (COC) adopted by the Foreign Ministers of ASEAN Member States and
China in August 2017 was an important step toward the conclusion of an effective COC.
We announced that as a next step, ASEAN Member States and China will officially
commence substantive negotiations on the text of the COC and tasked the Joint Working
Group and the Senior Officials’ Meeting on the DOC as the bodies responsible for drafting
the COC. We looked forward to the subsequent convening of the 23 rd ASEAN-China Joint
Working Group Meeting on the Implementation of the DOC in Viet Nam in early 2018.
13. We agreed to cooperate in maintaining peace, security, stability, safety and
freedom of navigation in and over-flight above the SCS, in accordance with international
law, including the 1982 UNCLOS.
14. We reiterated our commitment to the full and effective implementation of the DOC
in its entirety, including through confidence building measures and through practical
maritime cooperation. We adopted the Leaders’ Declaration on a Decade of Coastal and
Marine Environmental Protection in the South China Sea, which is reflective of our shared
commitment to implement the (DOC) and desire to transform the SCS into a sea of peace,
stability, and prosperity.
15. We recalled that at the ASEAN-China Summit last year, Chinese Premier Li
Keqiang suggested the target of 30 million two-way tourist arrivals by 2020. We noted
that both sides have exceeded this target in less than a year. In 2016, 19.8 million
Chinese tourists visited Southeast Asian countries while 10.3 million Southeast Asians
visited China. In 2016, 19.8 million Chinese tourists visited Southeast Asian countries
while 10.3 million Southeast Asians visited China.
16. We welcomed the various activities held in ASEAN Member States and in China
this year to celebrate the ASEAN-China Year of Tourism Cooperation to promote people-
to-people exchanges, mutual trust and understanding. We welcomed the significant
growth in tourism figures in two-way tourist arrivals. We also noted that the ASEAN-China
Year of Tourism Cooperation coincides with the Visit ASEAN@50 campaign, which seeks
to promote ASEAN as a single unified travel destination. These mutually reinforcing
events will further promote tourism cooperation between the two sides. We issued the
ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Tourism Cooperation, which reflected the strong
interest of ASEAN and China for further collaboration.
17. We underscored the important role and contribution of the ASEAN-China Centre
in Beijing to promoting trade, investment, tourism, educational and cultural cooperation
between ASEAN and China for mutual benefit. In this regard, we noted the signing of the
revised Memorandum of Understanding on Establishing the ASEAN-China Centre.FINAL
Page 4 of 4
18. We welcomed efforts to strengthen anti-corruption cooperation, which complement
domestic efforts to promote good governance and rule of law. We were pleased to note
that the meeting issued the ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Comprehensively
Strengthening Anti-Corruption Cooperation.
19. We looked forward to the commemoration of the 15th Anniversary on the ASEAN-
China Strategic Partnership in 2018, and welcomed China’s proposal to issue an ASEAN-
China Strategic Partnership Vision 2030 at the 21st ASEAN-China Summit next year.
20. We agreed to designate the Year 2018 as the ASEAN-China Year of Innovation
and welcome cooperation in areas such as technological innovation and the digital
economy.
21. We looked forward to Singapore’s ASEAN Chairmanship in 2018 and the
Philippines’ assumption of the Coordinatorship of ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations in
August 2018. We noted that Singapore Chairmanship’s theme of Resilience and
Innovation and the “ASEAN-China Year of Innovation” in 2018 are complementary.