Joint Press Briefing on the 23rd ASEAN-China Senior Officials’ Consultation (ACSOC)
19 May 2017, Guiyang, Guizhou Province, China
Remarks by
Mr Chee Wee Kiong
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Singapore
 Good afternoon everybody. We met yesterday for the Co-Chairs’ Joint
Press Briefing on the 14th ASEAN-China SOM-DOC. Today we meet to
brief you on the 23rd ASEAN-China Senior Officials’ Consultation and the
overall ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations.
 I would like to take this opportunity to thank my Co-Chair, Chinese Vice
Foreign Minister Mr Liu Zhenmin, the Chinese Foreign Ministry and the
local government for hosting this meeting in a beautiful city like Guiyang.
 The ASEAN-China partnership has developed rapidly, advancing from one
milestone to the next. We celebrated our Silver Jubilee last year. We also
reviewed overall ASEAN-China cooperation ahead of the 15th Anniversary
of the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership next year.
 We discussed the future of this partnership, including through the
implementation of the initiatives and outcomes of the 19th ASEAN-China
Summit to Commemorate the 25th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Dialogue
Relations on 7 September 2016.
 Trade and economic ties continue to be the mainstay of ASEAN-China
relations.Checked against delivery
o Both sides reiterated their commitment to strengthen cooperation in
trade and investment, to bring ASEAN and China closer to realising
their twin goals of two-way trade and investment of USD 1 trillion
and USD 150 billion respectively by 2020.
 We also discussed this morning the need to ensure that our cooperation is
constantly evolving to keep up with the times.
 Recognising that enhancing regional connectivity would help to advance
the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership, we discussed the need to explore
synergies between initiatives like China’s Belt and Road, and ASEAN’s
economic integration and Master Plan for ASEAN Connectivity. In this
connection, we also welcomed China’s hosting of the Belt and Road Forum
for International Cooperation this year.
 To promote intercultural understanding among our people, we have
designated 2017 as the ASEAN-China Year of Tourism Cooperation.
o An Opening Ceremony was held in Manila on 16 March 2017 to
officially launch the ASEAN-China Year of Tourism Cooperation.
At that occasion, Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte, as ASEAN
Chair, and Chinese Premier Li Keqiang sent congratulatory
messages which were read out by the Philippines Secretary of the
Department of Tourism Wanda Corazon Teo and Chinese Vice
Premier Wang Yang respectively during the Opening Ceremony.
o Tourism officials from ASEAN and China are working together on
a series of activities to be held throughout the year, with a view toChecked against delivery
enhancing ASEAN-China tourism cooperation, boosting two-way
tourist visits and promoting greater people-to-people exchanges
between ASEAN and China.
o Given its importance, ASEAN and China will issue a Joint
Statement on Tourism Cooperation at the 20th ASEAN-China
Summit in November in the Philippines. I am pleased to announce
that our tourism officials are working on the Joint Statement. We
look forward to finalising it and seeking our Leaders’ approval for
it.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 As ASEAN-China Country Coordinator, Singapore is very happy with the
progress that we have achieved during our meetings over the last two days.
 They have reinforced the point that ASEAN’s strategic partnership with
China is strong and substantive, and both sides attach great importance to
it.
 Moving ahead, we are committed to working together to further deepen
and broaden the cooperation.
 As Coordinator, Singapore will continue to foster opportunities for
dialogue and communication between ASEAN and China, through the
ASEAN-China Senior Officials’ Consultation and the SOM-DOC
processes.Checked against delivery
 Once again, let me thank my Co-Chair Vice Minister Liu Zhenmin for all
his hard work in advancing the ASEAN-China partnership.
 This ends my briefing. Thank you.
. . . . .