ASEAN POLITICAL-SECURITY COMMUNITY

Volume 1 (2019)

Number 1

ASEAN’S JOURNEY AS A POLITICAL
AND SECURITY COMMUNITY

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

one vision
one identity
Acommunity
one

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) was established on 8 August 1967.
The Member States of the Association are Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao
PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
The ASEAN Secretariat is based in Jakarta, Indonesia.
For inquiries, contact:
The ASEAN Secretariat
Community Relations Division (CRD)
70A Jalan Sisingamangaraja
Jakarta 12110, Indonesia
Phone : (62 21) 724-3372, 726-2991
Fax
: (62 21) 739-8234, 724-3504
E-mail : public@asean.org
APSC Analysis and Monitoring Division
ASEAN Political-Security Department
E-mail : APSCAMD@asean.org

Catalogue-in-Publication Data
APSC Outlook – ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community:
A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019
Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat, June 2019
320.0959
1 . Politics – International Relations
2. ASEAN – Political and Security Community – APSC
ISBN 978-602-5798-40-5

Photo credits :
Page 7 : INTERPOL and SOMTC-Singapore; ASEAN Secretariat
ASEAN: A Community of Opportunities for All
The text of this publication may be freely quoted or reprinted, provided proper
acknowledgement is given and a copy containing the reprinted material is sent to the
Community Relations Division (CRD) of the ASEAN Secretariat, Jakarta.
General information on ASEAN appears online at the ASEAN Website: www.asean.org
Write-up: Raymund Jose G. Quilop
Copy Editing: Dayangku Siti Rosinah Pengiran Rusli
Copyright Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 2019.
All rights reserved.

B

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community:
A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

The ASEAN Secretariat
Jakarta

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

i

ii

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

Foreword

M

ore than half a century ago, ASEAN
was founded to promote economic
growth, social progress and cultural
development in stability in the Southeast
Asian
region
through
multilateral
cooperation. Anchored on the principle that
national resilience would promote regional
resilience, the unique contribution of each
ASEAN Member State in ASEAN’s agenda,
such as its community building project, has
always been critical. Conversely, regional stability would enable
Member States to pursue their respective national developments.
Today, the rapidly evolving regional geo-political and economic
environment is making ASEAN’s community building efforts
a challenging endeavour. Nevertheless, ASEAN reaffirm its
commitment to implement the ASEAN Community Vision 2025
and the importance of maintaining ASEAN Centrality and unity
in community building efforts and engagement with external
partners, including the major powers.
While ASEAN exerts efforts to address a host of non-traditional
security challenges that impact on its peoples, traditional set
of challenges including potential regional flashpoints exist.
Meanwhile, ASEAN has to make the necessary adjustments in an
increasingly cyber connected world, with cyber security challenges
becoming more pronounced. Therefore, it is imperative for ASEAN
to continue providing platforms where external partners engage
each other. It is equally imperative that regional mechanisms
remain centred on ASEAN.

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

iii iii

It is in this context of staying on course and to deepen the
sense of being Community among its members where it is useful
to review in broad strokes what have transpired in the previous
years and have a glance as to what is in store for the current
year. Such exercise would enable ASEAN and its Member States
to reflect on what have been achieved; it would also contribute
in thinking through what could be undertaken further. This is
what this first issue of the “APSC Outlook” attempts to provide:
a modest contribution towards taking stock, thinking through and
looking ahead of where ASEAN has come thus far in its journey as
a political and security community.
Implicit in this publication’s name “Outlook” is the message
that in examining how ASEAN evolves as a political-security
community, it is useful to look forward and beyond. Contributions
to succeeding issues of the “Outlook” are welcome. It is hoped that
this publication would contribute in nurturing a forward looking
mindset and in promoting a collaborative approach on issues
that ASEAN faces. Views may be divergent but they are useful in
promoting a better understanding of issues, thereby encouraging
collaboration among stakeholders, both within and external to
ASEAN.

DATO LIM JOCK HOI
Secretary-General of ASEAN

iv iv

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

Introduction

T

he year 2019 marks the fourth year of implementation of
the ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint 2025.
Commencing in 2016, the Blueprint provides
a roadmap for elevating political and
security cooperation in ASEAN to “an even
higher level” along the following lines:
POL
ITIC
ASE
AL-S
ECU
RIT
A
a rules-based, people oriented, peopleBLU Y COMMU N
EPR
INT NITY
2025
centred community; peaceful, secure
and stable region; ASEAN Centrality in
a dynamic and outward looking region;
and strengthened ASEAN institutional
capacity and presence.
one

vision

, one

iden

With 258 of the total 290 items
contained in the Blueprint having been
addressed mid-way into 2019, much progress has been
made but more needs to be done. Not only do the remaining action
lines need to be acted upon, momentum will have to be sustained
in areas where efforts have been previously poured into as
ASEAN’s theme for 2019 “Advancing Partnerships for Sustainability”
underscores.
tity,

one

com

mun

ity

Indeed, while the theme of Innovation and Resilience marked
the previous year, highlighting the need for ASEAN to innovate
and be resilient in the fast changing geo-political, economic and
technological landscape, this year’s theme stresses the importance
of sustaining and building upon what currently exist.
It is therefore useful to take stock of what have transpired in 2018,
specifically along the areas of addressing current and emerging
challenges and community building efforts. These two areas of
concern may be separate from each other but they nonetheless
ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community:
A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019
A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

5

complement one another. The ability to deal with challenges
contributes to building a sense of community in the same manner
that a deeper sense of belonging to the community enhances the
capacity to address challenges that come along the way.

From Frameworks to Tangible Action

I

n 2018, Sectoral Bodies of the ASEAN Political Security pillar
have invested in formulating appropriate frameworks that would
enable their respective sectors to deal with challenges under their
purview. For the defence sector, for example, the Guidelines for Air
Military Encounters (GAME) was adopted. This set of guidelines,
which complements and builds upon a 2017-adopted Concept
Paper on Guidelines for
Maritime Interaction,
is meant to serve as a
Beyond the frameworks developed,
practical confidence
activities were undertaken to enhance
capacity to deal with challenges
building measure for
and
build confidence and thrust.
militaries to improve
operational safety in
the air.
Likewise adopted by the defence sector is the Concept Paper on
Our Eyes Initiative, with the end view of creating a platform for
strategic intelligence exchange to counter terrorism. Meanwhile,
ASEAN’s sector on transnational crimes adopted the ASEAN Plan
of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalisation and Violent
Extremism. These two frameworks are expected to complement each
other and highlight that dealing with terrorism, violent extremism
and radicalisation necessitates the concerted efforts of both the
defence and law enforcement sectors.
On a wider front, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) composed
of 27 participants adopted the Terms of Reference for the Open Ended

6

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

Study Group on Confidence
Building Measures to Reduce
the Risk of Conflict Stemming
from the Use of ICTs. Under
the ambit of the ARF InterSessional Meeting on Security
of and in the Use of ICTs, this
study group will develop
proposals on confidence building measures (CBMs) to address the
whole range of issues relating to ICTs Security, submit consensus
reports recommending CBMs, as well as develop processes and
procedures for sharing of information between ARF Participants to
prevent ICT crises, criminal and terrorist use of ICTs.
Beyond the frameworks developed, activities were undertaken
both to enhance capacity to deal with the challenges confronting
ASEAN and the wider region and to build confidence and trust
among the participating stakeholders.
For 2018, a total of 13 ad hoc activities have been undertaken by
the ARF mainly in the areas of maritime security, disaster relief,
preventive diplomacy, and counter-terrorism and transnational
crime. For the defence sector, a total of 11 activities have been
undertaken by the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM)Plus Experts’ Working Groups on maritime security, humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief, military medicine, peacekeeping
operations, humanitarian mine action and cybersecurity.
While majority of the military
exercises organised by the
working groups are expected to
take place in 2019 in accordance
with their respective work
programmes adopted in 2017,

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

7

previous years’ discussions regarding an ASEAN-China maritime
exercise resulted in a field training exercise in Zhanjiang, China
in late 2018. Participated by all ASEAN Member States, the field
training exercise with China focused on maritime safety and
application of the Code of Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES) as a
means of communication in the event of incidents at sea.
Meanwhile, there is an increasing realisation that issues
confronting ASEAN and the region cut across pillars and sectors,
with each pillar and sector addressing a specific aspect of an issue.
To date, 37 such issues have been identified. The latest addition
came with the adoption of the ASEAN Enabling Master Plan 2025:
Mainstreaming the Rights of Persons with Disabilities during the 33rd
ASEAN Summit in November 2018.
Cross-Cutting and Cross-Pillar Issues
Trafficking in Persons and People Smuggling

Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)

Maritime Security/Cooperation

Climate Change, Food Security and Food Safety

Counter-Terrorism

Education, Science and Technology

Cybersecurity/Cybercrime

Sustainable Development Cooperation

Peacekeeping/Post-conflict peacebuilding

Timor-Leste’s Application for ASEAN Membership

Human Rights

Social Protection

Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR)

ASEAN Awareness and Identity

Illicit Drug Trafficking

Strengthening Coordination among the ASEAN Community Pillars

Pharmaceuticals

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)

Environmental Crime

Health and Health Related Issues (Active Ageing)

Money Laundering and International Economic Crime

Anti-Corruption

Nuclear Safety/Nuclear Security

Connectivity

Border Management

Innovation

Climate Change

Food Safety

Good Governance

Fourth Industrial Revolution

Sustainable Tourism

Culture of Prevention

Skilled Labour, Skills Development, and Skill Recognition

Free Trade Agreements

Inclusive Employment

ASEAN Enabling Master Plan

Entrepreneurship and Women Economic Empowerment

8

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

Dealing with cross-cutting and cross-pillar issues necessitates
greater coordination among various Sectoral Bodies on the one
hand and, on the other hand, a specific Sectoral Body serving as the
lead shepherd to promote synergy and ensure that momentum is
sustained.
In 2018, three Sectoral
Bodies under the PoliticalSectoral bodies have explored
Security Community pillar
frameworks on how partners
have
manifested
their
could be meaningfully engaged.
readiness to serve as lead
shepherds for the following: trafficking in person and counterterrorism (Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime [SOMTC]),
illicit drug trafficking (ASEAN Senior Officials on Drug Matters [ASOD])
and border management (ASEAN Directors-General of Immigration
Departments and Heads of Consular Affairs Divisions of the Ministries of
Foreign Affairs [DGICM]).
Meanwhile, with the Leaders during the 33rd ASEAN Summit
having agreed on the need to establish a formal mechanism for
cooperation regarding the cross-cutting issue of cyber security,
there is a need to identify which Sectoral Body should serve as the
lead as regards the proposed mechanism and thresh out measures
needed to ensure coordination and avoid duplication of efforts.

Moving with Partners

I

n meeting challenges as well as in community building efforts,
engaging external partners is indeed useful, prompting Sectoral
Bodies under the Political-Security Community pillar to explore
frameworks on how partners could be meaningfully engaged.
The defence sector, for example, has adopted in 2018 a set of
criteria for allowing other interested partners to take part as

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

9

observers in the activities of the ADMM-Plus Experts Working
Groups. While membership in the ADMM-Plus is currently limited
to ASEAN and eight of its dialogue partners (Australia, China,
India, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand, Russia and the US), it was
decided in 2017 to allow other countries to take part as observers in
recognition of the need to meaningfully engage other so-called nonPlus countries as well as given the increasing number of countries
requesting to be part of the ADMM-Plus.
In the same manner, the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on
Drug Matters (AMMD) has adopted a set of guiding criteria and
modalities in engaging external partners, both for the AMMD and
its subsidiary mechanisms. These guiding criteria will be applicable
for all AMMD-related meetings from 2019 onwards.
Complementing the mechanisms whereby partners are engaged
collectively are ASEAN’s Plus One dialogue relations, which enables
ASEAN to work with a specific partner. Its dialogue relations
with its Northeast Asian neighbours produced the following in
2018: a Strategic Partnership Vision 2030 with China, an Agreement
on Technical Cooperation (TCA) to support ASEAN Community
Building with Japan, and a commitment from Korea to double its
contributions to ASEAN-Korea Cooperation Fund.
In the wider AsiaPacific, ASEAN’s relations
Leaders of ASEAN and
with Australia in 2018
its external partners are committed
resulted in a Memorandum of
in moving cooperation forward.
Understanding on Cooperation
to Counter International Terrorism and 15 new cooperation activities.
Two new development programmes from the US commenced:
the ASEAN-USAID Partnership for Regional Optimization within the
Political Security and Socio-Cultural Communities (PROSPECT) and
the ASEAN-USAID Inclusive Growth in ASEAN through Innovation,

10

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

Trade and E-Commerce (IGNITE). And from Europe, two flagship
programmes with the European Union were launched: Enhanced
Regional ASEAN Dialogue Instrument (E-READ) and the Enhanced
ASEAN Regional Integration Support from the EU (ARISE-Plus).
A financial agreement for EU’s support to the ASEAN Coordinating
Centre for Humanitarian Assistance (AHA Centre) was likewise
signed.
ASEAN’s relations with Russia has been elevated to strategic
partnership bringing to eight the total number of ASEAN’s strategic
partners, with Australia, China, Japan, India, South Korea, New
Zealand, and the US being the other seven.
Two countries (Argentina and Iran) have acceded to the
ASEAN’s Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC) in
2018. Peru’s request to accede was likewise approved by ASEAN in
2018 and that of South Africa in early 2019. Once Peru and South
Africa formally accede, the
TAC would have 29 nonBuilding upon what exists has
ASEAN contracting parties
characterised ASEAN political
in addition to the 10 ASEAN
security cooperation.
Member States.
Critical in moving cooperation forward is the political
commitment of Leaders both of ASEAN and its external partners.
It is this sense where the five statements on smart cities, ICT and
digital economy, marine debris, foreign terrorist fighters and
nuclear security issued at the 13th East Asia Summit in 2018 ought
to be appreciated.

Navigating 2019

B

uilding upon what exists has characterised ASEAN political
security cooperation in the last 51 years. Within the ambit of

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

11

the 2019 theme Advancing Partnerships for Sustainability under
Thailand’s Chairmanship, “maintaining sustainable peace, security
and stability in the region remains a key priority, including through
(1) enhanced border management; (2) enhanced cooperation to
combat transnational crimes; and (3) promoting an ASEAN-centred
regional architecture”.
Momentum will surely be sustained in addressing political and
security challenges, one of which is the humanitarian situation
in the Rakhine State. Following the invitation extended by the
Government of Myanmar to the AHA Centre to conduct the Needs
Assessment in Rakhine, the Preliminary Needs Assessment has
been successfully implemented in April 2019. The Comprehensive
Needs Assessment will be launched once the repatriation process
begins.
It is anticipated that
following
the adoption in
Initiatives to promote
sustainability focusing on cross- 2017 of the Framework for
pillar issues have been tabled. Negotiating the South China
Sea Code of Conduct and the
agreement in 2018 to have a single negotiating text, the first reading
of this text will be undertaken in 2019. Expectations, however, have
to be tempered. While it is the intention of all parties to conclude
an effective Code of Conduct (COC), there are divergent views as
to the shape of the COC. Nonetheless, the positive developments
in recent years (adoption of the framework of negotiation,
commencement of formal negotiations, agreement to have a single
negotiating text) have brought the region closer to the long awaited
and much sought for Code of Conduct in the South China Sea.
Anticipated to be signed in 2019 is the Practical Arrangement
between ASEAN and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Spearheaded by the ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies on

12

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

Atomic Energy (ASEANTOM), a 2013-established network of
regulatory bodies on atomic energy among ASEAN members,
these set of practical arrangements would promote nuclear safety,
security and safeguards within the region.
Thailand as the 2019 ASEAN Chair has tabled several initiatives
to “promote sustainability of things” focusing on cross-cutting
issues. These include (1) addressing the maritime debris challenges,
including through the convening of a Special Ministerial Meeting
on Maritime Debris; (2) launching a human capital development
initiative with the support of the World Bank; (3) developing an
ASEAN Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing Task
Force; and (4) tackling the challenge of an ageing society through
the launch of the ASEAN Centre for Active Ageing and Innovation.
Thailand is likewise keen on having a roadmap on border
management issued at the Leaders’ level. This roadmap would
promote an ASEAN-wide border management cooperation to
strike a balance between border management and cross-border
facilitation.
Relations with existing
partners are expected to
Relations with current partners
be further deepened. The
will be deepened and
with
new ones, explored.
various action plans of
ASEAN’s bilateral partners
that are in place would ensure that cooperative activities remain
on track. Relations with new partners will be explored given that
a number of potential partners have signified their intent to either
become a dialogue partner, sectoral dialogue partner, development
partner or accede to the TAC.
Non-ASEAN countries have likewise expressed interest to
accede to the ASEAN Convention on Counter Terrorism (ACCT).

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

13

While a provision on the accession of non-ASEAN countries is not
currently available for the ACCT unlike the TAC where external
parties could accede, discussions on moving forward regarding
this are anticipated to commence in 2019.
At least three non-ASEAN countries (Canada, France and
the United Kingdom) have applied as observers in the working
groups of the ADMM-Plus. Meanwhile, the Concept Paper on the
Establishment of a DGICM+3 (China, Japan, Korea) mechanism is
being reviewed by the ASEAN Member States.
As previously mentioned, a great number of defence and
military exercises under the ambit of the ADMM-Plus Experts
Working Groups are anticipated to be conducted in 2019 including
a one-off ASEAN-US Maritime Exercise involving navies proposed
to be conducted late in the year alongside the Southeast Asian
Cooperation and Training (SEACAT), an annual exercise with
regional navies and coastguards spearheaded by the US.
As ASEAN moves into and
Challenging and interesting through 2019, challenging
times as ASEAN moves into 2019. and interesting times it
would be for the Association
given the strategic competition between major powers, specifically
the US and China, increasingly being felt both regionally and
globally. It is anticipated that each (the US and China) utilising the
various elements of their national power (from political to military
to economic to socio-cultural) will intensify their efforts to be ahead
of the other.
Amidst such geo-political, economic and technological
context, ASEAN should position itself so much so that it remains
to be the driving force both in regional mechanisms and in the
regional political and security architecture. ASEAN’s openness

14

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

and inclusivity, excluding no one has enabled the Association to
bring together regional players, both big powers and developing
countries.
ASEAN will have to proactively shape the discourse on regional
issues, such as for example, discussions on Indo-Pacific, to ensure
that the principles of openness and inclusivity remains to be the
core bedrock of regional mechanisms. ASEAN has to continuously
set the direction of regional cooperation. This is an imperative for
ASEAN in order to realise the thrust for 2019 that no one (including
ASEAN itself) is left behind as all move into the next decade of this
century.

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

15

16

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community

A Snapshot of 2018 and a Preview of 2019

C

ASEAN: A Community of Opportunities for All
ASEAN
@ASEAN
@asean

ASEAN’s Journey as a Political and Security Community
D
www.asean.org

