Final

CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT OF THE 25TH ASEAN-CHINA SUMMIT
PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA
11 NOVEMBER 2022

1.

The 25th ASEAN-China Summit was held on 11 November 2022 in Phnom
Penh, Cambodia. The Meeting was chaired by Samdech Akka Moha Sena
Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, and
attended by ASEAN Member States and H.E. Li Keqiang, Premier of the State
Council of the People’s Republic of China. The Secretary-General of ASEAN
was also in attendance.

2.

We reiterated our support for Cambodia’s ASEAN Chairmanship and support
the efforts to achieve “ASEAN A.C.T.: Addressing Challenges Together”,
the theme of ASEAN for 2022. We were encouraged by progress made in the
realization of ASEAN’s priorities in 2022. We affirmed that ASEAN’s unity and
solidarity were strengthened, ASEAN Centrality consolidated, ASEAN’s active
contribution to regional peace and stability duly recognized in accordance with
ASEAN’s values and principles. We also acknowledged the steady progress in
ASEAN’s economic integration and regional connectivity with the enhanced
capacity of ASEAN to adapt to the changing regional and global dynamics. We
congratulated Cambodia for the successful convening of the 55th ASEAN
Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) and Related Meetings from 31 July to 06
August 2022 in Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

3.

We were also pleased with the long-standing ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations
over the past three decades, recognising ASEAN-China relations are among
the most dynamic, substantive, and mutually beneficial partnerships between
ASEAN and its dialogue partners. We were satisfied with our joint establishment
of the ASEAN-China Comprehensive Strategic Partnership (CSP) that is
meaningful, substantive and mutually beneficial at the ASEAN-China Special
Summit to Commemorate the 30th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Dialogue
Relations on 22 November 2021. We were committed to implementing the
consensus reached on the Special Summit and the Joint Statement of the
ASEAN-China Special Summit to Commemorate the 30th Anniversary of
ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations: Comprehensive Strategic Partnership for
Peace, Security, Prosperity, and Sustainable Development. We welcomed
China’s initiative to build a peaceful, safe and secure, prosperous, beautiful and

1

Final

amicable homeland together, so as to realise the common development of the
two billion population in ASEAN countries and China.
4.

We noted with satisfaction the significant progress made in the implementation
of the Plan of Action (POA) to Implement the ASEAN-China Strategic
Partnership for Peace and Prosperity (2021-2025). We welcomed the adoption
of the Annex to the ASEAN-China POA (2021-2025): Advancing ASEAN-China
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership at the ASEAN Post-Ministerial
Conference 10+1 Session with China on 4 August 2022. We looked forward to
the substantive and effective implementation of the Annex in order to further
bring the ASEAN-China partnership to a new height.

5.

We acknowledged China’s active engagement with ASEAN in advancing
collaboration and deepening political and security cooperation through its
participation in various ASEAN-led mechanisms, including ASEAN Plus Three
(APT), East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and the
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus). We welcomed the
successful convening of the ASEAN-China Defence Ministers’ Informal Meeting
in June 2022 and also noted China’s active participation in ADMM Plus-led
mechanism, including co-chairing the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group on
Humanitarian Mine Action with Cambodia in the current EWGs cycle (20212023).

6.

We reiterated the importance of cooperation in combating transnational crimes,
including illicit drug trafficking and addressing other non-traditional security
issues through various mechanisms, including the ASEAN Plus China
Ministerial and Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime (AMMTC and
SOMTC+China) Consultations and the ASEAN Senior Officials on Drug Matters
(ASOD)+China Consultations, and reaffirmed commitment toward the effective
implementation of the ASEAN-China Work Plan on Cooperation in the Field of
Non-Traditional Security Issues (2019-2023). We reiterated support to the
ASEAN-China Cyber Dialogue to further deepen exchanges and cooperation
on cybersecurity and digital governance.

7.

On the development sphere, we welcomed the finalisation of the Agreement on
Technical Cooperation between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and the Government of the People’s Republic of China and looked forward to
the signing of the Agreement by the ASEAN Secretary-General and Chairman
of China International Development Cooperation Agency at an early date. We
adopted the ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Strengthening Common and
Sustainable Development and ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Food Security
Cooperation. We agreed to designate the year of 2023 as the ASEAN-China
Year of Agricultural Development and Food Security Cooperation and looked
forward to the implementation of the proposed activities listed in the Time Table
of proposed activities under the ASEAN-China Year of Agricultural
Development and Food Security Cooperation, including joint research and
training and Research and Development (R&D), among others. We also
welcomed the Global Development Initiative (GDI) announced by President Xi
Jinping and encouraged participation from both sides to implement priority
areas in the GDI, with a view to further promoting cooperation with ASEAN
initiatives. We also welcomed the successful convening of the Jakarta Forum

2

Final

on ASEAN-China Relations: ASEAN-China Cooperation in Advancing the
Global Development Initiative held on 20 May 2022 via videoconference.
8.

We were encouraged by ASEAN-China cooperation for mutual benefits for
people of both sides, enhancing regional peace, security and prosperity, as well
as promoting mutual confidence and trust through upholding the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the ASEAN Charter, the Treaty
of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), the Five Principles of
Peaceful Coexistence and the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). We were
committed to promoting mutually beneficial cooperation between the BRI and
the ASEAN Outlook on Indo-Pacific (AOIP) and exploring development
cooperation with the GDI to complement the realisation of the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025.

9.

We looked forward to the early establishment of an ASEAN-China Partnership
on Blue Economy as envisaged in the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership
Vision 2030 to promote maritime sustainable development and create new
highlights in ASEAN-China cooperation. We welcomed the successful
convening of the 3rd Jakarta Forum on Exploring ASEAN-China Partnership on
Blue Economy. We welcomed China’s continued commitment to supporting and
assisting ASEAN with its efforts to promote sustainable development and subregional development cooperation. We also welcomed the efforts undertaken
in strengthening relevant sub-regional frameworks, including the BIMP-EAGAChina Cooperation (BECC), Mekong-Lancang Cooperation (MLC) and other
relevant sub-regional framework and cooperation mechanisms to support
efforts to narrow the development gap in the region.

10.

We recognised that China has remained ASEAN’s largest trading partner since
2009, and ASEAN has become China’s largest trading partner for two
consecutive years. We were satisfied with the increased two-way trade between
ASEAN and China in 2021. According to ASEAN’s statistics, in 2021, trade
volume between ASEAN and China reached a new record of USD 669 billion,
making China ASEAN’s largest trading partner for the 13th consecutive year;
foreign direct investment (FDI) flows from China to ASEAN amounted to USD
13.6 billion in 2021, almost double the USD 7.0 billion in 2020. We looked
forward to further increasing trade activities between ASEAN and China.

11.

We reiterated our commitment to upholding the multilateral trading system,
enhancing regional economic integration, and underscoring the importance of
multilateralism and free trade to boost ASEAN-China economic cooperation,
especially in the post-COVID-19 recovery. We emphasised the importance to
further enhancing the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA), in particular,
the Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation, focusing on trade opportunities in digital economy and
green economy, promotion of investment, tourism flows, e-commerce,
consumer protection, development of micro, small and medium enterprises
(MSMEs), local entrepreneurs, start-ups and Fin-tech cooperation in the region.
We noted and welcomed the Joint Feasibility Study Report to Further Enhance
the ACFTA 3.0. We were pleased to announce the launch of ACFTA 3.0
Upgrade Negotiations. Upgrading the ACFTA on mutual areas of interest,
including the digital economy, green economy, supply chain connectivity, non-

3

Final

tariff measures, competition, consumer protection, and MSMEs, among others,
along with transitioning it to modern chapter-based structure, will further Parties’
existing commitments and help ensure that the ACFTA remains relevant to our
businesses, future-ready, and responsive to global challenges. We were also
encouraged by the entry into-force of the RCEP Agreement and committed to
working closely together for the effective implementation and full utilisation of
the agreement to deliver benefits to businesses in the region. We welcomed
the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between China and ASEAN
Member States on Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary Cooperation.
12.

We commended China’s numerous supports to and collaboration with ASEAN
in mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic through ASEAN-China public health
cooperation, including the provision of medical supplies and vaccines to ASEAN
Member States and contribution to the COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fund. We
also appreciated support from China for ASEAN’s efforts to recover from the
impact of COVID-19 by actively implementing the ASEAN-China Public Health
Cooperation Initiative: Programme on Public Health Emergency Preparedness
Capacity (PROMPT) and ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Cooperation in
Support of the ASEAN Comprehensive Recovery Framework (ACRF), to
promote sustainable and comprehensive recovery and resilient and inclusive
development in the region, as outlined in the Fact Sheet on China’s Efforts to
Implement the ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Cooperation in Support of the
ACRF shared by China.

13.

We reaffirmed the continued commitment of ASEAN and China to working
together under the three pillars as well as cross-pillar sectors to strengthen
ASEAN Centrality in the ASEAN-led mechanisms in maintaining and upholding
peace, security, and prosperity, to sustain a positive momentum of the ASEAN’s
proactive contribution to UN peacekeeping operations and the incorporation of
Women, Peace, and Security (WPS) agenda, to strengthen joint efforts for
robust, resilient and sustainable recovery, the ASEAN’s competitiveness and
regional integration, and to ensure the health, well-being, and social protection,
of our peoples. We congratulated Cambodia for successfully convening of the
2nd ASEAN Women Leaders’ Summit in Phnom Penh on 12 October 2022 in a
hybrid format. ASEAN looked forward to working closely with China to further
implement the Joint Statement on Promoting the Youth, Peace and Security
(YPS) Agenda at the ASEAN Regional Forum.

14.

We took note of Cambodia’s idea to establish an ASEAN Green Deal with the
aim to gradually transform ASEAN region towards a green future, sustainability,
effective use of resources, resilience, and economic competitiveness.

15.

Aiming at strengthening regional climate resilience and green development, as
the year 2022 is designated as the ASEAN-China Year of Sustainable
Development Cooperation, we highlighted cooperation in areas such as climate
change, environmental protection, biodiversity conservation and sustainable
natural resource management, marine debris, poverty alleviation and
elimination, disaster prevention and mitigation, renewable energy, and
sustainable use of the ocean, seas and marine resources, as outlined in the
Fact Sheet on 2021-2022 ASEAN-China Year of Sustainable Development

4

Final

Cooperation shared by China. We agreed to advance discussion on experience
sharing and synergies for sustainable development.
16.

We commended the successful convening of the 2nd ASEAN-China Ministerial
Meeting on Disaster Management, and fully recognized the importance of
strengthening cooperation in disaster management and emergency response
under the ASEAN-China Work Plan on Disaster Management endorsed by the
First ASEAN-China Ministerial Meeting on Disaster Management (AMMDM
plus China), and AHA Centre, to improve capacity building and disaster
response coordination in the region.

17.

We underlined the importance of moving forward the implementation of the
ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Synergising the MPAC 2025 and the Belt and
Road Initiative (BRI), and working to enhance linkages in the region to facilitate
a more conductive business environment and to promote sustainable and
inclusive economic growth. We reaffirmed the commitment to foster closer
people-to-people exchanges, including through culture, education, technical
and vocational education and training, tourism and media, with a view to
promoting mutual trust and understanding between the people of ASEAN and
China. We also welcomed China’s continued support for human resource
development in ASEAN and China’s strong commitment to increasing the
number of scholarships and exchange programs for ASEAN students.

18.

We reaffirmed the role of education in human resource development as well as
economic development and prosperity and reiterated our commitment to
education cooperation for sustainable economic and social development. We
welcomed the successful convening of the 3rd ASEAN-China Education
Ministers Roundtable Conference on 23rd August 2022 and commended
China’s numerous support to upgrade ASEAN-China education cooperation, in
particular, by the launch of Building an Amicable Home Together: Vision and
Action on ASEAN-China Education Cooperation and Development (20222030), highlighting cooperation in areas such as improving the quality of human
resource in the region, strengthening the research collaboration, advancing
digital transformation of education and consolidating Asian Cultural Consensus.

19.

We agreed to further leverage the role of the ACCF and noted with appreciation
the on-going implementation of the ASEAN-China Young Leaders’ Scholarship
(ACYLS), and China’s efforts to promote youth exchanges and cooperation to
enhance mutual understanding and friendship with ASEAN, as outlined in the
Fact Sheet on China’s Activities in Support of the Year of ASEAN Youth 2022
shared by China. We appreciated the outcomes of the two Working Group
Meetings on “ASEAN-China Partnership: Mainstreaming the ASEAN Blue
Economy to Accelerate Post-pandemic Recovery” and “Forging ASEAN-China
Partnership: Empowering Youth in the Digital Era” by the Network of ASEANChina Think-Tanks (NACT) this year.

20.

In light of commitment toward post-COVID-19 recovery, tourism sector plays an
important role in contributing to the recovery process. In this regard, we put the
focus on developing new strategic cooperation measures and considered
gradually resuming the travel reflecting the importance of implementing the
ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Tourism Cooperation and further

5

Final

strengthening cooperation in the tourism sector. We also highlighted the need
for innovative ways to revitalise the tourism industry and ensure safe
international travel in line with public health measures of each country, with a
view to promoting economic recovery and people-to-people exchanges,
including businesses, tourists and students. We commended China’s response
to ease travelling-related images, especially air transport. We looked forward to
working closely together toward further liberalisation of the ASEAN-China Air
Transport Agreement (AC-ATA), which will further enhance regional
connectivity as well as the progressive resumption of more direct flights
between ASEAN Member States and China.
21.

We reiterated commitment to further advance cooperation in ICT cooperation
to cope with the 4th Industrial Revolution (4IR), especially through the effective
implementation of the Joint Statement on the ASEAN-China Science,
Technology and Innovation Cooperation. We agreed to promote cooperation on
ASEAN-China information and communication infrastructure connectivity,
technological innovation, ICT development, emergency communication
technologies, network security and industry development.

22.

We took note of the Global Security Initiative (GSI) proposed by China with core
elements consistent with the principles and spirit of the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and looked forward to further details of the GSI.

23.

On the cross-strait development, we reiterated the One-China Policy and
respect for China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

24.

We reiterated our commitment to preserving the Southeast Asian region as a
Nuclear Weapon Free-Zone and free of all other weapons of mass destruction
as enshrined in the Treaty of Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone
(SEANWFZ Treaty) and the ASEAN Charter. We welcomed China’s willingness
to sign as early as possible the Protocol to the SEANWFZ Treaty when it opens
for signature.

25.

This year marks the 20th Anniversary of the signing of the Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC). We adopted the ASEANChina Joint Statement on the 20th Anniversary of the Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea to commemorate this significant
milestone by reflecting on the achievements made over the past 20 years and
projecting the visions of ASEAN Member States and China on the
implementation of the DOC. We congratulated China on the successful
convening of the Workshop on the 20th Anniversary of DOC on 25 July 2022.
2022 also marks the 40th anniversary of the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

26.

On the South China Sea, we reaffirmed the importance of maintaining and
promoting peace, security, stability, prosperity, safety, and freedom of
navigation in and overflight above the South China Sea and recognised the
benefits of having the South China Sea as a sea of peace, friendship and
cooperation. We reaffirmed our commitment to the full and effective
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea (DOC) in its entirety. We were pleased with the positive momentum in the
ongoing negotiations on the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC),
6

Final

particularly the recent resumption of in-person negotiations in Siem Reap and
Phnom Penh, Cambodia, despite the challenging COVID-19 situation. We
welcomed the continuation of the second reading of the Single Draft COC
Negotiating Text (SDNT) this year through in-person meetings of the JWGDOC, and the progress of negotiations achieved so far.
27.

We reaffirmed the aspiration to expedite the COC negotiations. We encouraged
further progress towards the early conclusion of an effective and substantive
COC that is in accordance with international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS,
within a mutually agreed timeline. We emphasised the need to maintain and
promote an environment conducive to the COC negotiations, and thus
welcomed practical maritime cooperation initiatives which promote trust and
confidence and reduce misunderstandings and miscalculation, as well as
address emerging challenges in the region. We reaffirmed our commitment to
exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that could complicate or
escalate disputes and affect peace and stability, and to pursue the peaceful
resolution of disputes, through friendly consultations and negotiations by
sovereign states directly concerned, in accordance with the universally
recognised principles of international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS.

28.

With regard to Ukraine, as for all nations, we reaffirmed respect for sovereignty,
political independence, and territorial integrity, reiterated the call for compliance
with international law and the United Nations Charter, and underlined the
importance of an immediate cessation of hostilities and the creation of an
enabling environment for the peaceful resolution of conflict.
*****

7

