FINAL

CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT OF THE 26TH ASEAN-CHINA SUMMIT
JAKARTA, INDONESIA
6 SEPTEMBER 2023
1.

The 26th ASEAN-China Summit was held on 6 September 2023 in Jakarta,
Indonesia. The Summit was chaired by H.E. Joko Widodo, President of the
Republic of Indonesia. The Summit was attended by ASEAN Member States,
H.E. Li Qiang, Premier of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China,
as well as the President of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste as an
Observer. The Secretary-General of ASEAN was also in attendance.

2.

We reiterated our support for Indonesia’s ASEAN Chairmanship carrying the
theme "ASEAN Matters: Epicentrum of Growth". We were encouraged by
progress made in the realization of ASEAN’s priorities in 2023. We affirmed that
ASEAN’s unity and solidarity were strengthened, ASEAN Centrality
consolidated, and ASEAN’s active contribution to regional peace and stability
duly recognised in accordance with ASEAN’s values and principles. We also
acknowledged the steady progress in ASEAN’s economic integration and
regional connectivity with the enhanced capacity of ASEAN to adapt to the
changing regional and global dynamics. We congratulated Indonesia for the
successful convening of the 56th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (AMM)
and Related Meetings on 10-14 July 2023 in Jakarta.

3.

We were pleased with the long-standing ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations
which have elevated to a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership (CSP) that is
meaningful, substantive and mutually beneficial, recognizing ASEAN-China
relations are among the most dynamic, substantive, and mutually beneficial
partnerships between ASEAN and its dialogue partners. We noted with
satisfaction the significant progress made in the implementation of the Plan of
Action (POA) to Implement the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership for Peace
and Prosperity (2021-2025) and its Annex to advance the ASEAN-China CSP.
We looked forward to continuing the substantive and effective implementation
of the POA and its Annex. We welcomed the signing of ASEAN-China Technical
Cooperation Agreement.

1

FINAL

4.

We were encouraged by ASEAN-China cooperation for mutual benefits for the
people of both sides, enhancing regional peace, security and prosperity as well
as promoting mutual confidence and trust through upholding the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the ASEAN Charter, the Treaty
of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), the Five Principles of
Peaceful Coexistence. We welcomed the adoption of ASEAN-China Joint
Statement Commemorating and Reflecting on the 20th Anniversary of China’s
Accession to the TAC by the ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference Plus One
Session with China on 13 July 2023.

5.

We also acknowledged the efforts by China in building a closer ASEAN-China
community with a shared future.

6.

We reiterated our commitment to advancing cooperation in the priority areas
identified in the ASEAN Outlook on Indo-Pacific (AOIP) to strengthen trust and
cooperation among countries in the region, and mutually beneficial cooperation
between the AOIP and the BRI as well as exploring development cooperation
with the GDI to complement the realisation of the ASEAN Community Vision
2025, support ASEAN community-building process, and further strengthen
existing ASEAN led-mechanisms. In this regard, we adopted the Joint
Statement on Mutually Beneficial Cooperation on the ASEAN Outlook on the
Indo-Pacific.

7.

We also appreciated China’s support and valuable contribution to the ASEANIndo-Pacific Forum: Implementation of the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific
held on 5-6 September 2023 in Jakarta.

8.

We welcomed the Third Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation to
be held in China this year, and looked forward to further promoting high-quality
Belt and Road cooperation.

9.

We welcomed China’s willingness to sign as early as possible the Protocol to
the SEANWFZ Treaty when it opens for signature.

10.

We took note of China’s proposed Global Security Initiative (GSI) with core
elements consistent with the principles and spirit of the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and looked forward to further details of the GSI.

11.

We acknowledged China’s active engagement with ASEAN in advancing
collaboration and strengthening political and security cooperation through its
participation in various ASEAN-led mechanisms, including the ASEAN Plus
Three (APT), East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and the
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus), and Expanded ASEAN
Maritime Forum (EAMF). We welcomed China’s active participation in the

2

FINAL

ADMM-Plus framework, including co-chairing the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working
Group (EWG) on Humanitarian Mine Action with Cambodia in the current 20212023 cycle. We looked forward to the co-chairmanship of China and Brunei
Darussalam in the ADMM-Plus EWG on Peacekeeping Operations in the
upcoming 2024-2027 cycle. We appreciated China’s active participation under
the ambit of the ARF, including its co-chairmanship of the ARF Inter-Sessional
Meeting on Disaster Relief (ISM on DR) in 2018–2023 and the ARF InterSessional Meeting on Maritime Security (ISM on MS) in 2022–2023.
12.

We reiterated the importance of cooperation in combating transnational crime,
including illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in persons (TIPs) and addressing
other non-traditional security issues through various mechanisms, including the
ASEAN Plus China Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime Consultation
and ASEAN Plus China Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime
(AMMTC + China and SOMTC + China) and the ASEAN Plus China Senior
Officials on Drug Matters (ASOD + China) Consultation. We reaffirmed our
commitment to sustain the accomplishment of the ASEAN-China Work Plan on
Cooperation in the Field of Non-Traditional Security Issues (2019-2023) and
welcomed the adoption of the renewed draft SOMTC + China Work Plan on
Cooperation to Combat Transnational Crime (2024-2028). We also reiterated
support to the ASEAN-China Cyber Dialogue to further deepen exchanges and
cooperation on cybersecurity and digital governance.

13.

We recognised that China has remained ASEAN’s largest trading partner since
2009, and ASEAN has become China’s largest trading partner for three
consecutive years since 2020.

14.

We reiterated commitment to further strengthening ASEAN-China economic
partnership especially in the post-COVID-19 recovery, including through
upholding the multilateral trading system, enhancing regional economic
integration, and underscoring the importance of multilateralism and free trade.
We emphasised the importance to further enhance the implementation of the
ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA).

15.

We also welcomed the progress on the ASEAN-China Free Trade Agreement
(ACFTA) 3.0 upgrade negotiations and the implementation of the ACFTA. We
also looked forward to continuing enhancing cooperation, including in the areas
of trade in goods, investment, digital economy, green economy and supply
chain connectivity, and to further develop micro, small and medium enterprises
(MSMEs) in the region. We welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN-China
Initiative on Enhancing Cooperation on E-Commerce. We appreciated the
achievement made by the China-ASEAN Expo (CAEXPO) over the past two
decades and looked forward to the successful convening of the 20 th CAEXPO
in September 2023 in Nanning, China.
3

FINAL

16.

We welcomed the full ratification of the Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership (RCEP) Agreement which entered into force for all Parties on 2
June 2023, as this reflects our strong commitment to reinforce regional
economic recovery and affirm ASEAN’s Centrality to the rules-based order,
regional integration as well as economic development across the region. We
also underscored the importance of the full and effective implementation of
RCEP, which would contribute to an inclusive and open trade and investment
architecture in the region and to post-pandemic global economic recovery.

17.

We welcomed the launch of this year’s ASEAN-China cooperation theme,
ASEAN-China Year of Agricultural Development and Food Security
Cooperation on 25 April 2023. We looked forward to strengthening exchanges
and cooperation in areas such as climate change, food security and nutrition,
smart and digital agriculture, agricultural trade and investment, environment
protection, biodiversity conservation and sustainable natural resource
management, marine debris, poverty elimination, rural development including
through ASEAN Villages Network, and sustainable use of the ocean, seas and
marine resources. We adopted the ASEAN-China Joint Statement on
Deepening Agricultural Cooperation and welcomed the ASEAN-China Action
Plan on Green Agricultural Development to support the implementation of the
ASEAN Regional Guidelines on Sustainable Agriculture that emphasise the
significance of reducing the use of harmful chemicals in agricultural production
and promote the use of viable alternatives, which have been proven to be
effective and pose less risk.

18.

We recognised the need to maximize the potential of blue economy as the new
engine of growth to promote economic growth, social inclusion and livelihoods,
and environmental sustainability. We agreed to continue discussion on
exploring a partnership on blue economy between ASEAN and China as
envisaged in the ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership Vision 2030 to promote
marine sustainable development and create new highlights in ASEAN-China
cooperation.

19.

We reiterated commitment to further advancing cooperation in Digital and ICT
cooperation to cope with the 4th Industrial Revolution (4IR). We encouraged to
continue collaboration to promote cooperation on ASEAN-China digital
infrastructure connectivity, emerging technologies innovation, and
development, emergency communication technologies, cyber and data security
and industry development.

20.

We commended China for the commitment to advance cooperation in Science,
Technology and Innovation (STI) through the effective implementation of
ASEAN-China Plan of Action of a Closer Partnership in STI for Future (20214

FINAL

2025). ASEAN-China STI flagship cooperation includes ASEAN-China Joint
Research Project; China-ASEAN International Cooperation Seminar on
Climate Change; and ASEAN-China Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Competition. We agreed to continue building closer cooperation in STI through
mechanisms such as the ASEAN-China Joint Science Technology Committee
and welcomed the Joint Initiative on Advancing the ASEAN-China Science,
Technology, and Innovation Enhancing Program.
21.

We reaffirmed our commitment to strengthen communication and cooperation
on intellectual property under the framework of the Memorandum of
Understanding between the Governments of the Member States of ASEAN and
the Government of the People’s Republic of China on Cooperation in the Field
of Intellectual Property, and welcomed the implementation of the annual Work
Program on ASEAN-China IP cooperation. We looked forward to further
enhancing the ability of intellectual property creation, utilization, protection,
management and service of both ASEAN Member States and China through
policy dialogue, capacity building, experiences sharing and other cooperative
activities, and working jointly to foster a favourable innovation and business
environment for better supporting the friendly cooperation and communication
in the various areas of economy, trade, science and technology and culture
among ASEAN Member States and China.

22.

We emphasised the importance of stepping up the implementation of the
ASEAN-China Joint Statement on Synergising the Master Plan on ASEAN
Connectivity (MPAC) 2025 and the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and working
to enhance connectivity in the region including the full resumption of flights to
facilitate a more conducive business environment. We welcomed the ongoing
cooperation on enhancing ASEAN tourism digital platforms and looked forward
to further cooperation in enhancing ASEAN travel including by improving
information availability and accessibility. We looked forward to exploring the
possibility of further liberalisation of traffic rights under the ASEAN-China Air
Transport Agreement (AC-ATA), which will enhance regional connectivity as
well as the progressive resumption of more direct flights between ASEAN
Member States and China.

23.

We emphasised the importance of implementing the ASEAN-China Joint
Statement on Tourism Cooperation and looked forward to the development of
new cooperation measures and the gradual resumption of travel. We also
highlighted the need for innovative ways to revitalise the tourism industry and
ensure safe international travel in line with public health measures of each
country.

24.

We also appreciated support from China for ASEAN’s efforts to recover from
the impact of COVID-19, and encouraged the implementation of the ASEAN5

FINAL

China Public Health Cooperation Initiative: Programme on Public Health
Emergency Preparedness Capacity (PROMPT) and ASEAN-China Joint
Statement on Cooperation in Support of the ASEAN Comprehensive Recovery
Framework (ACRF), to promote sustainable and comprehensive recovery and
resilient and inclusive development in the region. We noted with appreciation
project activities supported by PROMPT and encouraged more cooperation in
vaccine, therapeutic and diagnostic research and development; public health
capacity building; improvement of information and data exchange platforms on
health-related matters; as well as health workforce capacity building
programme.
25.

We welcomed the implementation of the ASEAN-China Workplan on Disaster
Management to enhance joint efforts in strengthening disaster management
and humanitarian assistance capacities of ASEAN Member States, through
capacity building, sharing of knowledge, good practices and experiences
among ASEAN Member States and China. We noted with appreciation China’s
initiatives to establish the ASEAN-China Centre for Emergency Management
Cooperation (ACCEMC) and support its complementarity with the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management
(AHA Centre).

26.

We reaffirmed our commitment to the implementation of the Framework of
ASEAN-China Environmental Cooperation Strategy and Action Plan (20212025) to strengthen exchanges of experiences and best practices, dialogue and
pragmatic cooperation on environment. We encouraged enhancing cooperation
to address the impacts of climate change and welcomed China’s support for the
ASEAN Centre for Climate Change. We welcomed the successful conclusion
of the Establishment Agreement of the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Transboundary Haze Pollution (ACCTHPC) and supported the full
operationalisation of the Centre in Indonesia, which will facilitate faster and
effective implementation of all aspects of the ASEAN Agreement on
Transboundary Haze Pollution (AATHP) to address transboundary haze
pollution in the ASEAN region.

27.

We reaffirmed the continued commitment of ASEAN and China to working
together under the three pillars as well as cross-pillar sectors to strengthen
ASEAN Centrality in the ASEAN-led mechanisms in maintaining and upholding
peace, security, and prosperity, to sustain a positive momentum of the ASEAN’s
proactive contribution to UN peacekeeping operations and the incorporation of
Women, Peace, and Security (WPS) agenda, to strengthen the ASEAN’s
competitiveness and regional integration, and to ensure the health, well-being,
and social protection, of our peoples.

6

FINAL

28.

We reaffirmed the commitment to foster closer people-to-people exchanges
including through culture, education, technical and vocational education and
training, tourism and media, with a view to promoting mutual trust and
understanding between the people of ASEAN and China. We also welcomed
China’s continued support for human resources development and the
promotion of the decent work agenda in ASEAN including social security and
occupational safety and health for all workers, and China’s strong commitment
to increasing the number of scholarships and exchange programs for ASEAN
students, including through the ASEAN-China Young Leaders Scholarship. In
this regard, we welcomed China’s proposal for designating 2024 as ASEANChina Year of People-to-People Exchange to deepen cultural connections and
promote greater interaction among the peoples, which play a crucial role in
fostering mutual understanding and friendship. We also welcomed the
convening of the 2023 China-ASEAN Education Cooperation Week in August
which continues to serve as a platform for promoting high-quality educational
exchanges and cooperation between China and ASEAN.

29.

We commended China for the steadfast commitment in enhancing people-topeople exchange through the implementation of ASEAN-China Internship
Programme and ASEAN-China Young Leaders Programme by the ASEAN
Foundation. We also expressed our appreciation to China for supporting the
implementation of ASEAN Talk project, towards building a creative community
of inquisitive and informed youths with a keen appreciation of ASEAN and
ASEAN-China developments and innovative ideas for a future-ready ASEAN.
We noted with appreciation the convening of China-led youth exchange
programmes, including China-ASEAN Youth Campus, China-ASEAN Youth
Development Forum, and China-ASEAN Youth Voluntary Service Forum.

30.

We encouraged further cooperation on clean energy, including through the
early establishment of the ASEAN-China Clean Energy Cooperation Center.

31.

We welcomed the convening of First ASEAN Plus China Ministerial Meeting on
Sports (1st AMMS + China) on 1 September 2023 in Chiang Mai, Thailand. We
looked forward to strengthen cooperation in preserving and promoting
Traditional Sports and Games (TSG) as an intangible cultural heritage and
promotion of healthy and active ageing through sports. We noted with
appreciation the progress of ASEAN Sports Zones establishment in ASEAN
Member States through support from China in order to promote healthy lifestyle
by enabling sports participation at the community level across different ages
through the provision of outdoor sports facilities.

32.

We appreciated China’s continued support in narrowing development gap in the
region through the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) Work Plan IV (20212025), particularly China’s support in modernising training laboratories in
7

FINAL

Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Viet Nam (CLMV) to strengthen their TVET
sector, and in fostering cooperation in the prevention and control of respiratory
diseases for the CLMV countries.
33.

We welcomed the strengthening of cooperation within the Mekong-Lancang
Cooperation (MLC), the BIMP-EAGA-China Cooperation (BECC) and other
relevant sub-regional frameworks and mechanisms to narrow the development
gap in ASEAN.

34.

We discussed the situation in the South China Sea, during which concerns were
expressed by some countries on the land reclamations, and serious incidents
in the area, including damage to the marine environment which has eroded trust
and confidence, increased tensions, and may undermine peace, security, and
stability in the region. We reaffirmed the need to enhance mutual trust and
confidence, exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would
complicate or escalate disputes and affect peace and stability, and avoid
actions that may further complicate the situation. We further reaffirmed the need
to pursue peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with the universally
recognized principles of international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. We
emphasized the importance of non-militarization and self-restraint in the
conduct of activities all other states, including those mentioned in the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), that could
further complicate the situation and escalate tensions in the South China Sea.

35.

We reaffirmed the importance of maintaining and promoting peace, security,
stability, safety, and freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South
China Sea and recognized the benefits of having the South China Sea as a sea
of peace, stability, and prosperity. We underscored the importance of the full
and effective implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the
South China Sea (DOC) in its entirety.

36.

We were pleased with the continued positive momentum and the progress
achieved so far in the ongoing negotiations on the Code of Conduct in the South
China Sea (COC), including the completion of the second reading of the Single
Draft COC Negotiating Text (SDNT). We welcomed the adoption of the
Guidelines for Accelerating the Early Conclusion of an Effective and
Substantive Code of Conduct in the South China Sea. In this regard, we
reaffirmed the aspiration to work towards the early conclusion of an effective
and substantive COC that is in accordance with international law, including the
1982 UNCLOS.

37.

We emphasised the need to maintain and promote an environment conducive
to the COC negotiations. We welcomed practical measures and maritime
cooperation initiatives which could promote trust and confidence, reduce
8

FINAL

tensions and the risk of accidents, and avoid misunderstandings, and
miscalculation.

*****

9

