FINAL

JOINT COMMUNIQUÉ OF THE 56th ASEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS’ MEETING
JAKARTA, 11-12 JULY 2023
1.

The 56th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) was held on 11-12 July
2023 in Jakarta, Republic of Indonesia. The Meeting was chaired by Indonesia
under the theme “ASEAN Matters: Epicentrum of Growth.” We reaffirmed
ASEAN’s commitment to strengthen ASEAN as an organisation that is robust
and agile, and equipped with strengthened capacity and institutional
effectiveness to address today’s challenges and to remain credible and relevant
for its people, the region, and the world while continuing to serve as the region's
epicentre of growth and prosperity.
ASEAN COMMUNITY BUILDING

2.

We reaffirmed our commitment to the full and effective implementation of the
ASEAN Community Vision 2025. We further reaffirmed our commitment to
strengthening the ASEAN Community, its unity and Centrality. We reiterated
the importance of maintaining an ASEAN-centred, open, inclusive, transparent,
resilient and rules-based regional architecture that upholds international law
and of strengthening our engagement and cooperation with Dialogue Partners
and external partners, including through existing ASEAN-led mechanisms, in
promoting peace, stability, security, and development to enhance our regional
resilience to respond to common and emerging challenges.

3.

We reaffirmed our shared commitment to maintaining and promoting peace,
security and stability in the region, as well as to the peaceful resolution of
disputes, including full respect for legal and diplomatic processes, without
resorting to the threat or use of force, in accordance with the universally
recognised principles of international law, including the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

4.

We reaffirmed our belief that regionalism and multilateralism are important
principles and frameworks of cooperation, and that their strength and value lie
in their inclusivity, rules-based nature, and emphasis on mutual benefit and
respect.

5.

We reaffirmed our strong commitment to upholding regionalism and
multilateralism and emphasised the importance of adhering to key principles,
shared values, and norms enshrined in the United Nations (UN) Charter, the
ASEAN Charter, the Declaration on Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality
(ZOPFAN), the 1976 Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC),
the 1982 UNCLOS, the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free
1

Zone (SEANWFZ), the 2011 Declaration on the East Asia Summit on the
Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations and the ASEAN Outlook on the
Indo-Pacific (AOIP).
6.

We committed to intensifying our work towards a people-oriented, peoplecentred, and rules-based ASEAN, and continued to encourage the meaningful
participation of the people, societies and other stakeholders in the ASEAN
Community-building process.

7.

We emphasised our dedicated efforts to sustain the momentum of ASEAN
Community-building, ensuring the full and effective implementation of the
ASEAN Community Vision 2025, and reiterated the importance of cross-pillar,
cross-sectoral coordination and the significance of a holistic, coordinated
response and coherent approach in addressing the increasingly multidimensional character and complexities of issues facing ASEAN.

8.

We noted with satisfaction the progress in implementing the recommendations
of Mid-Term Reviews (MTRs) of the ASEAN Community Blueprints 2025 and
the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC) 2025. We commended the
active efforts by ASEAN Member States and Sectoral Bodies across the three
ASEAN Community pillars in ensuring the effective realisation of the ASEAN
Community Blueprints 2025 in the face of global and regional challenges.

9.

Recalling the ASEAN Leaders’ Statement on the Development of the ASEAN
Community’s Post-2025 Vision, we reiterated the necessity for ASEAN to be
adaptive, responsive and forward-looking, and able to anticipate opportunities
and address emerging and future challenges. We welcomed the convening of
the ASEAN Leaders’ Interface with the High-Level Task Force on the ASEAN
Community’s Post-2025 Vision (HLTF-ACV) and were encouraged by the
progress in the work of the HLTF-ACV. We further recalled the decision by the
Leaders at the 42nd ASEAN Summit on the 20-year timeframe for the vision,
and agreed with the HLTF-ACV for a mid-term review with the possibility of
updates and changes as may be necessary in the periods in between. We
emphasised the need for the HLTF-ACV to develop a visionary, inspirational,
robust, comprehensive, inclusive, and forward-looking ASEAN Community’s
Post-2025 Vision in an effective, efficient, balanced, inclusive, participatory,
and coordinated manner, guided by the Core Elements of the ASEAN
Community’s Post-2025 Vision endorsed by the ASEAN Leaders. We looked
forward to the finalisation and submission of ASEAN Community’s Post-2025
Vision to the ASEAN Coordinating Council (ACC) for in-principle endorsement
in September 2023.

10.

We noted the commendable efforts of ASEAN to respond and recover swiftly
from the COVID-19 pandemic, including the progress on the implementation of
the ASEAN Comprehensive Recovery Framework (ACRF) and its
Implementation Plan, in particular to effectively mitigate the multidimensional
impacts of the pandemic and equip the region’s long-term resilience to face
emerging challenges beyond the COVID-19 crisis. In this regard, we reiterated
the importance to incorporate the lessons learned from the whole-of-ASEAN

2

approach in responding to and recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic and
its consequences to the ASEAN’s Community-building process.
11.

We agreed to coordinate and provide mutual support for ASEAN Member
States’ candidacy in regional and international organisations, where possible.
In this regard, we reaffirmed ASEAN’s support for the Philippines to become
Non-Permanent Member of the UN Security Council (UNSC) for the year 20272028 as well as Indonesia and Thailand to become the Members of the UN
Human Rights Council for the year 2024-2026 and 2025-2027, respectively.

KEY DELIVERABLES
ASEAN Matters: Epicentrum of Growth
12.

We envisaged a strengthened ASEAN in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the ASEAN Charter that is able to implement the ASEAN Charter
in its entirety and navigate geopolitical dynamics in the region while maintaining
its unity and Centrality. We were also determined to build a resilient economic
architecture serving as the centre of regional economic growth and an engine
for global growth through robust cooperation. In this regard, we supported
Indonesia’s Key Deliverables under the theme of “ASEAN Matters: Epicentrum
of Growth”.

13.

We looked forward to the effective implementation of the ASEAN Leaders’
Statement on Strengthening ASEAN’s Capacity and Institutional Effectiveness.
In this regard, we encouraged the ASEAN Senior Officials’ Meeting Working
Group on Decision-Making Process (SOMWG-DMP) to work towards finalising
the outcome document, in accordance with the ASEAN Charter, that will guide
ASEAN and support ASEAN Leaders’ decision and consideration on a
particular issue to arrive at decisions in a timely manner for submission to the
ACC prior to the 43rd ASEAN Summit. We also encouraged the Committee of
Permanent Representatives to ASEAN (CPR) to expedite their work on
implementing the ASEAN Leaders’ Statement on Strengthening ASEAN’s
Capacity and Institutional Effectiveness, in line with the decision of the 32nd
ACC Meeting.

14.

We commended the work being done by the CPR in undertaking their roles and
functions in line with the ASEAN Charter. We underscored the importance and
benefit of the CPR’s presence in Jakarta as we commit to the strengthening of
the CPR that would support ASEAN, the ASEAN Community-building efforts as
well as ASEAN-led mechanisms, towards the ASEAN Community’s Post-2025
Vision.

15.

We underscored the importance of fostering a culture of dialogue in advancing
the promotion and protection of human rights in the region. In this regard, we
also underscored the importance of ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on
Human Rights’ (AICHR) role as the overarching human rights institution in
ASEAN to engage in dialogue and consultation in advancing the promotion and
protection of human rights in the region through its meetings and activities,
including the ASEAN Human Rights Dialogue. In this regard, we looked forward
3

to further discussions on Indonesia’s initiative on the ASEAN Human Rights
Dialogue and the ASEAN Leader’s Declaration on the ASEAN Human Rights
Dialogue for its adoption at the 43rd ASEAN Summit.
16.

We reiterated our commitment to developing an enabling environment for a
robust ASEAN digital economy and strengthening regional digital integration
and transformation. In this regard, we looked forward to the adoption of the
ASEAN Leaders' Statement to Develop the ASEAN Digital Economy
Framework Agreement at the 43rd ASEAN Summit.

17.

We reiterated our commitment to ensuring rapid action to food security and
nutrition in response to crises and strengthening preparedness for long-term
resilience and sustainability of agri-food systems. We expressed our
appreciation to our Dialogue Partners for the growing interest in developing
cooperation on food security and nutrition, including in times of crisis. We
looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on
Strengthening Food Security and Nutrition in Response to Crises at the 43rd
ASEAN Summit.

18.

We affirmed our commitment to strengthen the region’s capacity as the
epicentre of growth. In this regard, we supported Indonesia’s initiative to
develop the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on ASEAN as an Epicentrum of
Growth and looked forward to its adoption at the 43rd ASEAN Summit.

19.

We reiterated our commitment to implement the ASEAN Leaders' Declaration
on the Blue Economy, acknowledging that the oceans and seas are key drivers
of economic growth and innovation, while taking into account the need to
ensure ocean sustainability and rules-based ocean governance. In this regard,
we looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Blue Economy Framework at
the 43rd ASEAN Summit.

20.

We reiterated our commitment to global climate action at regional, national, and
sub-national levels and welcomed the progress made towards the finalisation
of the ASEAN Joint Statement on Climate Change to the 28th session of the
Conference of Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC COP-28).

21.

We also welcomed the progress towards the finalisation of the Agreement on
the Establishment of the ASEAN Co-ordinating Centre for Transboundary Haze
Pollution Control (ACC THPC) in Indonesia and resumption of discussion to
finalise the Host Country Agreement of the ACC THPC given the urgency to
accelerate the operationalisation of ACC THPC to facilitate faster and more
effective implementation in all aspects of the ASEAN Agreement on
Transboundary Haze Pollution to address transboundary haze pollution in the
ASEAN region.

22.

We reaffirmed the importance of providing every young child in ASEAN with
access to quality Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE), as it lays the
foundation to better fulfil their full developmental potential as adults and
participate successfully in economic, social, and civic life. We noted the
4

development of the Declaration on Early Childhood Care and Education in
Southeast Asia as a commitment to strengthening and reforming ECCE in the
region.
23.

We reaffirmed the crucial role of the family as an institution and building block
to stop all forms of violence, including violence against women and children,
and promote the values of respect, equality, collectivism, and social harmony
that will contribute to the inclusive growth and prosperity in the region. We
looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders Declaration on Gender
Equality and Family Development at the 43rd ASEAN Summit, which will among
others, develop family-centred policies and strategies to strengthen family’s
resilience, in building universal and gender-responsive care systems and
infrastructure, recognise and reduce the burden of women's unpaid carework
in family; as well as strengthen coordination across sector and pilar to promote
gender equality, women's empowerment, family development, and inclusive
sustainable growth.

24.

We reaffirmed the importance to continue enhancing regional health resilience
through, improving regional self-reliance and capacities to develop vaccines,
therapeutics and diagnostics (VTD). We took note of the ongoing discussion in
considering the proposal to strengthen collaboration including to facilitate joint
research and development, capacity building and networking of ASEAN
Member States with global partners on VTD.

25.

We acknowledged the strategic position of regional cooperation to mainstream
the rights of persons with disabilities and ensure their full participation in society
to enable them to better contribute to the region’s inclusive development and
growth. We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders Declaration
on Strengthening Disability-Inclusive Development for a Resilient and
Prosperous ASEAN Community at the 43rd ASEAN Summit.

ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific
26.

We expressed concern on the intensifying geopolitical tensions in the region,
and further underlined the value and relevance of the AOIP to ASEAN’s peace,
security, stability and prosperity. We were determined to further promote the
AOIP in our interactions with partners and to mainstream and promote the
implementation of the AOIP through concrete projects and activities in order to
promote mutual trust, respect and benefit through ASEAN-led mechanisms. We
welcomed the support of all our partners to the AOIP, among others, through
the issuance of joint statements and other forms of collaboration and support.
We continued to encourage our partners to support and undertake substantive,
practical and tangible cooperation with ASEAN, in accordance with the
objectives and principles contained in the AOIP, on the four identified key areas,
namely maritime cooperation, connectivity, UN Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) 2030, economic and other possible areas of cooperation.

27.

We committed to mainstreaming and promoting the implementation of the AOIP
through concrete and practical projects and activities based on its objectives
and principles and looked forward to the convening of the ASEAN-Indo-Pacific
5

Forum: Implementation of AOIP this year with particular focus on infrastructure
forum, creative economy forum, youth on digital development for SDGs, and
ASEAN Business and Investment Summit. We encouraged the continuation of
such platforms for dialogue and consultation on the four areas of cooperation
under the AOIP.
28.

We looked forward to exploring potential cooperation between the AOIP and
the respective initiatives of Dialogue Partners on the Indo-Pacific through
ASEAN-led mechanisms including, among others, the East Asia Summit (EAS),
ASEAN Plus One mechanisms, ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and ASEAN
Defence Ministers Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus). In this regard, we looked
forward to the adoption of Joint Statements between ASEAN and the United
States, New Zealand, Republic of Korea (ROK) and China respectively on the
AOIP.

29.

We welcomed the convening of the ASEAN-Indo-Pacific Workshop on Marine
Plastic Debris co-hosted by Indonesia and New Zealand on 15-16 June 2023
in Bali, Indonesia and the EAS Workshop on Combating Marine Pollution, with
a focus on marine plastic debris, co-hosted by Singapore, Australia and India
on 14-15 February 2022 via videoconference. We looked forward to the
convening of the ASEAN-Indo-Pacific Workshop on the Use of Technology for
Sustainable Aquaculture, co-hosted by Indonesia and Australia on 5-6 October
2023 in Lombok, Indonesia and the EAS Workshop on Developing Coastal
Economy as initial concrete implementations of the AOIP.

30.

We committed to enhancing our engagement in the wider Asia-Pacific and
Indian Ocean regions. We looked forward to the establishment of cooperation
between ASEAN and the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), and between
ASEAN and the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF), to be formalised on the sidelines
of the 43rd ASEAN Summit. We also looked forward to the participation of the
Chairs of PIF and IORA as Guests of the Chair at the 18th EAS. We also
welcomed the potential to engage further with IORA and PIF in areas of
common interest.

PROMOTING COMPLEMENTARITIES BETWEEN ASEAN COMMUNITY VISION
2025 AND THE UNITED NATIONS 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
31.

We reaffirmed our commitment to enhancing sustainable development
cooperation, including with partners, by promoting the Complementarities
Initiative. We reiterated our continued support for the effective implementation
of the Complementarities Roadmap (2020-2025) and for the work of the
ASEAN Centre for Sustainable Development Studies and Dialogue (ACSDSD).
We took note of the outcomes of the 7th High-Level Brainstorming Dialogue
(HLBD) held on 31 March 2023 in Bangkok, which highlighted actions to
accelerate the SDGs and explored ways forward to update the
Complementarities Initiative in the context of the ASEAN Community’s Post2025 Vision. We encouraged further efforts to promote sustainable
development cooperation between ASEAN and external partners to support the
mainstreaming and implementation of the AOIP.
6

INITIATIVE FOR ASEAN INTEGRATION
32.

We underscored the importance of narrowing the development gap within and
among ASEAN Member States to enhance ASEAN’s competitiveness as a
region through among others, the implementation of the Initiative for ASEAN
Integration (IAI) Work Plans. We commended the work of the IAI Task Force
and the concerted effort of all stakeholders and their contribution to the positive
progress in the implementation of the IAI Work Plan IV (2021-2025) and to
realise an inclusive, participatory and collaborative ASEAN Community that is
no longer divided by the development gaps among its members.

33.

We reaffirmed our commitment to develop the IAI Work Plan V which will guide
our collective efforts to further narrow the development gap within ASEAN and
realise the ASEAN Community’s Post-2025 Vision of an inclusive, participatory
and collaborative Community.

SUB-REGIONAL COOPERATION
34.

We underscored the importance of ASEAN unity and Centrality in promoting
ASEAN’s sub-regional development. We recognised the relevance of subregional development to ASEAN’s regional integration and Community-building
process, especially in narrowing the development gap, and encouraged closer
coordination between ASEAN Sectoral Bodies and ASEAN-approved subregional cooperation frameworks to facilitate the realisation of this endeavour.

35.

We reiterated the commitment to further promote equitable and sustainable
development across the ASEAN Community by aligning sub-regional growth,
including in the Mekong area such as the Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong
Economic Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS), as well as the Brunei DarussalamIndonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA), the
Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand Growth Triangle (IMT-GT), and the SingaporeJohor-Riau (SIJORI) Growth Triangle, with the comprehensive development of
ASEAN. We welcomed the continued support and assistance of external
partners in the relevant processes.

ASEAN CONNECTIVITY
36.

We reaffirmed our commitment to developing the ASEAN Connectivity Post2025 Agenda as part of the ASEAN Community’s Post-2025 Vision. In this
regard, the development of the ASEAN Connectivity Post-2025 Agenda shall
be carried out with a whole-of-Community approach towards synergising and
complementing connectivity efforts across sectors with the AOIP serving as a
key reference.

37.

We noted with appreciation the work of the ASEAN Connectivity Coordinating
Committee (ACCC), Lead Implementing Bodies and relevant ASEAN Sectoral
Bodies, as well as the MPAC 2025 National Coordinators, National Focal Points
and relevant national agencies in advancing the implementation of MPAC 2025
and the AOIP. In this regard, we welcomed the launch of the ASEAN
7

Sustainable Urbanisation Report in December 2022 as well as the
endorsement of the Framework on ASEAN Supply Chain Efficiency and
Resilience and the Report on Supply Chain Analysis on 10 Specific Product
Groups in March 2023. We therefore looked forward to the follow-on
development of the implementation plan for the Framework and the additional
supply chain analysis covering food security and energy resilience. We also
expressed our appreciation to our Dialogue Partners and other external
partners for their continued support to the MPAC 2025 as well as the growing
interest in developing stronger cooperation on connectivity through the
Connecting the Connectivities Initiative.
38.

We emphasised the need to approach ASEAN and the Indo-Pacific region,
through inclusive economic cooperation with a view to supporting the
implementation of the MPAC 2025 and the AOIP. We welcomed Indonesia’s
initiative to convene the ASEAN-Indo-Pacific Forum: Implementation of the
AOIP which will be held on 5-6 September 2023 in Jakarta as a platform for
dialogue and consultation between ASEAN Member States and external
partners, including to explore smart infrastructure projects, to support the
development of one of the most dynamic regions in the world while unlocking
its potential economic growth.

ASEAN SMART CITIES NETWORK
39.

We commended the significant progress made by the ASEAN Smart Cities
Network (ASCN) in implementing the smart city action plans and regional
initiatives including the development of an ASCN Online Portal and the ASEAN
Smart City Investment Toolkit. We also commended Indonesia for successfully
convening the ASCN Discussion Series this year and looked forward to the
outcomes of the 6th ASCN Annual Meeting. We appreciated our external
partners' support and collaboration in implementing ASCN initiatives.

ASEAN JUNIOR FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMME WITH THE ASEAN SECRETARIAT
40.

We commended the successful implementation of the Second ASEAN Junior
Fellowship Programme with the ASEAN Secretariat (AJFP) which took place
on 4 June – 3 July 2023. The second batch comprised 13 Junior Fellows from
10 ASEAN Member States and one from Timor-Leste. The programme
contributed to enriching the junior officials’ knowledge on ASEAN, as well as
expanded their network through engagements with various ASEAN
stakeholders.

TIMOR-LESTE’S FULL MEMBERSHIP IN ASEAN
41.

We welcomed the adoption of the objective and criteria-based Roadmap for
Timor-Leste’s Full Membership in ASEAN at the 42nd ASEAN Summit in May
2023. We looked forward to the full and effective fulfilment of all the Roadmap
criteria by Timor-Leste, as well as the robust monitoring of the Roadmap’s
implementation, to be regularly reported to the ACC. We encouraged ASEAN
Member States and external partners to fully support Timor-Leste to fulfil the
criteria in the Roadmap for Timor-Leste’s full membership in ASEAN, through
8

the provision of capacity-building assistance and other necessary and relevant
support.
ASEAN POLITICAL-SECURITY COMMUNITY
42.

We reaffirmed the importance of the TAC as the key code of conduct in
governing inter-state relations in the region and as a foundation for maintaining
regional peace and stability. We remain committed to further promoting the
principles embodied in the TAC. We emphasised the importance of all High
Contracting Parties (HCPs) in fulfilling their obligations under the Treaty. We
welcomed the growing interest of non-regional countries to accede to the TAC,
on the basis of respect for and in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the TAC. We welcomed the accession of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the
TAC.

43.

We expressed concern over the declining commitment and cooperation in
global non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament mechanisms, and
called on countries, especially Nuclear Weapon States (NWS), to maintain and
fully implement their commitments under these mechanisms, including in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We called on the
NWS to fulfil their obligations in advancing nuclear disarmament in accordance
with the Article VI of the NPT and to recognise the need to completely eliminate
nuclear weapons, which remains the only way to guarantee that nuclear
weapons are never used again under any circumstances. We reiterated our
commitment to preserving the Southeast Asian region as a Nuclear WeaponFree Zone (NWFZ) and free of all other weapons of mass destruction as
enshrined in the ASEAN Charter and the SEANWFZ Treaty, and stressed the
importance of the full and effective implementation of the Treaty.

44.

We noted that the Executive Committee of the SEANWFZ Commission is
continuing to explore the possibility of allowing individual NWS which are willing
to sign and ratify the Protocol to the SEANWFZ Treaty without reservations and
provide prior formal assurance of this commitment in writing to go ahead with
the signing. We welcome any NWS that are ready to do so. We reaffirmed our
commitment to continuously engage all the NWS, including those with
reservations, and intensify efforts of all parties to resolve all outstanding issues
in accordance with the objectives and principles of the SEANWFZ Treaty. We
encouraged our ASEAN experts to explore ways to bridge the differences,
including the possibility of engaging with the NWS experts. We tasked the
relevant officials to work towards the submission of the biennial SEANWFZ
Resolution through the First Committee of the 78th Session of the UN General
Assembly (UNGA).

45.

We reiterated the importance of strengthening efforts to address common
regional challenges in a strategic and holistic manner in the area of nonproliferation and disarmament. We noted the 30th anniversary of the signing of
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and reaffirmed our commitment to
this landmark treaty. We reaffirmed our full support to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to carry out its mandated work as
9

the implementing body of the CWC in a comprehensive, objective, and impartial
manner, in complementarity with the work of the UN. We also reaffirmed our
commitment to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BWC) and,
recognising the necessity of multilateral negotiations and noting the lack of a
verification measure, the latter of which poses a challenge to the effectiveness
of the BWC, welcomed the establishment of the Working Group on
Strengthening the BWC. We also placed great importance on enhancing
international cooperation, assistance, and exchanges in toxins, biological
agents, equipment, and technology for peaceful purposes.
46.

We noted ongoing multilateral discussions on emerging issues involving
international peace and security, such as outer space. We reiterated that
access to outer space is an inalienable right of all States and that the use of
outer space should exclusively be for peaceful purposes only, and for the
collective benefit of humanity.

47.

We congratulated the AICHR on the progressive implementation of the
AICHR’s Five-Year Work Plan 2021-2025, and its annual Priority
Programmes/Activities. We welcomed the successful convening of the 36th and
37th Meetings of AICHR in Jakarta and Bali, Indonesia, respectively, and the
commemoration of the 10th Anniversary of the ASEAN Human Rights
Declaration (AHRD) and the Phnom Penh Statement on the Adoption of the
AHRD in November 2022 in Siem Reap, Cambodia, and the AICHR’s Country
Learning Visit to Bogor, Indonesia to facilitate dialogues on human rights with
stakeholders and commended the continuous efforts of the AICHR to work with
ASEAN organs, sectoral bodies, entities, and other relevant stakeholders to
mainstream human rights across all pillars of the ASEAN Community, including
engaging all sectors of society in the people-oriented and people-centred
ASEAN Community-building process, as well as to maintain its relations with
Dialogue Partners in promoting and protecting human rights in the region. We
welcomed the successful convening of the ASEAN Human Rights Dialogue
2022 in Siem Reap, Cambodia and took note of the proposal to convene the
5th ASEAN Human Rights Dialogue in Indonesia. We tasked our Senior Officials
to continue working on the implementation of the decision made by the 52nd
AMM on the AICHR and looked forward to the establishment of the Panel of
Experts.

48.

We stressed the importance of the full and effective implementation of the Work
Plan of the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of
Radicalisation and Violent Extremism (Bali Work Plan) 2019-2025 to address
radicalisation and violent extremism in the region in a holistic manner. We
reaffirmed the importance of addressing the root causes of armed conflict and
violent extremism as foundations for regional peace, security and development.

49.

We noted the UNGA Resolution A/RES/77/248 emphasising in the Preamble,
the universal and unified character of the 1982 UNCLOS, and reaffirming that
the 1982 UNCLOS sets out the legal framework within which all activities in the
oceans and seas must be carried out and is of strategic importance as the basis
for national, regional and global action and cooperation in the marine sector,
and that its integrity needs to be maintained.
10

50.

We welcomed the successful convening of the ASEAN Regional Conference
on the 40th Anniversary of the 1982 UNCLOS: Promoting Legal Order for the
Seas and Oceans on 29 November 2022 at the ASEAN Secretariat during
which the participants exchanged views on 1982 UNCLOS as a legal
framework for ocean governance, new challenges for the effective
implementation of the 1982 UNCLOS and promoting cooperation on peaceful
settlement of conflict in the implementation of the 1982 UNCLOS.

51.

We welcomed the adoption of the Concept Paper on the Development of an
ASEAN Maritime Outlook (AMO) and looked forward to the issuance of its first
edition at the 13th ASEAN Maritime Forum (AMF) in August 2023. The AMO
would serve as a practical tool to understand regional maritime trends,
strengthen synergies, and avoid duplication of work among maritime-relevant
bodies, mechanisms, and processes in ASEAN. We welcomed the decision by
the ASEAN SOM to convene the AMF and the Expanded ASEAN Maritime
Forum (EAMF) annually, with their hosting and chairing to follow ASEAN’s
chairmanship cycle. The Chair may also decide to co-chair and co-host the fora
with another ASEAN Member State. We noted various initiatives to strengthen
the EAMF while ensuring ASEAN Centrality.

52.

We noted the convening of the Heads of ASEAN Coast Guard Meeting on 2223 November 2022 in Bali, Indonesia and on 7-8 June 2023 in Jakarta,
respectively. We noted the discussion on the Terms of Reference (TOR) and
Concept Paper on the Establishment of the ASEAN Coast Guard Forum (ACF)
and encouraged further discussion to finalise the documents.

53.

We reiterated the importance of cross-sectoral and cross-pillar coordination to
combat illicit activities and transnational crime in the region under the
frameworks of the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime
(AMMTC) and the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Drug Matters (AMMD). In this
regard, we looked forward to the convening of the 8th AMMD which will be held
on 11 August 2023 in Vientiane. We underscored our continued serious
concerns over global moves to reclassify certain types of illicit drugs to less
restrictive schedules under the international drug conventions, and reaffirmed
our commitment towards a drug-free region and a zero-tolerance approach
towards illicit drugs.

54.

We recalled the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Combating Trafficking in
Persons (TIP) Caused by the Abuse of Technology and committed to promoting
a more robust and more effective regional and international cooperation against
TIP. We reiterated the need to mobilise resources and develop strategies and
modalities against criminal use of technology in TIP. In this regard, we noted
the convening of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) High-Level
Dialogue to Address Transnational Crime and Human Trafficking Associated
with Casinos and Scam Operations in Southeast Asia on 28 June 2023 in
Bangkok, which served as one of the platforms for participants from the region
to share information and explore responses to these threats.

11

55.

We acknowledged the importance of the ADMM and ADMM-Plus as the
primary platforms for ASEAN defence establishments and their Plus Countries
counterparts in promoting security and stability in the region. We welcomed the
defence sector's commitment to advancing the Women, Peace, and Security
(WPS) agenda. We commended the progress made in practical defence
cooperation under the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Groups (EWGs) for 20212024 on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, peacekeeping operations,
maritime security, counter-terrorism, military medicine, humanitarian mine
action and cybersecurity. We took note of the ongoing discussion on the
Concept Paper on Harmonising ADMM and ADMM-Plus Initiatives and the
Discussion Paper on the Use of Military Assets to Maintain Food Security in the
Region. We further commended the commencement of the Observership
Programme in the ADMM-Plus EWG activities this year and looked forward to
deepening engagement with external partners in the area of defence.

56.

We commended the ongoing work of the ADMM in developing the Concept
Paper on the Implementation of the AOIP from a Defence Perspective, in line
with the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Mainstreaming Four Priority Areas of
ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific within ASEAN-led Mechanisms and the
Concept Note on the ASEAN Roadmap for Promoting ASEAN Outlook on IndoPacific adopted and noted respectively by the 40th ASEAN Summit. We looked
forward to the adoption of the Concept Paper at the ADMM in November 2023.

57.

We commended the work of the ASEAN Law Ministers’ Meeting (ALAWMM)
and the ASEAN Senior Law Officials’ Meeting (ASLOM) on law and legal
matters to support the ASEAN Community-building processes and enhance
ASEAN as a rules-based organisation. We welcomed the progress in the
negotiation of the ASEAN Extradition Treaty (AET) and looked forward to its
conclusion, which will complement the Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters (MLAT).

58.

We also commended the work of ALAWMM on strengthening cooperation
between ASEAN and Dialogue Partners and External Parties in promoting the
rule of law and enhancing the justice system. To this end, we noted with
satisfaction the achievement of the collaborative work between ASEAN and
Japan in the area of rule of law and justice and welcomed the convening of the
ASEAN-Japan Special Meeting of Justice Ministers as well as the ASEAN-G7
Justice Ministers’ Interface on 6-7 July 2023 in Tokyo.

59.

We welcomed the progress of the work of the Senior Officials’ Meeting of the
Central Authorities on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters (SOMMLAT) in formulating templates for Mutual Legal Assistance (MLA) requests
and also looked forward to the inaugural Meeting of the ASEAN
Ministers/Attorneys General Meeting of the Central Authorities on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters (AMAG-MLAT) which will be held in Brunei
Darussalam in the last quarter of this year in furthering the effective
implementation of the ASEAN MLAT to strengthen ASEAN’s capacity and
resilience to combat transnational crime.

12

60.

We noted the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation’s (ASEAN-IPR)
activities with relevant ASEAN bodies and external partners to promote the
culture of peace and moderation in ASEAN. We encouraged the ASEAN-IPR
to find innovative solutions to ensure its sustainability. We encouraged all
ASEAN Member States to continue supporting the operations of the Institute,
as reflected in the TOR of the ASEAN-IPR. We also noted ASEAN-IPR’s
continued support for the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry (AWPR) to
implement the ASEAN Leaders’ Joint Statement on Promoting Women, Peace
and Security (WPS) in ASEAN. We encouraged the ASEAN-IPR to engage with
other relevant stakeholders, including the AWPR and the Southeast Asian
Network of Women Peace Negotiators and Mediators (SEANWPNM), to further
implement the Joint Statement. We further encouraged the implementation of
the WPS and Youth, Peace, and Security (YPS) agendas in ASEAN and
ASEAN-led mechanisms.

61.

We commended the role of the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Centre (ARMAC)
as a centre of excellence in promoting ASEAN’s efforts to address the issue of
explosive remnants of war (ERW) for interested ASEAN Member States and
raise awareness of the danger of ERW among affected communities. We
reiterated the importance of mine action in national rehabilitation and
sustainable development and welcomed efforts to promote mine action at the
regional and global level, including at the UN. We expressed appreciation to
ASEAN Member States, Dialogue Partners, external partners and international
organisations that have contributed to the undertaking of projects and
operations of the ARMAC.
ASEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY

62.

We were encouraged by the region’s continued growth momentum despite
being confronted with various challenges. We recognised that ASEAN remains
a bright spot and a point of resilience in 2023, having a better prospect vis-ávis the global outlook, and noted that the ASEAN economy is expected to
achieve GDP growth of 4.7% in 2023 and 5.0% in 2024, driven by robust
domestic consumption, positive export performance, and accelerated recovery
in services. We reiterated our commitment to redouble our efforts to strengthen
ASEAN’s position as the epicentre of growth.

63.

We expressed our commitment to support the timely realisation of Indonesia's
Priority Economic Deliverables (PEDs) under the ASEAN Economic
Community (AEC) pillar, which is anchored on the three strategic thrusts of (i)
Recovery and Rebuilding, (ii) Digital Economy, and (iii) Sustainability. These
PEDs aim to address the immediate challenges in ensuring the region’s postCOVID-19 pandemic recovery and rebuilding, and further the momentum for
ASEAN as an epicentre of growth through inclusive digital economy integration,
sustainable economic development, strengthening financial stability, energy
security, and food security, as well as accelerating the implementation of the
AOIP.

13

64.

We acknowledged that sustainable food production and resilient agricultural
practices, including sustainable production of vegetable oils, are essential to
the attainment of the SDGs by 2030 and will contribute to the regional and
global efforts towards economic recovery, green growth, and food security. We
welcomed the convening of the Third Meeting of the Joint Working Group on
Palm Oil and Technical Webinar between the European Union and Relevant
ASEAN Member States and took note of the increased voluntary participation
of Member States to the Meeting, to continue promoting mutual understanding
on the sustainable production of vegetable oils and addressing the challenges
in this sector in a holistic, transparent, and non-discriminatory manner. We
noted the agreement between relevant producing countries and the European
Union (EU) to establish a Joint Task Force to strengthen the cooperation for
the implementation of the EU’s Deforestation Regulation. We reaffirmed our
support for the relevant Member States to promote collaboration and
sustainability efforts and practices in the vegetable oil sector and looked
forward to the convening of the Fourth Joint Working Group on Palm Oil
between the European Union and Relevant ASEAN Member States.

65.

We emphasised the importance of accelerating energy transition and
enhancing interconnectivity to achieve sustainable energy security, while
ensuring energy resilience and accessibility, through among others, initiatives
such as the Lao PDR-Thailand-Malaysia-Singapore Power Integration Project
(LTMS-PIP), and the implementation of the ASEAN Power Grid (APG) and
Trans ASEAN Gas Pipeline (TAGP). We looked forward to the adoption of Joint
Declaration on Sustainable Energy Security Through Interconnectivity and the
initiation of the Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-the Philippines Power
Integration Project (BIMP-PIP) at the 41st ASEAN Ministers on Energy Meeting
and its Associated Meetings (AMEM-41) in August 2023 in Bali, Indonesia.

66.

We recognised the continuing collaborative efforts in addressing volatilities
caused by supply chain disruptions from the oil and gas market. We noted the
discussion to renew the ASEAN Petroleum Security Agreement and the
ASEAN Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on the Trans-ASEAN Gas
Pipeline Project. We also noted the good progress in the development of new
regasification terminals in the region, especially in Cambodia, Indonesia,
Thailand, and Viet Nam, that will allow ASEAN to continue expanding the
region’s gas distribution networks.

67.

We noted the progress of the implementation of the Bandar Seri Begawan
Roadmap: An ASEAN Digital Transformation Agenda to Accelerate ASEAN’s
Economic Recovery and Digital Economy Integration, including the
development of the ASEAN Digital Economy Framework Agreement (DEFA)
and welcomed the convening of the consultative workshops on the Study of the
DEFA on 13 February 2023 in Jakarta and on 18-19 May 2023 in Bangkok,
respectively, as a good avenue for harnessing important information from
across sectoral bodies, in order to build a solid landscape of ASEAN’s digital
economy. In this regard, we looked forward to the completion of the study and
the launch of the DEFA negotiations this year, to transform ASEAN into a
leading digitally connected Community and economic bloc powered by secure,
transformative digital services, technologies and ecosystems.
14

68.

We noted the progress of the implementation of the ASEAN Minerals
Cooperation Action Plan III (Phase 2) and looked forward to addressing the
remaining action lines of Phase 1 under Phase 2. We looked forward to the 9th
ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Minerals scheduled for November 2023 with a
view to fostering the socio-economic development of the ASEAN region
towards AEC integration.

69.

We noted that the 26th Meeting of ASEAN Tourism Ministers (M-ATM) held
during the ASEAN Tourism Forum 2023 on 4 February 2023 in Yogyakarta,
Indonesia has commended further relaxation and removal of travel restrictions
by ASEAN Member States. In this connection, we supported the development
of an Action Plan to Implement the ASEAN Framework on Sustainable Tourism
Development in the Post-COVID-19 Era, as well as the plan to have an
interface meeting between the Tourism Ministers and Transport Ministers later
this year to further revitalise the tourism and transport sectors in supporting
post-pandemic economic recovery. We welcomed the new ASEAN tourism
brand and tagline “A Destination for Every Dream” to strengthen the marketing
efforts of the region as a single destination.

70.

We recalled the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Developing Regional Electric
Vehicle Ecosystem and looked forward to its implementation. In this
connection, we appreciated the ASEAN-U.S. collaboration in developing Policy
Recommendations to Improve Electric Vehicle Infrastructure and Charging
Stations in ASEAN and looked forward to its finalisation and adoption by
ASEAN Transport Ministers in November 2023.

71.

We recalled the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Advancing Regional Payment
Connectivity and Promoting Local Currency Transaction that emphasised the
importance of providing an enabling environment to strengthen regional
linkages and payment systems to support cross-border payments to promote
the development of local currency markets in the region. We supported and
looked forward to the implementation of the Declaration by the ASEAN Finance
Ministers and Central Bank Governors.

72.

We noted the progress of the ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement (ATIGA)
upgrade negotiations which is targeted to be comprehensive in scope and
cover not only traditional trade-in-goods elements but also emerging and future
issues to ensure that the upgraded ATIGA will be a modern, comprehensive,
forward-looking agreement relevant to business communities and more
responsive to regional and global developments. We also noted the progress
made in ASEAN’s Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with its external partners, in
particular the finalisation of the 2nd Protocol to Amend the Agreement
Establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA),
and the ongoing negotiations on ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) 3.0
Upgrade Negotiations, the Review of the ASEAN-India Trade in Goods
Agreement (AITIGA), and the ASEAN-Canada Free Trade Agreement.

73.

We welcomed the full ratification and progress in the implementation of the
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) Agreement that seeks
15

to contribute to regional post-pandemic economic recovery, achieve inclusive,
and rules-based trade and promote investment. We underscored the
importance of maintaining ASEAN Centrality and expressed our appreciation
to the non-ASEAN Parties to the RCEP Agreement for recognising and
respecting ASEAN Centrality. We reaffirmed our commitment to RCEP’s full
and effective implementation on all aspects, which will strengthen the regional
supply chain and contribute to the ASEAN economic integration agenda. We
also reaffirmed our commitment in the establishment of the RCEP Support Unit
within the ASEAN Secretariat, which could gradually transition into a standalone RCEP Secretariat. We encouraged other economies to accede to the
RCEP Agreement as we believe the full utilisation and expansion of the RCEP
would open up more opportunities for businesses to grow and for micro, small
and medium enterprises (MSMEs) to internationalise and contribute to stronger
supply chains.
74.

We recognised the importance of promoting investment that contributes to
sustainable development goals as mandated by the ACRF and the importance
of enhancing ASEAN’s attractiveness as a sustainable investment destination.
Therefore, we looked forward to the development of the ASEAN Sustainable
Investment Guidelines. We were also of the view that investment in higher
added-value downstream industry is central to achieve ASEAN as an
integrated, single market, and production base.

75.

We recognised the important role of MSMEs and encouraged their greater
participation in our economies. We emphasised the importance of providing
support to MSMEs through access to financing, business coaching and
mentoring and capacity-building programs, and the significance of digital
transformation for MSMEs to expand their business internationally. We
underscored the importance of inclusive growth in ensuring balanced socioeconomic development and looked forward to the convening of the Sixth
ASEAN Inclusive Business Summit on 23-25 August 2023 in Bali hosted by
Indonesia.

76.

We welcomed the significant contribution of the private sector in economic
development and integration and stressed the importance of public-private
sector collaboration. We reiterated the key role of the ASEAN Business
Advisory Council (ASEAN-BAC) in coordinating views and inputs of the ASEAN
business community to contribute into the development of the AEC. We
welcomed and commended ASEAN-BAC’s initiatives in the implementation of
eight legacy projects under the priority areas of trade and investment
facilitation, food security, health resilience, digital transformation and
sustainable development. We believe that the projects will create positive
impact and look forward to the progress of its implementation.

77.

We accentuated the role of science, technology, and innovation (STI) in
achieving development gains in the region. We encouraged the synergy
between the four major actors in the innovation system: science, policy,
industry and society. We took note of the implementation review of the ASEAN
Plan of Action on Science, Technology and Innovation (APASTI) 2016-2025
and the ongoing drafting of APASTI 2026-2035.
16

78.

We underscored the importance of the industrial sector as one of the main
pillars of ASEAN's economy. Therefore, we reiterated our commitment to
encouraging industrial cooperation by developing a framework for industrial
project-based initiatives that focus on forward-looking sectors and specific
areas, considering green technological advancements, private sector
participation, intra-ASEAN complementarity, and collaboration with the relevant
Dialogue Partners and external parties.

79.

We noted the importance of the Creative Economy as one of the streams for
competitiveness in ASEAN and looked forward to ASEAN Member States and
Dialogue Partners’ participation in the upcoming Creative Economy Forum,
which will be held as part of the ASEAN-Indo-Pacific Forum on 5-7 September
2023 in Jakarta. The forum will be an inclusive platform to discuss the
mainstreaming of creative economy by addressing common challenges and
building the creative economy ecosystem in the region.

80.

We recognised the urgent need to strike a balance between economic growth
and sustainable use of natural resources and protection of the environment.
We recalled the initial idea on an ASEAN Green Deal put forward at the 40th
and 41st ASEAN Summits and Related Summits and reaffirmed the importance
for ASEAN to continue its sustainable development agenda in the region, as
well as in achieving ASEAN Member States’ commitments under the Paris
Agreement. To this end, we welcomed the adoption of the Implementation Plan
of the Framework on Circular Economy for AEC by the AEC Council in February
2023 which will complement the ASEAN Member States' climate action and
decarbonisation efforts. We noted the ongoing development of the ASEAN
Strategy for Carbon Neutrality. We welcomed the issuance of Version 2 of the
ASEAN Taxonomy for Sustainable Finance in March 2023 by the ASEAN
Taxonomy Board and looked forward to its further progress.
ASEAN SOCIO-CULTURAL COMMUNITY

81.

We committed to realise our region as an epicentrum of growth, to be relevant
and beneficial to its people, to ensure an ASEAN Community that promotes
high quality of life and is adaptive and responsive to current and future
challenges.

82.

We committed to increasing investment in human resources development and
strengthen regional health security architecture, scale-up cooperation and
partnership in addressing climate change and other environmental issues, to
develop a competitive, resilient and sustainable region.

83.

We looked forward to the full implementation of the ASEAN Leaders’
Declaration on One Health Initiative, adopted at the 42nd ASEAN Summit, to
strengthen ASEAN’s prevention, preparedness, detection and response
mechanisms to deal effectively with potential public health threats in the future
as well as the development of a joint action plan on One Health and the
establishment of a One Health network to be noted at the 43rd ASEAN Summit.
17

84.

We reaffirmed our commitment and sustained engagement in the negotiations
of a World Health Organization Convention, agreement or other international
instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response (WHO CA+),
and the amendments of the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR
2005), to ensure both instruments work in synergy and effectively
operationalise equity to strengthen global pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response capacities.

85.

We looked forward to ASEAN’s participation in the UN High-Level Meeting on
Universal Health Coverage (UHC), the UN High-Level Meeting on Tuberculosis
and the UN High-Level Meeting on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and
Response to be held during the UN High-Level Week in September 2023 in
New York, U.S.

86.

We reaffirmed our commitment to strengthening regional health architecture
beyond the COVID-19 pandemic towards achieving resilience in the ASEAN
Community. We looked forward to the signing of the Establishment Agreement
and its operationalisation of the ASEAN Centre for Public Health Emergencies
and Emerging Diseases (ACPHEED). We also reaffirmed our commitment to
expand the utilisation of the existing COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fund (now
renamed as the ASEAN Response Fund for Public Health Emergencies and
Emerging Diseases) to address other public health emergencies and emerging
diseases and participate in global pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response (PPR) efforts. We looked forward to the continued discussion to
provide a report on modalities for a possible regional financial facility.

87.

We recognised the increasing need of future healthcare and social support
system in order to promote healthy, active, and productive ageing. In this
regard, we acknowledged work undertaken by the ASEAN Centre for Active
Ageing and Innovation (ACAI), including the ACAI International Conference on
Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology 2022 on 10-12 August 2022 in Bangkok.

88.

We extended support to the continued engagement of governments with
workers’, employers’ and relevant civil society organisations in the ongoing
development of the Guidance Document to Implement the ASEAN Declaration
on Promoting Competitiveness, Resilience, and Agility of Workers for the
Future of Work. We were pleased to note ASEAN Member States’ continuous
efforts in combating child labour through the ASEAN Roadmap on the
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour by 2025.

89.

We commended the labour sector in their continued efforts to protect migrant
workers throughout the entire migration cycle through the adoption of the
ASEAN Declaration on the Placement and Protection of Migrant Fishers and
the ASEAN Declaration on the Protection of Migrant Workers and Family
Members in Crisis Situations at the 42nd ASEAN Summit earlier this year. We
expressed support to the ongoing development of the ASEAN Guidelines to
implement both declarations. We were also pleased with the ongoing
development of the Guidelines to operationalise the ASEAN Declaration on
Portability of Social Security Benefits for Migrant Workers in ASEAN adopted
18

at the 40th and 41st ASEAN Summits last year. We called on further exploration
on potential strategic ASEAN cooperation in the protection of migrant workers.
90.

We recalled the ASEAN Leaders’ Statement on the Year of ASEAN Youth to
Strengthen the Role of Youth in ASEAN Community-Building, adopted at the
40th and 41st ASEAN Summits. We recognised the significance of equipping
youth with necessary skills to address present and future challenges in ASEAN.
Therefore, we welcomed the recommendations put forward by the ASEAN
Youth Dialogue 2023 to strengthen regional cooperation towards equitable
access for digital infrastructure, education, resource mobilisation, and capacity
building as conveyed at the ASEAN Leaders’ Interface with the Representative
of ASEAN Youth on the sidelines of the 42nd ASEAN Summit.

91.

We commended the accelerated efforts to promote and protect the rights of
women and children as guided by ASEAN’s commitments in the Regional Plan
of Action on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (RPA on EVAW) and
the Regional Plan of Action on the Elimination of Violence Against Children
(RPA on EVAC) through relevant impactful initiatives.

92.

We looked forward to the High-Level Forum on Disability Inclusive
Development and Partnership beyond 2025 hosted by Indonesia back-to-back
with ASEAN-U.S. Dialogue on Disability Rights, to further mainstream
disability-inclusive development through partnership, not only to accelerate the
implementation of the ASEAN Enabling Masterplan 2025: Mainstreaming the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, but also to explore future strategies beyond
2025.

93.

We commended the successful convening of the High-Level Dialogue on
Women Peace and Security (WPS) on 5-7 July 2023 in Yogyakarta, Indonesia
for sharing best practices and promoting the implementation of the Regional
Plan of Action on WPS. We appreciated the support of partners in strengthening
women’s capacities as mediators in the region.

94.

We reaffirmed our collective commitment towards fostering a more inclusive
and equitable ASEAN Community by emphasising gender mainstreaming and
acknowledged that achieving gender equality requires a holistic and
harmonious approach through integrating gender perspective into all policies,
programs, and decision-making processes and commended the convening of
the 11th ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Social Welfare and Development
(AMMSWD) with the theme "Accelerating the Implementation of ASEAN
Commitments for Gender Equality through Gender Mainstreaming and Social
Inclusion."

95.

We also commended the successful convening of the ASEAN Gender
Mainstreaming Conference on 4-5 July 2023 in Yogyakarta, Indonesia to
strengthen ASEAN’s commitment to implement the ASEAN Gender
Mainstreaming Strategic Framework (AGMSF) in particular to promote gender
mainstreaming in the work of each ASEAN Sectoral Body.

19

96.

We reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to promote gender equality and women
empowerment and commit to the implementation of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) as the
principal covenant dedicated to the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls, and the 1995 Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action (BpfA) as the key global policy document on gender equality,
as well as to support the UN Commission on the Status of Women (CSW).

97.

We reaffirmed the importance of promoting rural development and poverty
eradication in the region. We welcomed the adoption of ASEAN Leaders’ Joint
Statement on the Establishment of an ASEAN Villages Network to fast-track
rural development. We encouraged closer cross-pillar collaboration, including
with ASCN to explore and promote rural-urban connectivity through
collaboration between ASCN, the ASEAN Villages Network, as well as partners
for the sustainable growth and welfare of the region.

98.

We were encouraged by the implementation of the Roadmap to Implement the
Ha Noi Declaration on Strengthening Social Work Towards Cohesive and
Responsive ASEAN Community which recognises the critical role of social
workers and the wider social service workforce in promoting and protecting the
rights and welfare of vulnerable groups including older persons, persons with
disabilities, women and children in the region. We commended the
development of the regional guidelines to develop quality social work services
for victims of violence particularly women and children.

99.

We emphasised the importance of governments’ role in dealing with and
curbing the spread of fake news and disinformation in the media. We looked
forward to the finalisation of the Guidelines on Management of Government
Information in Combatting Fake News and Disinformation in the Media to
support the work of the ASEAN Task Force on Fake News (TFFN) in tackling
the proliferation and harmful effects of fake news.

100.

We recognised the importance of the implementation of the ASEAN Strategic
Plan for Culture and Arts 2016-2025 and the Siem Reap Declaration on
Promoting a Creative and Adaptive ASEAN Community to Support the Cultural
and Creative Economy in 2022, which supported the vital role of cultural and
creative industries in building a progressive, inclusive, dynamic, resilient,
harmonious, and inclusive ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community (ASCC) that is
aware and proud of its identity, culture, and heritage, and with the strengthened
capacity to innovate and proactively contribute to the global community.

101.

We supported the ongoing efforts in realising a sustainable, inclusive, resilient,
and quality education system in ASEAN, particularly in the areas of early
childhood care and education, lifelong learning, and education for sustainable
development. We looked forward to the convening of the Ministerial Policy
Dialogue on Early Childhood Care and Education in July 2023. We underscored
the importance and benefits of people-to-people connectivity within ASEAN,
and support to widen accessible and sustainable regional student mobility
scholarships for higher education students in each ASEAN Member State

20

through, among others, the ongoing implementation of Phase 1 of the IntraASEAN Scholarship Programme for ASEAN Nationals.
102.

We committed to accelerating the digital transformation of education in ASEAN
as an effort to advance the process of recovery from post-pandemic learning
losses and increase access to and participation in education among
marginalised populations. We appreciated the successful conduct of the
ASEAN Regional Forum on the Future of Education on 24-26 May 2023 via
videoconference, which discussed innovative solutions to support the
transformative education agenda and explored forward looking strategies to
support learning recovery and digital transformation of education systems in
the post-pandemic era. We also looked forward to the finalisation of the
Roadmap for Implementing the Declaration on Digital Transformation of
Education Systems in ASEAN.

103.

We welcomed the ASEAN TVET Conference: Collaborative Framework on
TVET Reformation in Encouraging Innovation through Collaboration between
TVET and Business Entity/Industry on 3-5 July 2023 in Batam, Indonesia to
improve technical, vocational, and educational training (TVET) implementation
and reformation in encouraging innovation between TVET institutes and private
sectors within ASEAN. We recognise the importance of multi-stakeholders’
engagement with the ongoing work of the ASEAN TVET Council (ATC) in
expanding and improving the quality of TVET to increase the relevance and
effective transfer of skills as well as industry cooperation.

104.

We took note of the plan to convene the ASEAN Conference on Shared
Civilisational Values in 2023 to facilitate and foster a greater understanding of
shared civilisational values derived from the ASEAN region's culture and
religions.

105.

We reaffirmed our commitment to the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement, in particular the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in light of
different national circumstances. We recognised the importance of enhancing
cooperation in areas such as capacity-building and the provision of climate
finance by developed countries, for the implementation of the commitments in
the Paris Agreement and the Glasgow Climate Pact. We looked forward to the
28th session of the Conference of the Parties (COP-28) to the UNFCCC from
30 November to 12 December 2023 in Dubai, the United Arab Emirates.

106.

We noted that Southeast Asia is one of the regions highly vulnerable to the
adverse impacts of climate change. We reiterated our call for developed
countries to fulfil their commitments under the Paris Agreement and to scaleup their contributions to climate finance. We encouraged collaboration on
climate change by sharing best practices, experience and knowledge,
technology transfer, and capacity building on climate change adaptation and
mitigation and disaster risk reduction.

107.

We committed to scaling up efforts to tackle environmental challenges, among
others, through halting and reversing biodiversity loss, preventing loss and
21

damage from climate change impacts, enhancing climate mitigation and
adaptation efforts including for coastal and marine ecosystem, ensuring the
sustainable use and management of water resources and promoting
sustainable development. In this regard, we welcomed the initiatives to develop
an ASEAN Action Plan for Invasive Alien Species (IAS) Management and an
ASEAN Community-based Climate Action.
108.

We emphasised the importance of a strategic and coordinated regional
response to climate change and welcomed the developments made on the
finalisation of the Establishment Agreement of ASEAN Centre for Climate
Change (ACCC) towards the formal establishment of the Centre in Brunei
Darussalam this year. We looked forward to the Centre’s work towards
enhancing climate change cooperation among ASEAN Member States to
realise a climate-resilient and low carbon ASEAN region.

109.

We reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to promoting biodiversity conservation,
sustainable use, and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of
the utilisation of genetic resources. We recognised the importance of promoting
nature-based solutions and ecosystem-based approach, in order to minimise
the devastating consequences of biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation
in line with post-pandemic recovery efforts. We continued to support the work
of the ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity (ACB) in assisting ASEAN Member States
in mainstreaming biodiversity into various development sectors, promoting
nature-based solutions and ecosystem-based approach to enhance the
region’s resilience against zoonotic diseases, addressing climate change, and
facilitating ASEAN’s contributions to the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity
Framework (GBF).

110.

We acknowledged that transboundary haze pollution has adverse impacts on
the public health, well-being and economies of ASEAN. We recognised that
transboundary haze pollution arising from land and forest fires remains a major
concern in the region. We stressed the importance of remaining vigilant and
noted the ongoing preventive efforts to minimise transboundary haze pollution
during periods of drier weather. We reaffirmed our commitment to the full and
effective implementation of the ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze
Pollution (AATHP), including stepping up measures to mitigate land and forest
fires and address transboundary haze pollution with a view to achieving a HazeFree ASEAN.

111.

We expressed our appreciation for the valuable support from partners in the
ongoing implementation of projects in peatland and ecosystems management
related to prevention of fire and haze and mitigation of greenhouse gas
emissions. We therefore looked forward to the finalisation of the ASEAN
Peatland Management Strategy (APMS) 2022-2030 and the Roadmap on
ASEAN Cooperation towards Transboundary Haze Pollution Control with
Means of Implementation (2022-2030). We also looked forward to the
finalisation of the Investment Framework for Haze-Free, Sustainable Land
Management in South East Asia (2022-2030) with a view to channelling
multiple sources of finance in addressing haze challenges. We also noted
increased ongoing regional efforts towards the implementation of the Chiang
22

Rai 2017 Plan of Action for Transboundary Haze Pollution Control in the
Mekong Sub-Region.
112.

We reaffirmed the importance of implementing the Bandar Seri Begawan
Declaration on the Strategic and Holistic Initiative to Link ASEAN Responses
to Emergencies and Disaster (ASEAN SHIELD) to prepare for and manage
climate-related and other disaster risks and their impacts in the region through
a holistic, cross-pillar and cross-sectoral approach. In this regard, we welcomed
the progress of reviewing the TOR of the Secretary-General of ASEAN as the
ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Coordinator (SG-AHAC) and commend the
ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Disaster Management (AMMDM) and the
Conference of Parties (COP) to the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (ADMER) on the adoption of the
revised Financial Rules of the ADMER Fund. We also looked forward to the
operationalisation and socialisation of the ADMER Fund.

113.

We reaffirmed the importance of promoting a whole-of-ASEAN approach in
disaster management and emergency response and reaffirmed our
commitment to continuously enhance ASEAN’s capacity in implementing the
ASEAN Declaration on One ASEAN One Response: ASEAN Responding to
Disasters as One in the Region and Outside the Region including through
support for the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
disaster management (AHA Centre).

114.

We commended the AHA Centre’s leading role in supporting and assisting
Myanmar in the aftermath of the severe impact of Tropical Cyclone MOCHA
through the mobilisation of relief items from the Disaster Emergency Logistics
System for ASEAN (DELSA) to the affected communities. We appreciated the
support from the ASEAN Member States and ASEAN Secretariat through the
deployment of the ASEAN Emergency Response Assessment Team (ASEANERAT), including the completion of the Needs Assessment of the affected
areas in Rakhine State.

115.

We expressed appreciation to the SG-AHAC and looked forward to the effective
operationalisation of the SG-AHAC, including in mobilising resources and
promoting coordination on humanitarian assistance and recovery efforts to
Myanmar in the aftermath of Tropical Cyclone MOCHA. We also looked forward
to strengthening collaboration with Dialogue Partners, UN agencies, and other
relevant agencies, including in mobilising resources to the affected
communities of Tropical Cyclone MOCHA in Myanmar.

116.

We reaffirmed ASEAN’s continued support for Myanmar’s efforts to bring
peace, stability, the rule of law, promote harmony and reconciliation among the
various communities, as well as ensure sustainable and equitable development
in Rakhine State.

117.

We emphasised the importance of and reiterated our continued support for
Myanmar’s commitment to ensuring safety and security for all communities in
Rakhine State as effectively as possible and facilitating the voluntary return of
displaced persons in a safe, secure, and dignified manner. We noted
23

engagement and cooperation between Myanmar and Bangladesh for the pilot
repatriation project, to facilitate 7,000 returnees by the end of 2023 and
welcomed Myanmar’s efforts to work towards the implementation of this project.
118.

We looked forward to ASEAN’s continued facilitation of the repatriation process
through the implementation of the projects as the follow up to the
recommendations of the Preliminary Needs Assessment (PNA). We also
looked forward to the Comprehensive Needs Assessment (CNA) when
conditions allow and encouraged the Secretary-General of ASEAN to continue
identifying possible areas for ASEAN to effectively facilitate the repatriation
process.
ASEAN EXTERNAL RELATIONS

119.

We underscored the importance of strengthening ASEAN unity and Centrality
in our engagement with external partners, including through ASEAN-led
mechanisms such as the ASEAN Plus One, ASEAN Plus Three (APT), EAS,
ARF, and ADMM-Plus, in order to build mutual trust and confidence as well as
reinforce an open, transparent, resilient, inclusive, and rules-based regional
architecture with ASEAN at the centre that upholds international law. We
underscored the need to promote an enabling environment for peace, stability
and prosperous development for all through ensuring a culture of dialogue and
cooperation, instead of rivalry, enhancing mutual trust and confidence and
respect for international law. We reaffirmed that ASEAN shall act in accordance
with ASEAN Centrality in external political, economic, social and cultural
relations while remaining actively engaged, outward-looking, inclusive and nondiscriminatory, in line with the ASEAN Charter.

120.

We noted with satisfaction the encouraging progress in ASEAN’s relations with
our Dialogue Partners, Sectoral Dialogue Partners, and Development Partners
through the existing frameworks, Plans of Action, Practical Cooperation Areas
and development cooperation programmes based on mutual interest and
benefit in contribution to ASEAN Community-building and development
cooperation efforts. We also welcomed the support of our partners for the
priorities of ASEAN in 2023 under the theme “ASEAN Matters: Epicentrum of
Growth”. We agreed to further strengthen partnerships and cooperation with
our partners, including through sub-regional development cooperation and
projects, thus contributing to the continued efforts towards the realisation of the
ASEAN Community Vision 2025, as well as our proactive response to regional
and global challenges and opportunities.

121.

We took note of the growing interest from countries and regional organisations
outside of the region in developing stronger collaboration and substantial
cooperation with ASEAN, including through applications for formal partnerships
with ASEAN. We affirmed the importance of pursuing an outward-looking policy
and agreed on the need to reach out to new potential external parties based on
shared interest, constructive engagement, and mutual benefit which could
contribute to ASEAN Community-building, regional integration and
development cooperation efforts.
24

122.

We welcomed the increased engagement between the CPR and ASEAN’s
partners, including through the 95 Non-ASEAN Ambassadors Accredited to
ASEAN (NAAAs). We also welcomed the role of the 55 ASEAN Committees in
Third Countries and International Organisations in promoting ASEAN’s interest
and forging partnerships in the respective host countries and international
organisations.

Dialogue Partners
123.

We looked forward to the 3rd ASEAN-Australia Summit, the 26th ASEAN-China
Summit, the 26th ASEAN-Japan Summit, the 24th ASEAN-Republic of Korea
Summit, the 11th ASEAN-U.S. Summit, the 20th ASEAN-India Summit, to be
held during the 43rd ASEAN Summits and Related Summits in September 2023.
We looked forward to the ASEAN-Japan Commemorative Summit for the 50th
Year of Friendship and Cooperation on 16-18 December 2023 in Tokyo, and
the Special Summit to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of ASEAN-Australia
Dialogue Relations on 4-6 March 2024 in Melbourne, Australia. We looked
forward to the ASEAN-Canada Summit that would launch the establishment of
the ASEAN-Canada Strategic Partnership in September 2023.

124.

We underscored that the establishment of a Comprehensive Strategic
Partnership (CSP) with ASEAN should be meaningful, substantive and mutually
beneficial. We welcomed the establishment of the ASEAN-U.S. and ASEANIndia CSP in November 2022 and reaffirmed our commitments to working
closely with the US and India, respectively, in implementing these CSPs. We
looked forward to the establishment of the ASEAN-Japan CSP at the 26th
ASEAN-Japan Summit in September 2023. ASEAN welcomed and looked
forward to considering more details on the ROK’s announcement of the request
for an ASEAN-ROK CSP.

125.

We looked forward to the adoption of the Annexes to the Plans of Action with
the U.S. and India at the upcoming Post Ministerial Conferences (PMC) Plus
One Sessions with the U.S. and India, respectively, to guide the implementation
of the respective CSPs. We also looked forward to the endorsement of the
ASEAN-Russia Joint Statement on the Occasion of 5th Anniversary of ASEANRussia Strategic Partnership at the upcoming PMC Plus One Session with
Russia, the ASEAN Japan Vision Statement and its Implementation Plan with
Japan at the upcoming ASEAN-Japan Commemorative Summit for the 50th
Year of Friendship and Cooperation, as well as the Joint Statement to establish
an ASEAN-Canada Strategic Partnership at the ASEAN-Canada Summit in
September 2023 in Jakarta. We further looked forward to an in-principle
endorsement for the establishment of the ASEAN-U.S. Centre to follow-up the
implementation of the ASEAN-U.S. CSP and work on the details for its
establishment.

ASEAN Sectoral Dialogue Partners and ASEAN Development Partners
126.

We noted the good progress made in the ASEAN’s Sectoral Dialogue
Partnerships with Norway, Switzerland, Türkiye, Brazil, United Arab Emirates,
25

and Pakistan as well as Development Partnerships with Chile, France,
Germany and Italy. We welcomed South Africa becoming Sectoral Dialogue
Partner of ASEAN, and accept in-principle the application of Morocco, for a
formal decision to be taken at the upcoming 43rd ASEAN Summit, while tasking
the ASEAN Secretariat to further identify more focused and concrete areas of
cooperation. We looked forward to the individual Trilateral Meetings between
the ASEAN Chair, the Secretary-General of ASEAN and Norway and Türkiye,
respectively, to explore opportunities for further cooperation and exchanges on
issues of mutual interest.
Regional and International Organisations
127.

We reaffirmed the importance of multilateralism and international cooperation
and underscored the importance of ASEAN’s partnerships with other external
partners such as regional and international organisations, including the UN to
address global concerns, pursue shared goals and complementary initiatives,
and promote sustainable development for the benefit of our people. In this
regard, we looked forward to the continued high-level interactions between
ASEAN and the UN, including the convening of ASEAN Foreign Ministers’
Meeting with the UN Secretary-General and the President of the 78th Session
of the UNGA, as well as the 13th ASEAN-UN Summit at the 43rd ASEAN Summit
and Related Summits later this year.

128.

We were pleased to note the positive progress made in the implementation of
the Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the UN (2021-2025). We reaffirmed our
commitment to intensifying cooperation in the implementation of the
Complementarities Roadmap, effectively realising the goals of the UN 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and continuing our close collaboration
and cooperation at regional and international fora.

129.

We looked forward to the convening of ASEAN-Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Summit in October 2023 in Riyadh which will further strengthen our
future relations with the GCC. We also looked forward to the adoption of
ASEAN-GCC Framework of Cooperation 2024-2028.

130.

We are seriously disappointed over the failure of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM) to update paragraphs on the South China Sea in the Final Document of
the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement on 5-6 July 2023 in Baku. We called on all NAM Members to respect
ASEAN, and ASEAN’s unity and Centrality, especially on issues which directly
affect peace and prosperity in its own immediate region. We also called on all
NAM Members to uphold their commitment to the main goals and objectives of
NAM as enshrined in the Bandung Principles and to firmly uphold the principles
of non-alignment while promoting peace, friendship, solidarity and cooperation
among ourselves.

26

ASEAN Plus Three
131.

We reaffirmed the important role of the APT cooperation framework in
promoting peace, stability and prosperity in the East Asian region with ASEAN
as the driving force. We noted the substantive progress of the implementation
of the APT Cooperation Work Plan 2023-2027. We were committed to further
strengthening APT mechanisms, including the Chiang Mai Initiative
Multilateralisation (CMIM), the Asian Bond Markets Initiative (ABMI), the
ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO), and ASEAN Plus Three
Emergency Rice Reserve (APTERR), exploring potential areas of cooperation
which would contribute to greater regional resilience and preparedness against
emerging challenges and future shocks as well as to promote recovery toward
inclusive, resilient, equitable and sustainable growth. We also looked forward
to the convening of the 21st East Asia Forum in China co-hosted by Indonesia
and China as a platform to further promote APT cooperation.

East Asia Summit
132.

We reaffirmed our commitment to further strengthening the EAS as a Leadersled forum for dialogue on broad strategic, political, and economic issues of
common interest and concern with the aim of promoting peace, stability, and
economic prosperity in the region with ASEAN as the driving force. In this
regard, we were committed to ensuring the effective follow-up on the Ha Noi
Declaration on the 15th Anniversary of the EAS to further strengthen the EAS
process, sustain its strategic value and relevance as well as enhance its
responsiveness to fast-changing developments in the regional and global
context. We looked forward to the adoption of the EAS Plan of Action (20242028) to further enhance EAS cooperation over the next five years.

133.

We welcomed the continued discussions and efforts to strengthen the EAS,
including through, among others, negotiating and concluding the Terms of
Reference of the Group of the East Asia Summit Ambassadors in Jakarta which
regularises the engagement between the CPR and the non-ASEAN
Ambassadors of EAS Participating Countries in Jakarta to discuss the
implementation of the EAS Leaders’ decisions, strengthen EAS cooperation,
as well as exchange information on regional development which may affect
regional peace and stability, cooperation initiatives and security policies and
initiatives, and discuss the evolving regional architecture as well as enhancing
coordination with the support of the EAS Unit at the ASEAN Secretariat.

134.

We underscored the importance of refraining from provocative actions and
adhering to the purposes and principles enshrined in the UN Charter, the
ASEAN Charter, the TAC, and the objectives and principles of the SEANWFZ
Treaty, in light of regional volatilities in order to prevent miscalculation, serious
confrontation, open conflicts, and unpredictable consequences. Therefore, we
expressed our willingness to work together to promote the common goals and
interests of the EAS Participating Countries and committed to a single EAS
statement as the outcome document of the 18th EAS that emphasises the EAS
Participating Countries’ commitment to maintaining the region as an epicentrum
of growth by building resilience against emerging challenges and future shocks
27

through cooperation on maintaining financial stability, strengthening regional
health architecture, building food security and resilience, and mitigating the
impacts of geopolitical tensions on the economy.
ASEAN Regional Forum
135.

We reiterated the importance of the ARF’s role in promoting dialogue and
cooperation among its Participants for the past 30 years and as a key platform
for building mutual trust and confidence, as well as consultation on regional
political and security issues of common interest and concern. We reaffirmed
the need to further enhance its effectiveness and maintain its relevance in the
evolving regional security architecture. We noted with satisfaction the progress
of cooperation in the ARF and commended the provisional measures
undertaken to ensure the continuity of cooperation and operations of the ARF
in the post-pandemic recovery, as well as in enhancing the region’s postpandemic resilience. We noted the progress made in the implementation of the
ARF Ha Noi Plan of Action II (2020-2025) and the need for further progress, as
well as looked forward to further discussion on efforts and follow-up actions to
streamline and enhance the efficiency of the ARF based on the agreed 2020
Guide to ARF Processes, Procedures, Practices and Protocol. We looked
forward to the adoption of the ARF Statement on the Commemoration of 30
Years of the ARF at the 30th ARF on 14 July 2023.

136.

We looked forward to continuing to work together towards revitalising the ARF,
so that it continues to function as the leading regional security forum in the AsiaPacific region and further promoting concrete cooperation and consultation to
address political and security issues of common interest and concern, with a
view to building capacity, developing expertise and enhancing coordination in
areas that can contribute to the region’s peace, security and stability.
REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ISSUES

137.

We recognised the strategic importance of our region for our peace, security,
stability, and prosperity, as well as for those of our external partners. ASEAN
and ASEAN-led mechanisms remain inclusive, and open avenues that facilitate
constructive dialogue and concrete cooperation, thereby contributing to the
development of the evolving regional architecture in line with the ASEAN
Charter and the AOIP.

South China Sea
138.

We discussed the situation in the South China Sea, during which concerns were
expressed by some Ministers on the land reclamations, activities, serious
incidents in the area, including actions that put the safety of all persons at risk,
damage to the marine environment, which have eroded trust and confidence,
increased tensions, and may undermine peace, security, and stability in the
region. We reaffirmed the need to enhance mutual trust and confidence,
exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate or
escalate disputes and affect peace and stability, and avoid actions that may
28

further complicate the situation. We further reaffirmed the need to pursue
peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with the universally recognised
principles of international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. We emphasised
the importance of non-militarisation and self-restraint in the conduct of all
activities by claimants and all other states, including those mentioned in the
2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) that
could further complicate the situation and escalate tensions in the South China
Sea.
139.

We reaffirmed the importance of maintaining and promoting peace, security,
stability, safety, and freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South
China Sea and recognised the benefits of having the South China Sea as a sea
of peace, stability, and prosperity. We underscored the importance of the full
and effective implementation of the DOC in its entirety. We welcomed the
progress achieved so far in the ongoing negotiations on the Code of Conduct
in the South China Sea (COC), including the completion of the second reading
of the Single Draft COC Negotiating Text (SDNT) and encouraged continued
positive momentum in this regard. We looked forward to the adoption of the
Guidelines for Accelerating the Early Conclusion of an Effective and
Substantive Code of Conduct in the South China Sea at the PMC Plus One
Session with China on 13 July 2023 and encouraged efforts to make full use of
the Guidelines. We further looked forward to the early conclusion of an effective
and substantive COC that is in accordance with international law, including the
1982 UNCLOS. We emphasised the need to maintain and promote an
environment conducive to the COC negotiations, and thus welcomed practical
measures that could reduce tensions and the risk of accidents,
misunderstandings, and miscalculation. We stressed the importance of
undertaking confidence building and preventive measures to enhance, among
others, trust and confidence amongst parties, and we reaffirmed the importance
of upholding international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS.

Maritime Situation in the Region
140.

We recognised the need to maintain and further strengthen stability in the
maritime sphere in our region, and underlined the importance of strengthening
maritime cooperation, and exploring new initiatives towards this end.

Developments in the Korean Peninsula
141.

We stressed the importance of continued peaceful dialogue among all
concerned parties in order to realise lasting peace and stability in a
denuclearised Korean Peninsula. The recent surge in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s (DPRK) intercontinental ballistic missile testing and ballistic
missile launches and the increased tension in the Korean Peninsula are a
worrisome development that threatens peace and stability in the region. We
urged all concerned parties to resume peaceful dialogue and continue working
towards the realisation of lasting peace and stability in a denuclearised Korean
Peninsula. We reiterated our commitment to the full implementation of all
relevant UNSC Resolutions and noted international efforts to bring about the
complete, verifiable, and irreversible denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula
29

in a peaceful manner. Diplomatic efforts, including the creation of a conducive
environment for peaceful dialogue among all concerned parties should remain
a priority. We reiterated our readiness to play a constructive role, including
through utilising ASEAN-led platforms such as the ARF in promoting a
conducive atmosphere for peaceful dialogue amongst the concerned parties.
Developments in Myanmar
142.

We discussed the developments in Myanmar and reaffirmed our united position
that the Five-Point Consensus (5PC) remains our main reference to address
the political crisis in Myanmar. We strongly condemned the continued acts of
violence, including air strikes, artillery shelling, and destruction of public
facilities and urged all parties involved to take concrete action to immediately
halt indiscriminate violence, denounce any escalation, and create a conducive
environment for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and inclusive national
dialogue.

143.

We commended the AHA Centre for its partial delivery of aid to 400 households
of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Hsiseng Township, located in the
Southern Shan State, on July 7, 2023. We appreciated the support of the
relevant stakeholders in ensuring safe delivery. We called on further facilitation
to ensure the humanitarian assistance can safely reach the 1,1 million Internally
Displaced Persons (IDPs) identified in the Joint Need Assessment (JNA)
Report of the AHA Centre. We appreciated the support from all stakeholders in
Myanmar for helping the completion of the JNA by the AHA Centre in an
inclusive manner facilitated by the ASEAN Chair. We called for additional
support from the international community for humanitarian assistance to
implement the JNA Report.

144.

We appreciated the Chair’s efforts in intensifying engagement with all relevant
stakeholders in Myanmar to build trust and confidence, create a conducive
environment, and bridge gaps and differences leading toward an inclusive
dialogue for a comprehensive political solution. We supported sustaining such
engagements to push for the implementation of the 5PC in its entirety, in line
with our Leaders’ decision at the 42nd ASEAN Summit. We called for continued
support of the External Partners, including the UN and neighbouring countries
of Myanmar, to work with ASEAN for concrete implementation of the 5PC.

145.

In line with paragraph 14 of the ASEAN Leaders’ Review and Decision on the
Implementation of Five-Point Consensus, we were briefed by Thailand on its
recent activities on Myanmar, which a number of ASEAN Member States
viewed as a positive development. We reaffirmed ASEAN unity and reiterated
that any effort should support, in line with 5PC and in coordination with the
Chair of ASEAN.

146.

We will conduct our comprehensive review of the 5PC implementation and
submit our recommendation to the 43rd ASEAN Summit.

30

Situation in Ukraine
147.

With regard to Ukraine, as for all nations, we continued to reaffirm our respect
for sovereignty, political independence, and territorial integrity. We reiterated
our call for compliance with the UN Charter and international law. We
underlined the importance of an immediate cessation of hostilities and the
serious engagement in a genuine dialogue for the peaceful resolution of the
conflict. We supported the efforts of the UN Secretary-General in the search for
peaceful solution. We also called for the facilitation of rapid, safe and
unhindered access to humanitarian assistance for those in need in Ukraine,
and for the protection of civilians, humanitarian personnel, and persons in
vulnerable situations.

Situation in Middle East
148.

We expressed concern over the developments in the Middle East region. We
reiterated the need for a comprehensive, just, and sustainable solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in order to achieve peace and stability in the Middle
East region. We urged both sides to actively take positive steps to allow for
negotiations to gain traction and work together towards the resumption of
negotiations to achieve an enduring peace. We fully supported the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people for an independent State of Palestine with the
realisation of two states, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
THE 57th ASEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS’ MEETING

149.

We looked forward to the convening of the 57th AMM, Post Ministerial
Conferences, 25th APT Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, 14th EAS Foreign Ministers’
Meeting, and 31st ARF to be held in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in
2024.

31

