JOINT COMMUNIQUÉ OF THE 57th ASEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS’
MEETING
VIENTIANE, 25 JULY 2024

1.

The 57th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) was held on 25 July 2024, in
Vientiane, Lao PDR. The Meeting was chaired by Lao PDR under the theme
“ASEAN: Enhancing Connectivity and Resilience.” We reaffirmed ASEAN’s
commitment to strengthen the ASEAN Community through intensifying ASEAN
cooperation across the three community pillars, promoting infrastructure
connectivity, narrowing development gap, enhancing economic integration,
promoting people-to-people exchanges, and strengthening capacity and
institutional effectiveness. We reaffirmed ASEAN Centrality, relevance and
resilience, while strengthening our relations with external partners and the evolving
regional architecture with ASEAN as the driving force.

ASEAN COMMUNITY BUILDING
2.

We reaffirmed our commitment to the full and effective implementation of the
ASEAN Community Vision 2025. We further reaffirmed our commitment to
strengthening the ASEAN Community, its unity and Centrality. We reiterated the
importance of maintaining an ASEAN-centred, open, inclusive, transparent,
resilient, and rules-based regional architecture that upholds international law and
of strengthening our engagement and cooperation with Dialogue Partners and
external partners, including through existing ASEAN-led mechanisms, in promoting
peace, stability, security, development, and growth to enhance our regional
resilience to respond to common and emerging challenges.

3.

We reaffirmed our shared commitment to maintaining and promoting peace,
security and stability in the region, as well as to the peaceful resolution of disputes,
including full respect for legal and diplomatic processes, without resorting to the
threat or use of force, in accordance with the universally recognised principles of
international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS).

4.

We reiterated our strong commitment to upholding regionalism and multilateralism
and emphasised the importance of adhering to key principles, shared values and
norms enshrined in the UN Charter, the ASEAN Charter, the Declaration on Zone
of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality, the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia (TAC), the 1982 UNCLOS, the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ Treaty), the 2011 Declaration of the East
Asia Summit on the Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations and the ASEAN
Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP).
1

5.

We reiterated our commitment to intensifying our work towards a people-oriented,
people-centred, and rules-based ASEAN, and continued to encourage the
meaningful participation of the people, societies and other stakeholders in the
ASEAN Community-building process.

6.

We welcomed the adoption of the (i) Paper on Recommendations to Enhance the
Role of the Secretary-General of ASEAN and (ii) Paper on Enhancing Resources
Mobilisation for the Work of ASEAN and the ASEAN Secretariat. We looked
forward to further implementation of the recommendations of the High-Level Task
Force on ASEAN Community’s Post-2025 Vision (HLTF-ACV) on strengthening
ASEAN’s capacity and institutional effectiveness.

7.

We commended the HLTF-ACV for sustaining the momentum in developing the
Strategic Plans of the ASEAN Community Vision 2045: Resilient, Innovative,
Dynamic, and People-Centred ASEAN to be adopted in 2025. We welcomed the
HLTF-ACV’s effort in coordinating and consulting with relevant stakeholders
including the High-Level Task Force on ASEAN Economic Integration (HLTF-EI),
the ASEAN Connectivity Coordinating Committee (ACCC), and the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Development of ASCC Post-2025 Strategic Plan for ASEAN
Socio-Cultural Community (ASCC), in the overall development of the ACV 2045.
In this regard, we looked forward to substantive progress in the development of the
ASEAN Political-Security Community (APSC) Strategic Plan, the ASEAN
Economic Community (AEC) Strategic Plan, the ASCC Strategic Plan, and the
ASEAN Connectivity Strategic Plan during the Lao PDR’s Chairmanship of ASEAN
in 2024.

8.

We welcomed the undertaking of the End-Term Reviews of the APSC Blueprint
2025, AEC Blueprint 2025, ASCC Blueprint 2025, and the Master Plan on ASEAN
Connectivity (MPAC) 2025 and looked forward to the early completion of the EndTerm Reviews in order to draw lessons and best practices for the future
implementation of the Strategic Plans.

9.

We looked forward to the ASEAN Leader’s Declaration on Development of
Strategic Plans to Implement the ASEAN Community Vision 2045 to further guide
the development of the Strategic Plans and ensure their completion in a timely
manner. We took note that the Strategic Plans are being developed in a
participatory manner with the three ASEAN Community Pillars and that of ASEAN
Connectivity working closely together to ensure synergy across the Strategic Plans
and that cross-pillar issues are addressed in a holistic manner.

10.

We welcomed the successful convening of the ASEAN Future Forum 2024 hosted
by Viet Nam under the theme “Towards Fast and Sustainable Growth of a PeopleCentered ASEAN Community”, which complements the exercise of developing the
Strategic Plans of the ASEAN Community Vision 2045. We noted that this Forum
contributed to ASEAN efforts in strengthening the regional cooperation and
integration. We further welcomed Viet Nam’s plan to convene the ASEAN Future
Forum in the years to come.

2

11.

We agreed to coordinate and provide mutual support for ASEAN Member States’
candidacy in regional and international organisations, where possible. In this
regard, we reaffirmed ASEAN’s support for the Philippines to become NonPermanent Member of the UN Security Council (UNSC) for the year 2027-2028 as
well as Thailand to become the Member of the UN Human Rights Council for the
year 2025-2027. We took note of ASEAN SOM Leaders’ ongoing discussions with
regard to the draft guidelines for designating ASEAN candidatures to the UN
bodies and international organisations, which will further manifest ASEAN
Centrality, unity and solidarity, and contribute to the enhancement of ASEAN’s
profile at international fora.
KEY DELIVERABLES

12.

We welcomed the progress of the implementation of ASEAN Priority Areas 2024
and Key Deliverables under the Lao PDR’s Chairmanship 2024 to enhance
ASEAN Connectivity and Resilience, namely (i) Integrating and Connecting
Economies; (ii) Forging an Inclusive and Sustainable Future; (iii) Transforming for
a Digital Future; (iv) Promoting the Role ASEAN Culture and the Arts for Inclusion
and Sustainability; (v) Development of Strategic Plans to Implement the ASEAN
Community Vision 2045; (vi) Enhancing ASEAN Centrality; (vii) Promoting
Environmental Cooperation: Climate Change Resilience; (viii) Promoting the Role
of Women and Children towards the Transformation of Behaviourism in ASEAN;
and (ix) Transforming ASEAN Health Development Resilience in a New Context.
We looked forward to the successful completion of these priorities and its key
deliverables, which are pivotal to deepening the region’s economic integration and
strengthening its long-term resiliency.
ADVANCING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ASEAN

13.

We reaffirmed our commitment to enhancing sustainable development cooperation
in the region including through promoting the Complementarities Initiative between
the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable
Development. We welcomed the work of the ASEAN Centre for Sustainable
Development Studies and Dialogue (ACSDSD) in promoting sustainable
development across the ASEAN Community, including the convening
of the inaugural ASEAN Circular Economy Forum 2023 held on 8-9 November
2023, in Jakarta, and the inaugural ASEAN Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) Youth Camp: Empowering Agents of Change for SDGs on 29 October-4
November 2023 in Thailand. We commended the leadership of Thailand as
ASEAN Coordinator on Sustainable Development Cooperation in spearheading
the convening of the 2024 ASEAN Forum on SDGs with National Development
Planning Agencies with the theme “Looking Ahead: Reframing Priorities and
Actions to Achieve the SDGs” back-to-back with the 8th High-Level Brainstorming
Dialogue to discuss ways forward on the Complementarities Initiative taking into
account the upcoming ASEAN Community Vision 2045.
INITIATIVE FOR ASEAN INTEGRATION

14.

We reaffirmed our commitment to narrow the development gap within and among
ASEAN Member States and continue to address the development disparities to
3

achieve a more balanced and inclusive regional development through accelerating
the implementation of the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) Work Plan IV (20212025), with the continued support and assistance of external partners. We
commended the work of the IAI Task Force, IAI National Coordinators, IAI Focal
Points and all other relevant stakeholders in the implementation of the IAI Work
Plan IV (2021-2025). We noted the successful conduct of the Regional Workshop
on ASEAN Integration: Enhancing the Implementation of the IAI Work Plan IV
(2021-2025) held in Siem Reap, Cambodia, in April 2024. We also supported the
development of the Reframed Strategies for Narrowing the Development Gap and
Sustainable Development in ASEAN as one of the Priority Economic
Developments (PEDs) under Lao PDR 2024 ASEAN’s chairmanship. We looked
forward to the finalisation of this PED to narrow the development gap more
effectively, and to guide the development of the IAI Work Plan V to align with the
ASEAN Community’s Post-2025 Vision. Through collective action, shared
responsibility, and mutual respect, we remain steadfast in our commitment to
realise an inclusive, participatory and collaborative ASEAN Community that is no
longer divided by the development gaps among its members.
SUB-REGIONAL COOPERATION
15.

We underscored the importance of ASEAN unity and Centrality in promoting
ASEAN’s sub-regional development. We recognised the relevance and
complementarity of subregional development to ASEAN’s regional integration and
Community-building process, especially in narrowing the development gap, and
encouraged closer coordination and collaboration between ASEAN Sectoral
Bodies and ASEAN-approved sub-regional cooperation frameworks to facilitate the
realisation of this endeavour.

16.

We reiterated the commitment to further promote equitable, inclusive and
sustainable development across the ASEAN Community by aligning sub-regional
growth, including in the Mekong area such as the Ayeyawady-Chao PhrayaMekong Economic Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS), as well as the Brunei
Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (BIMPEAGA), the Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand Growth Triangle (IMT-GT), and the
Singapore-Johor-Riau (SIJORI) Growth Triangle, with the comprehensive
development of ASEAN. We noted the successful convening of the 29th IMT-GT
Ministerial Meeting in September 2023, as well as the 26th BIMP-EAGA Ministerial
Meeting in October 2023. We welcomed the continued support and assistance of
external partners in the relevant processes.
ASEAN CONNECTIVITY

17.

We welcomed the emphasis on ASEAN Connectivity this year under Lao PDR’s
ASEAN Chairmanship theme of “ASEAN: Enhancing Connectivity and Resilience”.
We therefore reaffirmed our commitment to advance the ASEAN Connectivity
agenda towards seizing opportunities and effectively addressing present and
emerging challenges in the region leveraging economic resilience, in accordance
with ASEAN’s vision as an epicentrum of growth. In this regard, we expressed our
appreciation to ongoing efforts undertaken by the ACCC, in consultation with the
HLTF-ACV, relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies and stakeholders, in developing the
4

ASEAN Connectivity Strategic Plan (ACSP) as one of the attendant documents of
the upcoming ASEAN Community Vision 2045, building on the achievements and
lessons learnt from implementing the MPAC 2025, and leveraging on synergies
with other connectivity-related initiatives and frameworks across the region.
18.

We commended the significant progress achieved in the implementation of MPAC
2025 over the past year and expressed our appreciation to the ACCC, Lead
Implementing Bodies and relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies, as well as the MPAC
2025 National Coordinators, National Focal Points and relevant national agencies.
In this regard, we noted with appreciation the ACCC’s efforts in strengthening
coordination with the Lead Implementing Bodies and relevant ASEAN Sectoral
Bodies, as well as Dialogue Partners and other external partners, to accelerate the
implementation of the remaining measures under the MPAC 2025. We further
expressed our appreciation to ASEAN’s external partners for their continued
participation in ASEAN Connectivity-related activities and events. In this
connection, we encouraged continued efforts between ASEAN and its external
partners to explore and undertake practical cooperation to support the continued
implementation of MPAC 2025 and the development of ACSP.

19.

We underscored the importance of enhancing supply chain connectivity to support
ASEAN’s ongoing efforts for reducing costs, increasing reliability and improving
the competitiveness of the supply chain; promoting cooperation between
stakeholders, including buyers, logistics operators and government agencies;
prioritising logistics and digital infrastructure; facilitating Micro Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSMEs)' access and integration into regional and global supply
chains; and supporting the implementation of the MPAC 2025.

20.

We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on
Enhancing Supply Chain Connectivity, which will support and guide the efforts of
relevant ASEAN sectoral bodies and stakeholders towards strengthening supply
chain resiliency and competitiveness in the region, while taking into consideration
the unique circumstances of each ASEAN Member State.
ASEAN SMART CITIES NETWORK

21.

We commended the efforts under the ASEAN Smart Cities Network (ASCN) in
enhancing the capacity of local governments, private sectors, and other
stakeholders and nurturing young entrepreneurs to respond and prepare for
current and future challenges in smart and sustainable urban development. In this
regard, we reiterated our appreciation to our external partners for their continued
support and collaboration in implementing ASCN initiatives, such as through the
flagship ASEAN Smart City Professional Programme. We also looked forward to
the completion of the development of the ASEAN Smart City Investment Toolkit.
ASEAN JUNIOR FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMME WITH THE ASEAN SECRETARIAT

22.

We looked forward to the implementation of the Third ASEAN Junior Fellowship
Programme with the ASEAN Secretariat (AJFP) which will tentatively take place in
August 2024. The third batch will comprise 21 Junior Fellows from 10 ASEAN
Member States and two from Timor-Leste. We were pleased to note that from the
5

first two iterations of the AJFP, the programme had contributed to enhancing the
participants’ knowledge and understanding of the work of ASEAN, and more
importantly expanded their ASEAN network through engagements with various
stakeholders.
TIMOR-LESTE’S FULL MEMBERSHIP IN ASEAN
23.

We continued to support and stressed the need for Timor-Leste to implement the
objective and criteria-based Roadmap for Timor-Leste’s Full Membership in
ASEAN as adopted by the Leaders and looked forward to the full and effective
fulfilment of all the Roadmap criteria towards its full membership of ASEAN. We
noted that Timor-Leste has intensified its engagements with ASEAN through its
attendance in close to 500 meetings across three pillars of ASEAN Community and
ASEAN Connectivity with an attendance rate of 88.6% as of May 2024, and
recognised the progress made by Timor-Leste in implementing the Roadmap. We
encouraged Timor-Leste to maintain and promote good relations with all ASEAN
Member States, as part of demonstrating its ability and readiness to implement and
abide by the ASEAN Charter. We also called on the ASEAN Secretariat to robustly
monitor Timor-Leste’s implementation of the Roadmap and establish the assigned
dedicated unit mandated in the Roadmap. We welcomed the inclusion of TimorLeste as a beneficiary of the IAI in May 2024, which will provide another key
platform for ASEAN and our external partners to channel assistance to Timor-Leste
in supporting the fulfilment of all the Roadmap criteria and requirements. We
reiterated our commitment, and call on our external partners, to continue providing
capacity building assistance to Timor-Leste. We were pleased to note the
successful completion of the first phase of the ASEAN Traveling Resource Persons
Programme (ATRPP) and looked forward to the implementation of the second
phase.

24.

We welcomed the adoption of the relevant guidelines for the implementation of the
observer status granted to Timor-Leste by ASEAN Sectoral Bodies, which reflects
their commitment to supporting Timor-Leste’s full membership in ASEAN and
building its capacity to address current and future security challenges.

25.

We underscored the importance of Timor-Leste’s accession to the ASEAN
agreements as part of its accession to ASEAN, as stipulated in the Roadmap. With
regard to Timor-Leste’s request to accede to the SEANWFZ Treaty, we recalled
the formal approval of the SEANWFZ Commission on Timor-Leste’s accession to
the SEANWFZ Treaty and welcomed the progress of discussions on this matter.
The accession will also further strengthen the implementation of the SEANWFZ
Treaty and reinforce the region’s commitment to nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation in the region and beyond. As a follow-up, we encouraged our officials
to complete all necessary preparations that must precede Timor-Leste’s accession
to the SEANWFZ Treaty. We also acknowledged Timor-Leste’s intention to accede
to the ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement (ATIGA) and encouraged the economic
officials to continue their consultations.

ASEAN POLITICAL-SECURITY COMMUNITY

6

26.

We noted the sustained implementation of the APSC Blueprint 2025 and
commended the APSC Sectoral Bodies and other stakeholders within the APSC
pillar in taking further action to implement the remaining action lines of the APSC
Blueprint 2025, bringing the implementation rate to 99% as we move closer to the
end of term of the Blueprint. The successful implementation of the Blueprint would
contribute to the fulfilment of our ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and would serve
as the foundation for the ASEAN Community Vision 2045 and its APSC Strategic
Plan.

27.

We reaffirmed the importance of the TAC as the key code of conduct in governing
inter-state relations in the region and as a foundation for maintaining regional
peace and stability. We remained committed to further promoting the principles
embodied in the TAC. We emphasised the importance of all High Contracting
Parties (HCPs) in fulfilling their obligations under the Treaty. We welcomed the
growing interest of non-regional countries to accede to the TAC, on the basis of
respect for and in conformity with the purposes and principles of the TAC. We
looked forward to the accession of the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria,
the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Kingdom of Spain, the United Mexican
States, and the Republic of Finland to the TAC.

28.

We welcomed the successful convening of the Conference of the HCPs to the TAC:
Reflections and Future Direction on 26 June 2024 at the ASEAN
Headquarters/ASEAN Secretariat, bringing together 47 out of 54 HCPs to the TAC
for the first time at the ambassadorial level. The Conference was timely to reaffirm
the commitment of the HCPs to the principles and values of the TAC. It also served
as an avenue for dialogue among the HCPs to discuss the implementation of the
TAC and future strategies to enhance relevance and visibility of the Treaty in the
region and beyond, and explore cooperation between ASEAN and other HCPs
under the TAC, towards the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the signing
of the TAC in 2026.

29.

We reiterated our commitment to preserve the Southeast Asian region as a nuclear
weapon-free zone and free of all other weapons of mass destruction as enshrined
in the SEANWFZ Treaty and the ASEAN Charter. We stressed the importance of
the full and effective implementation of the SEANWFZ Treaty, including through
the Plan of Action to Strengthen the Implementation of the SEANWFZ Treaty
(2023-2027).

30.

We noted that the Executive Committee of the SEANWFZ Commission is
continuing to explore the possibility of allowing individual Nuclear Weapon States
(NWS) which are willing to sign and ratify the Protocol to the SEANWFZ Treaty
without reservations and provide prior formal assurance of this commitment in
writing to go ahead with the signing. We welcome any NWS that are ready to do
so. We reaffirmed our commitment to continuously engage all the NWS, including
those with reservations, and intensify efforts of all parties to resolve all outstanding
issues in accordance with the objectives and principles of the SEANWFZ Treaty.
We encouraged our ASEAN experts to explore ways to bridge the differences,
including the possibility of engaging with the NWS experts.

7

31.

We reaffirmed our commitment to enhancing the profile of the SEANWFZ Treaty
globally, including through engaging other nuclear weapon-free zones (NWFZs).
In this connection, we welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN-sponsored biennial
resolution on the SEANWFZ Treaty by the 78th Session of the UN General
Assembly on 4 December 2023, which reiterates the importance of the Treaty in
contributing to international peace and security. We welcomed the convening of
the Virtual Workshop on Sharing Experiences between Agency for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL) and ASEAN
on the Signing and Ratification of NWS to the Protocols of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
and the Treaty of Bangkok on 3 May 2024.

32.

We expressed concern over the declining commitment and cooperation in global
non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament mechanisms, and called on
countries, especially NWS, to maintain and fully implement their commitments
under these mechanisms, including in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We called on the NWS to fulfil their obligations in
advancing nuclear disarmament in accordance with the Article VI of the NPT and
to recognise the need to completely eliminate nuclear weapons, which remains the
only way to guarantee that nuclear weapons are never used again under any
circumstances.

33.

We reiterated the importance of strengthening efforts to address common regional
challenges in a strategic and holistic manner in the area of non-proliferation and
disarmament. We reaffirmed our full support to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to carry out its mandated work as the implementing
body of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) in a comprehensive, objective,
and impartial manner, in complementarity with the work of the UN. We also
reaffirmed our commitment to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
(BWC) and, recognising the necessity of multilateral negotiations and noting the
lack of a verification measure, the latter of which poses a challenge to the
effectiveness of the BWC, welcomed the establishment of the Working Group on
Strengthening the BWC. We also placed great importance on enhancing
international cooperation, assistance, and exchanges in toxins, biological agents,
equipment, and technology for peaceful purposes.

34.

We commended the ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies on Atomic Energy
(ASEANTOM) for their continued efforts in enhancing cooperation among the
nuclear regulatory bodies in the region and in strengthening practices and
standards of nuclear safety, security, and safeguards guided by International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) standards and international best practices, and
welcomed the progress of the implementation of the Practical Arrangements
between ASEAN and the IAEA on Cooperation in the Areas of Nuclear Science
and Technology and Applications, Nuclear Safety, Security and Safeguards, which
was signed in September 2019. We noted that ASEANTOM is undertaking work to
renew the Practical Arrangements between ASEAN and the IAEA, and we looked
forward to the renewal of the Practical Arrangements for another five-year period
in September 2024. We also looked forward to the convening of the 11th Annual
Meeting of ASEANTOM on 15-16 August 2024 in Luang Prabang, Lao PDR.

8

35.

We commended the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) for consciously
managing its fast-growing practical cooperation and external engagements and
noted the ongoing work to streamline initiatives under the ADMM and the ADMMPlus for more efficient and economical outcomes. We noted that the ADMM and
ADMM-Plus strive to make meaningful contributions to peace and security,
including by promoting the Women, Peace and Security (WPS) Agenda and the
Youth, Peace and Security (YPS) Agenda, and expanding cooperation on
emerging issues, notably the impact of climate change. We appreciated the
ADMM’s endeavour to chart its overall future direction, among others, through the
development of “A Future-Ready ADMM and ADMM-Plus: A Strategy Paper”, in a
manner that is consistent with the upcoming ASEAN Community Vision 2045. We
looked forward to the successful convening of the 18th ADMM and the 11th ADMMPlus in November 2024.

36.

We congratulated the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights
(AICHR) on the progress of implementation of the AICHR Five-Year Work Plan
2021-2025 and its annual Priority Programmes/Activities. We welcomed the
successful convening of the 38th and 39th Meetings of AICHR in Vientiane and
Jakarta, respectively. We took note of the AICHR's ongoing preparation for the new
AICHR Five-Year Work Plan 2026-2030. We commended the continuous efforts of
AICHR to work with ASEAN organs, sectoral bodies, entities, and relevant
stakeholders to mainstream human rights across all pillars of the ASEAN
Community, as well as to enhance engagements with Dialogue Partners, notably
the successful convening of the 1st AICHR-UN Dialogue on Human Rights and the
5th ASEAN-EU Policy Dialogue on Human Rights held respectively in September
and October 2023. We noted that the AICHR and China are considering a joint
activity on the promotion and protection of human rights. We underscored the
importance of fostering a culture of dialogue in advancing the promotion and
protection of human rights in the region. In this regard, we welcomed the successful
convening of the 5th ASEAN Human Rights Dialogue held in November 2023 at the
ASEAN Headquarters/ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta, Indonesia, and looked
forward to the convening of the 6th ASEAN Human Rights Dialogue to be cochaired by Lao PDR and Indonesia in 2024. We noted the on-going discussion by
the AICHR to develop a draft ASEAN declaration related to the environment and
tasked the AICHR to consult relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies.

37.

We commended the efforts of the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Drug Matters
(AMMD) in leading the cooperation to combat illicit drugs, particularly through the
ongoing implementation of the ASEAN Work Plan on Securing Communities
Against Illicit Drugs 2016-2025. We welcomed the delivery of the ASEAN Joint
Statement during the 67th Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) in March 2024 to
reaffirm ASEAN’s zero-tolerance approach against illicit drugs and shared
commitment to a Drug-Free ASEAN vision. We maintained our resolute stand
against the legalisation and manufacturing of illicit drugs for non-medical and nonscientific use or measures to undermine international control over any type of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances without relevant, verifiable, and
reliable scientific evidence.

38.

We recognised the continued efforts by ASEAN law enforcement in tackling
transnational crime in various forms and the challenges facing the law enforcement
9

agencies in this endeavour. We welcomed the Labuan Bajo Declaration on
Advancing Law Enforcement Cooperation in Combating Transnational Crime
adopted by the 17th ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime (AMMTC)
in 2023 that reaffirmed our commitment to enhance practical cooperation among
law enforcement agencies, including collaboration with ASEAN partners. We also
welcomed the ASEAN Declaration on Strengthening Cooperation in Protecting and
Assisting Witnesses and Victims of Transnational Crime which, among other
provisions, reaffirmed the commitment of the ASEAN Member States to the
purposes and principles of the ASEAN Charter, in particular, the respect for,
promotion, and protection of human rights as well as fundamental freedom.
39.

We commended the steadfast commitment of the AMMTC and its subsidiary
bodies in spearheading cross-sectoral and cross-pillar coordination to
comprehensively address the multi-dimensional aspects of transnational crimes,
especially trafficking in persons (TIP), terrorism and border management. We
welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN Multi-Sectoral Work Plan (Bohol TIP Work
Plan 2.0) 2023-2028 at the 17th AMMTC in 2023 and encouraged the active
engagements of all 10 relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies to support its effective
implementation. We commended the contribution made by ASEAN Member
States, including the recent contribution of Indonesia to the Trust Fund to Support
Emergency Humanitarian and Relief Efforts in the Event of the Irregular Movement
of Persons in Southeast Asia. We recognised the need for continued coordinated
responses in addressing irregular movement of persons, including TIP and people
smuggling. We encouraged ASEAN Member States to appoint their National
Representatives for the Implementation of the ASEAN Convention Against
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (ACTIP).

40.

We took note of the adoption of the ASEAN Plan of Action on Cooperation on
Immigration and Consular Assistance Matters (2022-2031) by the
ASEAN Directors-General of Immigration Departments and Heads of Consular
Affairs Divisions of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs Meeting (DGICM) in 2022 and
looked forward for its implementation.

41.

We took note of the adoption of the ASEAN Declaration on Developing Regional
Early Warning and Early Response (EWER) Capability to Prevent and Counter the
Rise of Radicalisation and Violent Extremism (PCRVE) by the 17th AMMTC and
re-emphasised the importance of addressing the root causes of radicalisation and
violent extremism. In this regard, we commended the continued efforts of 19
relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies/Organs/Entities, in collaboration with ASEAN
partners, in implementing the Work Plan of the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent
and Counter the Rise of Radicalisation and Violent Extremism (Bali Work Plan)
2019-2025 as well as of SOMTC in coordinating this implementation. We stressed
the importance of garnering further efforts to ensure the fulfilment of this Work Plan
in its final period of implementation.

42.

We noted the adoption of the ASEAN Declaration on Combatting Arms Smuggling
by the 17th AMMTC and reaffirmed our resolve in preventing and curbing crossborder illicit trade and smuggling of firearms and its ammunition in the region.

10

43.

We noted the development of ASEAN cooperation on law and legal matters and
welcomed the successful outcome of the 12th ASEAN Law Ministers’ Meeting
(ALAWMM) held on 25 January 2024 that aims at strengthening ASEAN and its
Member States on law and legal matters to support the ASEAN Communitybuilding processes and enhance ASEAN as a rules-based organisation. We also
commended the work of ALAWMM in developing the ASEAN Extradition Treaty
and looked forward to its finalisation and conclusion by the end of this year to
further enhance ASEAN capacity in the field of crime prevention, criminal justice
system, and combating transnational crimes.

44.

We were pleased to note the ALAWMM’s continued dialogue and engagement with
external parties, including Japan and G7 countries, to promote the rule of law and
justice as well as rules-based ASEAN, in line with the Joint Communique of the
12th ALAWMM. We noted with satisfaction the progress of the concrete
implementation programme between ASEAN and Japan, especially in carrying out
the ASEAN-Japan Work Plan on Law and Justice.

45.

We welcomed the inaugural ASEAN Ministers/Attorneys General of the Central
Authorities on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters (AMAG-MLAT) held on
22 November 2023, in Brunei Darussalam, and the convening of the Third Senior
Officials’ Meeting of the Central Authorities on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters (SOM-MLAT) on 29-30 April 2024, in Bali, Indonesia, to ensure the
effective implementation of the ASEAN Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters (ASEAN MLAT) which is an important legal instrument to
strengthen ASEAN capacity and its Member States’ cooperation in combatting
transnational crimes. We looked forward to AMAG-MLAT’s endorsement of the
Guidelines for Accession to the ASEAN MLAT by non-ASEAN Member States.

46.

We commended the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation (ASEAN-IPR)
for its efforts and activities with relevant ASEAN bodies and external partners to
promote the culture of peace and moderation in ASEAN. We noted ASEAN-IPR’s
continued support for the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry (AWPR) to
implement the ASEAN Leaders’ Joint Statement on Promoting Women, Peace,
and Security (WPS) in ASEAN, and the Regional Plan of Action on WPS. We
encouraged the implementation of the WPS and YPS agendas in ASEAN and
ASEAN-led mechanisms and noted the progress of towards implementing the
practical initiatives on enhancing support mechanisms for ASEAN women
peacekeepers under the purview of the ADMM. We welcomed the convening of
the ASEAN-UN Regional Dialogue VI on Climate, Peace and Security in November
2023 which facilitated discussions on the climate, peace and security among
policymakers and stakeholders in the region.

47.

We noted ongoing multilateral discussions on emerging issues involving
international peace and security, such as outer space. We reiterated that access
to outer space is an inalienable right of all States and that the use of outer space
should exclusively be for peaceful purposes only, and for the collective benefit of
humanity.

48.

We expressed concerns about the possible negative consequences and impact of
autonomous weapon systems on global security and regional and international
11

stability, including the risk of an emerging arms race, lowering the threshold for
conflict and proliferation, including to non-State actors.
49.

We noted the UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/78/69 emphasising in the
Preamble, the universal and unified character of the 1982 UNCLOS, and
reaffirming that the Convention sets out the legal framework within which all
activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out and is of strategic importance
as the basis for national, regional and global action and cooperation in the marine
sector, and that its integrity needs to be maintained.

50.

We reaffirmed the role of the ASEAN Maritime Forum (AMF) and Expanded AMF
(EAMF) as Track 1.5 platforms in promoting maritime cooperation in the region
through dialogue and consultations. Taking into account the cross-cutting nature
of maritime cooperation, we encouraged stronger coordination among ASEAN
cross-sectoral bodies and other relevant ASEAN mechanisms to avoid duplication
of efforts. We emphasised the importance of ASEAN Centrality and further
encouraged the exploration of an integrated and comprehensive approach to
maritime cooperation, including through considering enhancing ASEAN’s capacity
and capability in this regard. We looked forward to the convening of the 14th AMF
and 12th EAMF which will be held in Lao PDR in 2024.

51.

We welcomed the issuance of the First Edition of the ASEAN Maritime Outlook
(AMO) in August 2023, which serves as a practical tool to understand regional
maritime trends and strengthen synergies of work among maritime-relevant
bodies, mechanisms, and processes in ASEAN. We looked forward to the interim
report of the AMO in 2024 to highlight the progress of maritime cooperation under
relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies as well as the issuance of 2nd AMO in 2026.

52.

We noted the convening of the 3rd ASEAN Coast Guard Forum (ACF)
Commander’s Meeting on 4-7 June 2024 in Samal, Davao Del Norte, Philippines.
We noted the discussion on the Terms of Reference (TOR) and Concept Paper on
the Establishment of the ASEAN Coast Guard Forum (ACF) and encouraged
further discussion to finalise the documents.

53.

We commended the role of the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Center (ARMAC) as
a centre of excellence in promoting ASEAN’s efforts to address the issue of
explosive remnants of war (ERW) for interested ASEAN Member States and raise
awareness of the danger of ERW among affected communities. We reiterated the
importance of mine action in national rehabilitation and sustainable development
and welcomed efforts to promote mine action at the regional and global level,
including at the UN. We expressed appreciation to ASEAN Member States,
Dialogue Partners, external partners and international organisations that have
contributed to the undertaking of projects and operations of the ARMAC, including
the recent contribution from Cambodia and Thailand.

ASEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
54.

We recognised that ASEAN’s economy is poised to experience Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) expansion in 2024, with a projected growth rate of 4.7%, up from
12

the 4.1% recorded in 2023, driven by policy initiatives designed at stimulating the
domestic economy, improved manufacturing output, and enhancements in exports.
As service demand normalises across ASEAN, pivotal drivers such as domestic
consumption, government fiscal spending, and the revival of the manufacturing
sector are expected to fuel the region's GDP growth in 2024.
55.

We welcomed the ongoing progress of the Implementation of the Framework on
Circular Economy for AEC and its corresponding work programme, as well as the
work of the ASEAN Circular Economy Stakeholders Platform, which will
complement the ASEAN Member States' climate action and low carbon economy
efforts. We also welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN Strategy for Carbon
Neutrality by the AEC Council in September 2023, to complement national
initiatives by ASEAN Member States in fulfilling their respective Nationally
Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement. We noted the progress in
implementing the ASEAN Strategy for Carbon Neutrality including the early
establishment of a dedicated governance body to ensure streamlined coordination
and as well as the early and effective implementation of the Strategy.

56.

We reaffirmed that the blue economy is an integrated, holistic, cross-sectoral and
cross-stakeholder approach that creates value-added and value-chain of
resources from oceans, seas, and fresh water in inclusive and sustainable way, as
stipulated in the ASEAN Blue Economy Framework. We welcomed the
establishment of the ASEAN Coordinating Taskforce on Blue Economy (ACTFBE). We looked forward to the inaugural meeting of the ACTF-BE in August
alongside the 2nd ASEAN Blue Economy Forum and the development of the
ASEAN Blue Economy Implementation Plan.

57.

We welcomed Version 1 of the ASEAN Transition Finance Guidance which was
published on 17 October 2023. The Guidance addresses how entities may assess
or demonstrate a credible transition in ASEAN to obtain financing from capital
markets. We further welcomed the updated iteration of the Version 2 of the ASEAN
Taxonomy for Sustainable Finance that took effect on 19 February 2024 which
incorporated the inputs from the targeted consultations with stakeholders and
users. We also welcomed the publication of the Version 3 of the ASEAN Taxonomy
which was released on 27 March 2024 for consultation with stakeholders. This
comprises several refinements to the assessment methods for Do No Significant
Harm and the technical screening criteria (TSC) for two more focus sectors, namely
Transportation & Storage and Construction and Real Estate under the Plus
Standard.

58.

We commended the strong commitment to enhancing the sustainability of transport
in ASEAN, a crucial step towards a more sustainable future for the region. We
expressed support for ASEAN Port Digitalisation and Automation Best Practice
Guidelines which contributes to the enhancement of efficiency, productivity and
resilience of maritime transport infrastructure in the region. We also looked forward
to the ASEAN Guidelines on Light Electric Vehicles and Urban Freight Transport
and the finalisation of the ASEAN EV Implementation Roadmap that would support
decarbonisation in the land transport sector and provide guidance in improving the
urban freight transport system in ASEAN.

13

59.

We acknowledged the robust efforts to advance energy security, energy transition
and enhancing regional energy connectivity and resilience. We supported the
efforts toward substantive conclusion of the texts for two major successor energy
agreements this year, which are integral to the ASEAN 2024 PEDs and constitute
key annual priorities within the energy sector. These agreements include the
successor to the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on ASEAN Power Grid
and the ASEAN Petroleum Security Agreement. Additionally, we looked forward to
the full signing of the amended MOU for the Trans-ASEAN Gas Pipeline within
2024. The renewal of all three energy agreements will bolster ASEAN’s
frameworks and mechanisms to effectively address the emerging and dynamic
requirements of energy security and sustainability, which will also implement the
Joint Declaration of the 41st ASEAN Ministers on Energy Meeting (AMEM) on
Sustainable Energy Security through Interconnectivity. We encouraged further
discussions to accelerate the establishment of an ASEAN Power Grid including
through the implementation of cross-border renewable energy initiatives. In this
regard, we welcomed the implementation of the Lao PDR-Thailand-MalaysiaSingapore Power Integration Project (LTMS-PIP) and the ongoing discussion on
the Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-the Philippines Power Integration
Project (BIMP-PIP), which would promote regional energy connectivity, security,
and resilience, to realise the ASEAN Power Grid. In this regard, we also welcomed
continuous support from our external partners to facilitate ASEAN’s energy
transition initiatives.

60.

We reaffirmed commitment to advancing science, technology, and innovation (STI)
across diverse domains through the vigorous implementation of over 100 STI
activities annually. We reaffirmed our support to STI sector’s priorities for 2024,
notably the: i) ASEAN Online Education Platform for Industry 4.0; ii) ASEAN
Technology Management Hub; iii) ASEAN Regional Research Infrastructure
Strategy; iv) ASEAN Startup Initiative; v) ASEAN Talent Mobility Community; and
vi) ASEAN Energy Resilience Assessment Guideline: Capacity Building on Energy
Resilience Assessment.

61.

We expressed strong support for the comprehensive review of ASEAN Plan of
Action on STI (APASTI) 2016-2025 and the formulation of APASTI 2026-2035,
which would include robust scenario-guided planning and horizon scanning to
proactively anticipate forthcoming technologies and their impact, drawing insights
from the ASEAN STI Ecosystem (SITE) Foresight 2035. ASEAN remained
dedicated to harnessing STI for epidemic preparedness, evidenced by initiatives
such as the Real-time Epidemic Genomic Surveillance and the ASEAN Serosurveillance Study. We acknowledged the endorsement of the ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting on Science, Technology and Innovation (AMMSTI) Statement on Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and welcomed the inauguration of the ASEAN Committee on
Science, Technology, and Innovation (COSTI) Tracks on AI (ACT on AI) 20242025, which consolidated the implementation of regional AI-related initiatives in
collaboration with various Dialogue Partners.

62.

We welcomed the successful completion of Lao PDR’s PEDs on “Enhancing Policy
Dialogue to Address Financing Gaps and Strengthen Financial Inclusion among
MSMEs”, which gathered the Working Committee on Financial Inclusion (WCFINC) together with external partners and key stakeholders, including the Centre
14

for Impact Investing and Practices (CIIP) and the ASEAN Coordinating Committee
on Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (ACCMSME) that discussed ways and
initiatives to narrow financing gaps for MSMEs such as through harnessing digital
infrastructure, improving financial literacy, providing incentives to financial service
providers, and strengthening credit bureaus.
63.

We reaffirmed our commitment to strengthen trust in our digital ecosystems by
fostering data-driven innovation and encourage the responsible use and
transmission of data in ASEAN. We pledged to intensify collaboration on the
governance of emerging technologies such as generative AI, including through the
establishment of an ASEAN Working Group on AI Governance to provide guidance
on implementing AI governance frameworks. We supported the efforts to build a
secure, diverse and resilient submarine cable network for regional and global
connectivity. We recognised the importance of enhancing cooperation and
collaboration to preventing and combating online scams, and scams across digital
and telecommunication channels.

64.

We recalled the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Advancing Regional Payment
Connectivity and Promoting Local Currency Transaction and noted the
establishment of the ASEAN Local Currency Transaction (LCT) Framework which
identified key objectives of enhancing accessibility and efficiency in local currency
transactions and promoting its wider adoption by market participants in the region.
We noted the continuous progress in the adoption and promotion of cross-border
QR payment in ASEAN with the launching of Cambodia-Lao PDR, Cambodia-Viet
Nam, Singapore-Indonesia, Singapore-Malaysia, and Lao PDR-Thailand linkages,
showcasing ASEAN at the forefront of QR payment integration globally. We looked
forward to the continued efforts of the ASEAN Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors to identify concrete solutions to promote adoption and usage of crossborder QR payments. Likewise, we welcomed the accession of Brunei
Darussalam, Viet Nam, and Lao PDR to the MOU on Regional Payment
Connectivity (RPC) and looked forward to the accession of the remaining AMS to
the MOU on RPC and the expansion to other countries or jurisdictions.

65.

We welcomed the progress of ASEAN’s on-going efforts on digital transformation.
We recognised the important role of digitalisation in enhancing connectivity and
deepening the region’s economic integration. We recalled the Leaders’ vision to
develop a modern, comprehensive, and coherent digital transformation strategy
towards an ASEAN digital economy, where the seamless and secure flow of goods,
services, and data are underpinned by enabling rules, regulation, infrastructure,
and talent. We are encouraged by the continuing efforts and good momentum in
the implementation of the Bandar Seri Begawan Roadmap to accelerate the digital
transformation of the region and establishment of an ASEAN digital community.

66.

We welcomed the commencement of the ASEAN Digital Economy Framework
Agreement (DEFA) negotiations and looked forward to its conclusion by 2025 as
mandated by the 23rd AEC Council on 3 September 2023. We welcomed ASEAN’s
commitment to develop an ASEAN DEFA that shall be comprehensive, highquality, forward-looking, and future-proof to harness the benefits of digital
transformation so that ASEAN may become a leading digital community in the
world. Furthermore, we looked forward to the completion of the (i) Implementation
15

Roadmap to Establish Regionally Comparable and Recognised Unique Business
Identification Numbers (UBIN) in ASEAN; (ii) Study on the New Generation of
ASEAN Single Window (ASW); and (iii) Roadmap on Digital Trade Standards. We
expressed our strong support to the timely delivery of these initiatives, which
complements the regional objective to create a seamless digital trade ecosystem
across the region.
67.

We are pleased to note that ASEAN tourism is back on track with international
tourism arrivals reaching 101 million in 2023 reflecting a 136% year-on-year
increase from 2022. We noted the good progress in the implementation of the
ASEAN Tourism Strategic Plan (ATSP) 2016-2025, and welcomed the several key
achievements of the tourism sector in 2023, including the (i) launch of the three
regional marketing campaigns in 2023, namely, the Southeast Asia Travel
Collective; imaginASEAN; and intra-ASEAN Tourism Recovery Campaign; (ii)
endorsement of the Action Roadmap for Sustainable Tourism Development in
ASEAN; (iii) Interface Meeting between ASEAN Tourism Ministers and ASEAN
Transport Ministers as the first high-level cross-sectoral collaboration; and (iv)
endorsement of the Memorandum of Understanding between ASEAN and UN
World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO), which covers four focus areas, namely:
tourism competitiveness, capability development/ capacity building, as well as
sustainability and inclusivity.

68.

We looked forward to the full recovery of the tourism industry in 2024, and we
reaffirmed our support to the tourism sector’s priorities for 2024, notably the (i)
development of the ASEAN Ecotourism Standard; (ii) implementation of the Action
Roadmap for Sustainable Tourism Development in ASEAN; (iii) development of
the ASEAN Sustainable Tourism Toolkit; (iv) development of the Cruise Tourism
Work Plan 2024; (v) development of Common ASEAN Tourism Curriculum for Spa
Professionals; and (vi) implementation of the Capacity Building of ASEAN Master
Assessors on the Guidelines on Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) Mechanism
for ASEAN Tourism Professionals Through Piloting Assessment.

69.

We emphasised the critical importance of sustainability and resilience in the
ASEAN region, particularly within the food, agriculture, and forestry sectors due to
their profound impacts on livelihoods and the environment. We eagerly anticipated
the launch of the ASEAN Action Plan on Sustainable Agriculture in ASEAN and
the ASEAN Guidelines for Crop Burning Reduction, which are some of the key
PEDs for the region in 2024. We urged all stakeholders, including private sectors
and research institutes to collaborate with ASEAN and the ASEAN Secretariat in a
collective effort to advance these initiatives for the mutual benefit and progress of
the ASEAN Member States.

70.

We acknowledged that sustainable food production and resilient agricultural
practices, including sustainable production of vegetable oils, are essential to the
attainment of the SDGs by 2030 and will contribute to regional and global efforts
towards economic recovery, green growth, and food security. We looked forward
to the convening of the Fourth Joint Working Group on Palm Oil between the
European Union (EU) and Relevant ASEAN Member States to continue promoting
mutual understanding on the sustainable production of vegetable oils and
addressing the challenges in this sector in a holistic, transparent, and non16

discriminatory manner. We noted that relevant producing countries and the EU
have established a Joint Task Force to strengthen the cooperation for the
implementation of the EU’s Deforestation Regulation.
71.

We reaffirmed our commitment to strengthening the region’s supply chain
resilience, as well as elevate ASEAN’s standing in the regional and global
economic architecture. We underscored the importance of effective
implementation and utilisation of ASEAN’s Free Trade Agreements in furthering
the ASEAN economic integration agenda. We emphasised ASEAN Centrality and
upholding the region’s interests in ASEAN’s external economic cooperation.

72.

We welcomed the progress of the ATIGA Upgrade Negotiations, which aims to be
modern, comprehensive, forward-looking, relevant to business communities and
more responsive to regional and global developments, as well as to further
increase intra-ASEAN trade.

73.

We looked forward to continuing to support the implementation of the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (RCEP), including to boost
investment and investors’ confidence in the region, as well as contributing to
stronger and more resilient regional supply chains. We commit to supporting
businesses, including MSMEs, to access the full benefits of the RCEP. We also
reiterated our commitment to the operationalisation of the RCEP Support Unit at
the earliest opportunity to provide institutional support to the Parties’
implementation of the RCEP Agreement. We further encouraged the early
finalisation of the RCEP Accession Procedures to ensure that the RCEP
Agreement remains open and inclusive to facilitate trade and investment, including
participation in regional and global supply chains.

74.

We welcomed the progress made in modernising and upgrading enforced
ASEAN’s Free Trade Agreements with external partners, as well as in negotiating
FTAs with new partners. In particular, we looked forward to the completion of the
Review of the ASEAN-India Trade in Goods Agreement (AITIGA) and the
continued negotiation on the ASEAN-Canada Free Trade Agreement.

75.

We reiterated our commitments to deepening economic integration in ASEAN, as
well as with our external partners in order to strengthen the region’s resiliency. We
welcomed the signing of the Second Protocol to Amend the Agreement
Establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA),
which will keep the AANZFTA relevant and open more opportunities for businesses
in the region through new and enhanced provisions on trade in goods, rules of
origin, trade in services, government procurement, investment, e-commerce, and
MSMEs and trade and sustainable development. We looked forward to its timely
entry into force and implementation. We also reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to
achieve meaningful progress of the negotiation in line with ASEAN’s interest in
order to reach substantial conclusion of the ASEAN-China FTA 3.0 Upgrade within
this year. We emphasised that these efforts are also undertaken to ensure that
ASEAN’s FTAs remain modern, comprehensive, of high-quality and more
responsive to the needs of businesses operating the production networks in
ASEAN.

17

76.

As ASEAN remains committed to advancing an effective, enterprising, and
inclusive intellectual property (IP) ecosystem, we expressed strong support for the
comprehensive review of the ASEAN Framework Agreement on Intellectual
Property Cooperation (AFAIPC) with a view to upgrade the Agreement.

ASEAN SOCIO-CULTURAL COMMUNITY
77.

We noted the ASCC priorities for 2024, which focus on promoting the role of culture
and arts for inclusion and sustainability, environmental cooperation, and climate
change resilience, enhancing the role of women and children towards the
transformation of behaviourism in ASEAN, and transforming ASEAN health
development resilience. We commended the broad range of ASCC outcome
documents expected to be adopted and noted by the ASEAN Leaders at the 44th
and 45th ASEAN Summits which will see achievements in human and sustainable
development.

78.

We looked forward to the adoption and notation of key human development
outcome documents of the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community by the 44th and 45th
ASEAN Summits which include the ASEAN Declaration on Skills Mobility,
Recognition, and Development of Migrant Workers; the ASEAN Declaration on the
Prevention and Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour; the ASEAN
Declaration on Strengthening the Care Economy and Fostering Resilience
Towards the Post-2025 ASEAN Community; and the Vientiane Statement on
Equity, Access and Environment: Advancing Climate Resilience in Early Childhood
Settings in ASEAN.

79.

We acknowledged the contributions of the ASCC Research and Development
(R&D) Platforms Programme in advancing evidence-based policy-making and
strengthening decision-making capabilities across the ASCC sectors including the
future of education and work, health, disaster management, climate change, public
health emergencies, media, culture and arts and poverty action. We further noted
the ongoing ASCC Research and Development Platform on the Future of Work
which examines emerging trends in the world of work such as digitalisation and the
rise of alternative work arrangements in gig economy.

80.

We looked forward to health-related deliverables on health security and health
system resilience under the Lao PDR’s Chairmanship which includes the
endorsement of the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Strengthening Regional
Biosafety and Biosecurity, prompt finalisation and signing of the establishment
agreement and operationalisation of the ASEAN Centre for Public Health
Emergencies and Emerging Diseases (ACPHEED), the implementation of the
ASEAN Public Health Emergency Coordination System (APHECS) Framework,
and the commemoration of the 10-year anniversary of the Mitigation of Biological
Threats Programme.

81.

We acknowledged the sustained efforts of the ASEAN Health Sector in addressing
HIV and AIDS. We looked forward to ASEAN’s renewed commitment in
implementing the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Ending Inequalities and Getting

18

on Track to End AIDS by 2030 through the updated ASEAN Health Sector Work
Plan on HIV and AIDS 2021-2025.
82.

We commended the sustained and scaled-up initiatives of the ASEAN Health
Sector for an integrated and inter-disciplinary cooperation in implementing ASEAN
Leaders’ Declaration on One Health Initiatives through the ASEAN One Health
Joint Plan of Action 2023-2030 and the ASEAN Strategic Framework to Combat
Antimicrobial Resistance through One Health Approach 2019-2030 (ASF-AMR).
We acknowledged the role of the ASEAN One Health Network (AOHN) in ensuring
a whole-of-society and whole-of-government approach to inclusive and responsive
One Health governance towards these initiatives.

83.

As part of ASEAN’s endeavours to provide universal access to safe, affordable,
efficacious, quality, and holistic health care as well as essential medical supplies,
we expressed strong support towards the operationalization of the ASEAN
Leaders’ Declaration on ASEAN Vaccine Security and Self-Reliance to ensure the
availability of essential vaccines within and among ASEAN Member States through
collective efforts. To this end, we encourage ASEAN to explore regional vaccine
manufacturing as part of our collective efforts towards strengthening ASEAN
vaccine security and self-reliance.

84.

We applauded the ASEAN Health Sector’s efforts in strengthening the regional
health architecture post-COVID-19 which continue to enhance regional capacities
and capabilities in effectively addressing both current and future health threats
through the existing mechanisms of the ASEAN Health Sector such as the ASEAN
Emergency Operation Centre (EOC) Network, the ASEAN+3 Field Epidemiology
Training Network, and the ASEAN BioDiaspora Virtual Centre (ABVC), among
others.

85.

We acknowledged continued efforts by the ASEAN Health Sector in making
preparations for the establishment of the ACPHEED, including ACPHEED for
Prevention and Preparedness, ACPHEED for Detection and Risk Assessment and
ACPHEED for Response and Risk Communication as well as the ACPHEED
Secretariat Office. We also appreciated the contributions of Dialogue Partners in
the preparatory stage for the setting-up of ACPHEED.

86.

We welcomed the entry into force of the Host Country Agreement between the
Government of the Kingdom of Thailand and the ASEAN Centre for Active Ageing
and Innovation (ACAI) in June 2024. We also acknowledged continued work
progress undertaken by ACAI, including the Workshop on the ACAI Strategic
Implementation for the Older Person in ASEAN in 2023 and looked forward to
future activities by ACAI to help promote healthy, active, and productive ageing in
ASEAN.

87.

We noted the significant role of the ASEAN Health Sector in enhancing disaster
preparedness and response capacity in ASEAN through the full integration of the
Standard Operating Procedure in the Coordination of Emergency Medical Teams
in ASEAN (EMT SOP) in the Standard Operating Procedure for Regional Standby
Arrangements and Coordination of Joint Disaster Relief and Emergency Response
Operations (SASOP).
19

88.

We acknowledged the continuous efforts by the Regional Coordination Committee
on Disaster Health Management (RRC-DHM) to enhance disaster health
management, as guided by the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Disaster Health
Management, through the platforms of the ASEAN Academic Network on Disaster
Health Management (AANDHM) and the ASEAN Institute for Disaster Health
Management (AIDHM).

89.

We commended the significant progress of the ASEAN Health Sector in
accelerating evidence-based multi-sectoral actions and upscaling interventions to
reduce and ultimately end all forms of malnutrition, particularly among the most
vulnerable, poor, and disadvantaged groups in ASEAN communities, as espoused
in the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Ending All Forms of Malnutrition, through
the sustained implementation of the ASEAN Strategic Framework and Action Plan
for Nutrition 2018-2030.

90.

We recognized the need to strengthen key strategies to promote healthy lifestyle,
ensure healthy lives and promote well-being at all ages. We noted the ongoing
initiative of the ASEAN Health Sector to implement the reformulation and
production of healthier food and beverages options to curb the increasing
incidence of non-communicable diseases within and among ASEAN communities,
among others, as declared in the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on the
Reformulation and Production of Healthier Food and Beverage Options.

91.

We reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to protecting and promoting the human and
labour rights of migrant workers throughout the entire migration cycle. We
commended the second self-assessment of the ASEAN Consensus on the
Protection and Promotion of the Rights of Migrant Workers in identifying regional
initiatives for the post-2025 Action Plan and supported the finalisation of the
ASEAN Guidelines on Portability of Social Security for Migrant Workers in ASEAN
and ASEAN Guidelines on the Placement and Protection of Migrant Fishers for
adoption by the ASEAN Labour Ministers’ Meeting (ALMM) and encouraged close
partnerships with stakeholders in the implementation of the Guidelines at the
national and regional levels. We also noted the completion of the ASEAN Migration
Outlook 2nd edition which examined the nexus of climate change, human mobility,
and labour migration in our region.

92.

We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Declaration on Skills Mobility,
Recognition, and Development of Migrant Workers which aims at enhancing
migrant workers' access to skill development and certification, mainstreaming skills
recognition, policy and labour migration governance, and promoting whole-ofsociety approach, stronger collaboration and active networks.

93.

We noted the successful conduct of the ASEAN Green Jobs Forum on 24-25 April
2024 in Malaysia as a platform in sharing best practices and existing policies and
programmes that sought to address the critical need for green skills and green jobs
in the region, which contributed to the implementation of the ASEAN Declaration
on Promoting Green Jobs for Equity and Inclusive Growth. We also noted the
completion of the ASEAN Employment Outlook 1st edition which focused on
informal employment and the emerging gig economy, and how to better protect the
20

well-being of these workers and looked forward to the development of the 2nd
edition.
94.

We appreciated the strong commitment of the ASCC Sectoral Bodies in promoting
and protecting the rights of children, including through the prevention and
elimination of child labour in the region. We took note of ASEAN Member States’
continued efforts in combating child labour in ASEAN and looked forward to the
adoption of the ASEAN Declaration on the Prevention and Elimination of Child
Labour, Including Worst Forms of Child Labour through the leadership of the
ASEAN Senior Labor Officials Meeting (SLOM) in close collaboration with the
ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and
Children (ACWC).

95.

We commended the continued efforts of the ASEAN Cooperation on Civil Service
Matters (ACCSM) in raising the standards of civil service in the region, as well as
the initiative of the ACCSM under the Chairmanship of Brunei Darussalam in
developing a standard definition and guiding principles of work-life balance in the
public sector that will support the well-being of civil servants. We applauded the
ACCSM for updating the ASEAN Gender Mainstreaming Human Resource Toolkit,
which provides a practical tool for assessing gender mainstreaming in civil service.

96.

We commended the progress of the Roadmap to Implement the Ha Noi Declaration
on Strengthening Social Work Towards Cohesive and Responsive ASEAN
Community. We noted the development of key regional guidance on social work,
including the ASEAN Regional Guidance for ASEAN Member States on
Strengthening the Role of Social Workers and the wider Social Service Workforce
in Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Resilience and the ASEAN Regional
Guidance for ASEAN Member States on Strengthening the Role of Social Workers
and the Social Service Workforce in Education Sector. We also commended the
successful convening of the 11th and 12th ASEAN Social Work Consortium
Conference on 6-7 December 2023 with the theme “Strengthening the Role of
Social Work: Responding to the Changing Socio-Economic, Environmental, and
Political Landscapes in ASEAN.”

97.

We noted the ongoing mid-term review of the implementation of the ASEAN
Enabling Master Plan 2025: Mainstreaming the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and expressed our appreciation to all ASEAN Sectoral Bodies for their support and
active participation. We also noted the meaningful and substantive engagements
with Organisations of Persons with Disabilities through the ASEAN Disability
Forum (ADF).

98.

We reaffirmed the importance of promoting rural development and poverty
eradication in the region. We also underscored the importance of rural-urban
linkages, and the roles of rural women and youth in rural development and poverty
eradication. We commended the efforts under the ASEAN Villages Network in
developing sustainable solutions to respond to rural development challenges,
address poverty, as well as strengthening the ASEAN identity, including through
exploring rural-urban networking and collaborating with the ASCN and external
partners. We looked forward to the convening of the 2nd Meeting of ASEAN Villages
Network in Indonesia in 2024.
21

99.

We reiterated our support to promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls through the acknowledgment of unpaid care and domestic work
(UCDW), which is a significant issue in many ASEAN Member States. We
reaffirmed our support to the initiative of Lao PDR to convene the 3rd ASEAN
Women Leaders’ Summit under the theme “Strengthening Care Economy and
Resilience towards ASEAN Community Post-2025” and looked forward to the
adoption of a Declaration on Strengthening Care Economy and Resilience Toward
ASEAN Community Post-2025.

100.

We noted with appreciation the establishment of multi-sectoral ASEAN Gender
Mainstreaming Steering Committee (AGMSC) to steer and provide strategic
guidance on the operationalisation of the ASEAN Gender Mainstreaming Strategic
Framework and the roll-out of the Implementation Plan of the ASEAN Gender
Mainstreaming Strategic Framework (AGMSF) 2015-2025 across the three
ASEAN Community pillars. We reaffirmed the need to scale-up ASEAN’s efforts
on integrating gender mainstreaming in policies and programmes in the work of all
relevant sectors towards achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment.

101.

We supported the ongoing implementation of the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action
on the Elimination of Violence Against Women and the ASEAN Regional Plan of
Action on the Elimination of Violence Against Children, and we looked forward to
its end-term review and development of the successor regional plans of action that
will provide more future-proof protection approaches to the women’s rights and
children’s rights. On Women, Peace, and Security, we commended the launch of
the ASEAN Localisation Toolkit and Guidelines on Localisation of the ASEAN
Regional Plan of Action on Women, Peace, and Security. We also commended the
work of the Advisory Group on Women, Peace and Security that coordinates with
various ASEAN Sectoral Bodies on implementing the ASEAN Regional Plan of
Action on Women, Peace and Security. We noted the International Conference on
Women, Peace, and Security to be hosted by the Philippines on 28-30 October
2024 in Manila, Philippines.

102.

We commended the education sector for its continued efforts in improving the
quality of education across all levels from early childhood education to higher
education. We welcomed the adoption of the Vientiane Statement on Equity,
Access and Environment: Advancing Climate Resilience in Early Childhood
Settings in ASEAN at the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Ensuring Equal Access to
Quality Early Childhood Development and Care held in Vientiane, Lao PDR on 1415 May 2024, which underscored the need to integrate climate resilience into Early
Childhood Care and Education planning and actions. Emphasising the importance
of prioritising educational quality within ASEAN, we looked forward to the outcomes
of the regional Southeast Asia Primary Learning Metrics (SEA-PLM) main survey
and encouraged all ASEAN Member States to participate in the assessment.

103.

We noted the substantial progress in implementing the Intra-ASEAN Scholarship
Program for ASEAN Nationals and looked forward to the key findings and
recommendations from its on-going research which aims to provide valuable
insights for ASEAN and individual Member States in developing policies and
programs geared towards nurturing inclusivity and enhancing intra-ASEAN
mobility.
22

104.

We looked forward to the implementation of the Roadmap of the ASEAN
Declaration on the Digital Transformation of Education Systems in Southeast Asia
and the improvements that it will bring to learning delivery in the region.

105.

We reiterated our commitment to equipping ASEAN youth with necessary skills to
address present and future challenges through youth exchanges, youth leadership,
and youth volunteerism programmes as well as skills training and social
entrepreneurship programmes.

106.

We acknowledged the significant role of ASEAN Culture and the Arts in advancing
inclusive and sustainable development in order to strengthen the capacity building
and increase more innovation and creativity activities and projects of the culture
and the arts. In this regard, we looked forward to the adoption of the Vang Vieng
Declaration on Promoting the Small and Medium-sized Cultural Enterprises
aligned with the Green Growth for Sustainable Development.

107.

We acknowledged the ongoing implementation of the ASEAN Strategic Plan for
Culture and Arts 2016-2025 and noted the continued commitment and robust
efforts in the culture and arts cooperation to foster an increasingly vibrant and
interconnected ASEAN towards an inclusive and sustainable community.

108.

We emphasised the need to further promote the development of ASEAN Creative
and Cultural Economy, and looked forward to more activities including policy
dialogue, capacity-building and networking to support the creative and cultural
industries toward building a dynamic and vibrant ASEAN Community and
engendering a sense of pride in celebrating ASEAN Identity.

109.

We reiterated our commitment to global climate action and biodiversity at national,
sub-national and regional levels and welcomed the progress made towards the
finalisation of the ASEAN Joint Statement on Climate Change to the 29th session
of the Conference of Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC COP29) and the ASEAN Joint Statement on Biodiversity to the 16th
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD COP16), respectively.

110.

We welcomed the progress towards the establishment and encouraged the
acceleration of the operationalisation of the ASEAN Centre for Climate Change in
Brunei Darussalam to further reaffirm ASEAN’s commitment in enhancing regional
cooperation and coordination on climate change.

111.

We recognised that Southeast Asia is one of the regions highly vulnerable to the
adverse impacts of climate change. In our efforts to achieve net-zero emission
targets, we reiterated our call for developed countries to fulfil their commitments
under the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement which include expediting and scalingup their contributions to climate finance, capacity building and technology
development and transfer for climate change adaptation and mitigation. We noted
the convening of the 4th ASEAN Climate Change Partnership Conference on 28
May 2024 in Bali, Indonesia. We also noted the ongoing progress on the
development of an ASEAN Community-based Climate Action that provides
23

comprehensive overview of the region’s climate action at the community level. We
welcomed the ASEAN Climate Finance Mobilisation and Access Strategy. We
looked forward to the UNFCCC COP29 in November 2024 in Baku, Azerbaijan.
112.

We reaffirmed our commitment to existing Multilateral Environmental Agreements
(MEAs), including the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement, in particular the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in light of
different national circumstances, and the CBD, and Basel, Rotterdam, and
Stockholm Conventions (BRS). We underscored the acceleration and
advancement of MEAs implementation through enhancing cooperation in areas
like capacity-building, sharing knowledge and skills, technology transfer, and
financing.

113.

We committed to scaling up efforts to tackle environmental challenges, among
others, through halting and reversing biodiversity loss, preventing loss and damage
from climate change impacts, enhancing climate mitigation and adaptation efforts
including for coastal and marine ecosystem, ensuring the sustainable use and
management of water resources and promoting sustainable development.

114.

We continued to support the work of the ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity (ACB) in
assisting ASEAN Member States in mainstreaming biodiversity into various
development sectors, promoting nature-based solutions and ecosystem-based
approach to enhance the region’s resilience against zoonotic diseases, addressing
climate change, and facilitating ASEAN’s contributions to the Kunming-Montreal
Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF). We looked forward to the convening of the
CBD COP16 from 21 October to 1 November 2024, in Colombia.

115.

We also welcomed the progress towards the establishment of the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Transboundary Haze Pollution Control (ACC THPC) in
Indonesia and resumption of the discussion to finalise the Host Country Agreement
of the ACC THPC. The operationalisation of the ACC THPC, as well as the work
of the ASEAN Specialised Meteorological Centre, the ASEAN Coordinating Centre
for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management (AHA Centre), the ACB, and
the ASEAN Research and Training Centre for Space Technology and Applications
(ARTSA), in accordance with their respective mandates under the Establishment
Agreement of the ACC THPC, will facilitate effective implementation of the ASEAN
Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution and further reaffirm ASEAN’s
commitment in enhancing regional cooperation and coordination on transboundary
haze pollution in the ASEAN region.

116.

We noted with serious concern that transboundary haze pollution has adverse
impacts on the public health, well-being, and economies of ASEAN. We
emphasised that transboundary haze pollution arising from land and forest fires
remains a major concern in the region. We stressed the importance of remaining
vigilant and welcomed the ongoing preventive efforts to minimise transboundary
haze pollution during periods of drier and hotter weather. We reaffirmed our
commitment to the full and effective implementation of the ASEAN Agreement on
Transboundary Haze Pollution (AATHP) and welcomed the adoption of the Second
Roadmap on ASEAN Cooperation towards Transboundary Haze Pollution Control
with Means of Implementation (Haze-free Roadmap) 2023-2030 and the Second
24

ASEAN Peatland Management Strategy (APMS) 2023-2030 to further strengthen,
intensify, and comprehensively address the root causes of transboundary haze
pollution in the ASEAN region. We also noted the endorsement of the ASEAN
Investment Framework for Haze-free Sustainable Land Management.
117.

We commended the 2035 Vision Toward a Transformative, Responsive and
Resilient Information and Media Sector that underscored the cross-cutting role of
the information and media sector. We noted the sustained efforts to mitigate the
harmful effects of fake news through the Da Nang Declaration on Media: From
Information to Knowledge for a Resilient and Responsive ASEAN, and the ASEAN
Guideline on Management of Government Information in Combating Fake News
and Disinformation in the Media.

118.

We acknowledged the importance of enhancing the visibility of our ASEAN
Community and increasing awareness of our milestones and achievements
through the narratives and stories of people who have directly experienced the
positive impact of the ASEAN Community-building process. We commended the
ASCC in its public engagement and awareness raising activities including the
ASEAN Magazine which plays an important role in effectively broadening
engagement and nurturing a well-informed ASEAN Community.

119.

We recognised the devastating impact of natural disasters and climate change on
ASEAN endeavours towards sustainable development. We reaffirmed the
importance of implementing the Bandar Seri Begawan Declaration on the Strategic
and Holistic Initiative to Link ASEAN Responses to Emergencies and Disaster
(ASEAN SHIELD), and the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Sustainable
Resilience, to prepare for and manage disaster and climate-related risks and their
impacts in the region through a holistic, cross-pillar and cross-sectoral approach,
and enhance collaboration in strengthening climate and disaster resilience. In line
with these Declarations, we emphasised the importance of continuously promoting
a whole-of-ASEAN approach in disaster management. We also noted the
discussions of the ASEAN Disaster Resilience Platform (ADRP) and encouraged
active participation of relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies across the three ASEAN
Community Pillars to the ADRP.

120.

We welcomed the progress of the review of the TOR of the Secretary-General of
ASEAN as the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Coordinator (SG-AHAC). We
noted the initial development of the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management
and Emergency Response (AADMER) Work Programme 2026-2030 and
encouraged the next phase of discussion on the operationalisation and
socialisation of the revised Financial Rules of ADMER Fund.

121.

We reaffirmed our commitment to continuously enhance ASEAN’s capacity to
implement the ASEAN Declaration on One ASEAN One Response: ASEAN
Responding to Disasters as One in the Region and Outside the Region. We
commended the AHA Centre’s continuous efforts in strengthening the ASEAN
Disaster Information Network (ADINet), Disaster Monitoring and Response System
(DMRS), and the scoping study for ‘One ASEAN, One Response’ Outside the
Region. We expressed appreciation for the strong commitment and support of
ASEAN Member States and ASEAN partners in further strengthening the Disaster
25

Emergency Logistics System for ASEAN (DELSA), and the ASEAN Emergency
Response Assessment Team (ASEAN-ERAT). We reiterated our commitment
towards full and effective implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction (SFDRR) 2015-2030. We noted the Asia-Pacific Ministerial
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction (APMCDRR) to be hosted by the
Philippines on 14-18 October 2024 in Manila, Philippines.
122.

In commemoration of the 20th Anniversary of the Indian Ocean Tsunami, we
reaffirmed our commitment to further strengthen ASEAN’s early warning system,
preparedness, response, and recovery capacity on tsunami and other megadisasters, and we looked forward to the commemorative events in Brunei
Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand. We further looked forward to the
adoption of the ASEAN Ministerial Statement on the Commemoration of the 20th
Anniversary of Indian Ocean Tsunami and the ASEAN Ministerial Declaration on
Building a Resilient ASEAN through Inclusive and Sustainable Disaster Recovery.

123.

We reaffirmed ASEAN’s continued support for Myanmar’s efforts to bring peace,
stability, the rule of law, promote harmony and reconciliation among the various
communities, as well as ensure sustainable and equitable development in Rakhine
State. We emphasised the importance of and reiterated our continued support for
Myanmar’s commitment to ensuring safety and security for all communities in
Rakhine State as effectively as possible and facilitating the voluntary return of
displaced persons in a safe, secure, and dignified manner. We noted and
encouraged the engagement and cooperation between Myanmar and Bangladesh
for the pilot repatriation project. We looked forward to ASEAN’s continued
facilitation of the repatriation process through the implementation of projects as the
follow up to the recommendations of the Preliminary Needs Assessment (PNA).
We also looked forward to the Comprehensive Needs Assessment (CNA) when
conditions allow and encouraged the Secretary-General of ASEAN to continue
identifying possible areas for ASEAN to effectively facilitate the repatriation
process.

ASEAN EXTERNAL RELATIONS
124.

We underscored the importance of strengthening ASEAN unity and Centrality in
our engagement with external partners, including through ASEAN-led mechanisms
such as the ASEAN Plus One, ASEAN Plus Three (APT), East Asia Summit (EAS),
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and ADMM-Plus, in order to build mutual trust and
confidence as well as reinforce an open, transparent, resilient, inclusive, and rulesbased regional architecture with ASEAN at the centre that upholds international
law. We underscored the need to promote an enabling environment for peace,
stability and prosperous development for all through ensuring a culture of dialogue
and cooperation, instead of rivalry, enhancing mutual trust and confidence, and
respect for international law. We reaffirmed that ASEAN shall act in accordance
with ASEAN Centrality in external political, economic, social and cultural relations
while remaining actively engaged, outward-looking, inclusive and nondiscriminatory, in line with the ASEAN Charter.

26

125.

We noted with satisfaction the encouraging progress in ASEAN’s relations with our
Dialogue Partners, Sectoral Dialogue Partners, and Development Partners through
the existing frameworks and the implementation of Plans of Action, Practical
Cooperation Areas and development cooperation programmes based on mutual
interest and benefit in contribution to ASEAN Community-building and
development cooperation efforts. We agreed to further strengthen partnerships
and cooperation with our partners, including through sub-regional development
cooperation and projects, thus contributing to the continued efforts towards the
realisation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025, as well as our proactive
response to regional and global challenges and opportunities.

126.

We are committed to fostering an outward-looking community that supports
regional sustainable growth and resilience through inclusive cooperation and
collaboration with external partners. We took note of the growing interest from
countries and regional organisations outside of the region in developing stronger
collaboration and substantial cooperation with ASEAN, including through
applications for formal partnerships with ASEAN. We affirmed the importance of
pursuing an outward-looking policy and agreed on the need to reach out to new
potential external partners based on shared interest, constructive engagement and
mutual benefit, which could contribute to ASEAN Community-building, regional
integration and development cooperation efforts. We noted ASEAN’s rising global
relevance and unique convening power amidst the emerging multipolar global
architecture.

127.

We recalled our decision to commence a comprehensive review of the moratorium
on new dialogue partnerships, in conjunction with the work of the ASEAN
Community Vision Post-2025, with the objective to enhance the ASEAN
Community and advance ASEAN’s relations with external parties. In this regard,
we noted the ongoing discussion of the ASEAN Senior Officials and looked forward
to their recommendations for our consideration.

128.

We welcomed the increased engagement between the Committee of Permanent
Representatives to ASEAN (CPR) and ASEAN’s external partners, including
through the 95 Non-ASEAN Ambassadors Accredited to ASEAN (NAAAs). We
also welcomed the role of the 55 ASEAN Committees in Third Countries and
International Organisations (ACTCs) in promoting ASEAN’s interest and forging
partnerships in the respective host countries and international organisations.
Dialogue Partners

129.

We looked forward to the 4th ASEAN-Australia Summit; the 27th ASEAN-China
Summit; the 27th ASEAN-Japan Summit; the 25th ASEAN-ROK Summit to
commemorate the 35th Anniversary of the ASEAN-ROK Dialogue Relations; the
12th ASEAN-U.S. Summit; and the 21st ASEAN-India Summit, to be held during the
44th and 45th ASEAN Summits in October 2024.

130.

We underscored that the establishment of a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership
(CSP) with ASEAN should be meaningful, substantive and mutually beneficial. We
welcomed the establishment of the ASEAN-Japan CSP at the 26th ASEAN-Japan
Summit through the adoption of the Joint Statement on the Establishment of the
27

ASEAN-Japan Comprehensive Strategic Partnership. We also welcomed the
establishment of the ASEAN-Canada Strategic Partnership at the ASEAN-Canada
Summit during the 43rd ASEAN Summit and Related Summits in Jakarta, in
September 2023, through the adoption of the Joint Leaders’ Statement on ASEANCanada Strategic Partnership. We further welcomed the 35th Anniversary of
ASEAN-ROK Dialogue Relations and looked forward to the establishment of the
ASEAN-ROK CSP and the adoption of its Joint Statement at the 25th ASEAN-ROK
Summit in October 2024, in conjunction with the milestone. ASEAN welcomed and
looked forward to more details on New Zealand’s intention to request for an
ASEAN-New Zealand CSP.
131.

We commended the successful convening of the Commemorative Summit for the
50th Year of ASEAN-Japan Friendship and Cooperation on 16-18 December 2023,
in Tokyo, Japan; the ASEAN-Australia Special Summit to Commemorate the 50th
Anniversary of ASEAN-Australia Dialogue Relations on 4-6 March 2024, in
Melbourne, Australia; and the 24th ASEAN-EU Ministerial Meeting on 2 February
2024, in Brussels, Belgium. We welcomed the proposal on the convening of the
ASEAN-New Zealand Commemorative Summit in 2025.

132.

We looked forward to the adoption of the Plan of Action to Implement the ASEANAustralia Comprehensive Strategic Partnership (2025-2029), which will guide the
implementation of the ASEAN-Australia CSP for the next five years. We also
looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN-China Foreign Ministers’ Joint
Statement on Strengthening Humanitarian Mine Action Cooperation, the Joint
Statement of ASEAN and Russia Foreign Ministers Commemorating the 20th
Anniversary of Russia’s Accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia (TAC) and the ASEAN-UK Joint Ministerial Statement on
Enhancing Connectivity for a Prosperous and Sustainable Future.

133.

We welcomed the establishment of the ASEAN-U.S. Center at Arizona State
University to enhance ASEAN-U.S. cooperation and also looked forward to further
consultations on the establishment of the ASEAN-Australia Centre.
ASEAN Sectoral Dialogue Partners and ASEAN Development Partners

134.

We noted the progress made in the ASEAN’s Sectoral Dialogue Partnerships
(SDPs) with Brazil, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, South Africa, Switzerland, Türkiye
and United Arab Emirates, as well as Development Partnerships with Chile,
France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands. We welcomed Peru as a
Development Partner of ASEAN. We also looked forward to the convening of the
individual trilateral meetings between ASEAN Chair, the Secretary-General of
ASEAN, and Norway, Türkiye, and Switzerland during the 57th AMM/PMCs and
Related Meetings.

135.

We welcomed the adoption of the Practical Cooperation Areas between ASEAN
and Brazil, Morocco, Pakistan, South Africa, Türkiye and United Arab Emirates,
respectively, for the period of 2024-2028 earlier this year, which will serve as the
overall framework for ASEAN’s cooperation with the respective SDPs over the next
five years. We also welcomed the establishment of the Mission of the Federative

28

Republic of Brazil to ASEAN in Jakarta, which demonstrated the country’s strong
desire to strengthen relations and cooperation with ASEAN.
Regional and International Organisations
136.

We reaffirmed the importance of multilateralism and international cooperation and
underscored the importance of ASEAN’s partnerships with other external partners
such as regional and international organisations, including the UN, to address
global concerns, pursue shared goals and complementary initiatives, and promote
sustainable development for the benefit of our people. In this regard, we looked
forward to the continued high-level interactions between ASEAN and the UN,
including the 14th ASEAN-UN Summit at the 44th and 45th ASEAN Summits and
Related Summits later this year.

137.

We were pleased to note the positive progress made in the implementation of the
Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership
between ASEAN and the UN (2021-2025). We reaffirmed our commitment to
intensifying cooperation in the implementation of the Complementarities Roadmap
(2020-2025), effectively realising the goals of the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and continuing our close collaboration and cooperation at regional
and international fora.

138.

We welcomed the successful convening of the 1st ASEAN-Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) Summit in October 2023, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and the Joint
Statement of the Summit of ASEAN and GCC and the ASEAN-GCC Framework of
Cooperation (FOC) 2024-2028, which has guided our future relations and
cooperation with the GCC. We looked forward to the effective implementation of
the Joint Statement and the FOC. We noted the convening of the ASEAN-GCC
Business and Investment Conference on 28 May 2024 in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
We also looked forward to the convening of the 2nd ASEAN-GCC Summit that will
be held in Malaysia in 2025.

139.

We welcomed the adoption of the Framework of Cooperation between the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organisation (2024-2028) at the 15th ASEAN-ECO Ministerial Meeting in
September 2023. We looked forward to the convening of the 7th ASEAN-Pacific
Alliance Ministerial Meeting on the sidelines of the 79th UNGA in September 2024.

140.

We expressed our serious disappointment over the continued failure of the NonAligned Movement (NAM) to reflect substantive and factual updates on the
paragraphs relating to the South China Sea in NAM key outcome documents,
including the Final Document of the 19th Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the NAM adopted at the Summit in Kampala, Uganda on 19
January 2024. We called on all NAM Members to respect ASEAN, and ASEAN’s
unity and Centrality, especially on issues which directly affect peace and prosperity
in its own immediate region. We also called on all NAM Members to uphold their
commitment to the main goals and objectives of NAM as enshrined in the Bandung
Principles and to firmly uphold the principles of non-alignment while promoting
peace, friendship, solidarity and cooperation among ourselves.

29

ASEAN Plus Three
141.

We reaffirmed the important role of the APT cooperation framework in promoting
peace, stability and prosperity in the East Asian region with ASEAN as the driving
force. We reaffirmed our commitment to implementing the Manila Declaration on
the 20th Anniversary of ASEAN Plus Three Cooperation. We acknowledged the
substantive progress of the implementation of the APT Cooperation Work Plan
2023-2027. We were committed to further strengthening APT mechanisms,
including the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation (CMIM), the Asian Bond
Markets Initiative (ABMI), the Disaster Risk Financing (DRF) and the ASEAN+3
Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO), and ASEAN Plus Three Emergency
Rice Reserve (APTERR), as well as exploring potential areas of cooperation which
would contribute to greater regional resilience and preparedness against emerging
challenges and future shocks as well as to promote recovery toward inclusive,
resilient, equitable and sustainable growth. We also looked forward to the
convening of the 22nd East Asia Forum.
East Asia Summit

142.

We reaffirmed our commitment to further strengthening the EAS as a premier
Leaders-led forum for dialogue and cooperation on broad strategic, political, and
economic issues of common interest and concern with the aim of promoting peace,
stability, and economic prosperity in the region, with ASEAN as the driving force.
In this regard, we were committed to ensuring the effective follow-up on the Ha Noi
Declaration on the 15th Anniversary of the EAS to further strengthen the EAS
process, sustain its strategic value and relevance as well as enhance its
responsiveness to fast-changing developments in the regional and global contexts.

143.

We acknowledged the importance of increasing strategic coordination between the
EAS and other ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ARF and the ADMM-Plus,
including through the submission of reports and information-sharing by the ASEAN
Chair, where deemed necessary, for the EAS’ information.

144.

We looked forward to further enhancing cooperation in EAS streams of work
through effective implementation of the EAS Plan of Action 2024-2028 to ensure
practical coordination, cooperation, and implementation of the EAS Leaders’
statements, declarations, decisions, and initiatives.

145.

We welcomed the continued efforts to strengthen the EAS, including through,
among others, the regular engagement between the CPR and the non-ASEAN
Ambassador of EAS Participating Countries in Jakarta and encouraged their
continuation as the Group of the East Asia Summit Participating Countries’
Ambassadors to ASEAN in Jakarta to discuss the implementation of the EAS
Leaders’ decisions, and exchange information on regional development
cooperation initiatives and security policies and initiatives, and discuss the evolving
regional architecture with the support of the EAS Unit at the ASEAN Secretariat.

146.

We expressed our willingness to work together to promote the common goals and
interests of the EAS participating countries while reaffirming the importance of
maintaining and promoting ASEAN unity and Centrality. In this regard, we were
30

committed to a single EAS statement that emphasises the EAS Participating
Countries’ commitment to enhancing the region’s connectivity and resilience as the
outcome document of the 19th EAS.
ASEAN Regional Forum
147.

We reaffirmed the importance of the ARF as the leading regional security forum in
the Asia-Pacific region for fostering constructive dialogue and cooperation among
its Participants on political and security issues of common interest and concern,
with ASEAN as the primary driving force. In the face of increasingly complex
challenges in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond, we looked forward to further
discussion on the continued efforts and follow-up actions to ensure the ARF’s
efficiency and effectiveness, in accordance with the 2020 Guide to ARF Processes,
Procedures, Practices, and Protocol. We further encouraged ARF Participants to
strengthen efforts in confidence building measures and preventive diplomacy in
adherence to the principles stipulated in the ARF Preventive Diplomacy Work Plan
in order for the ARF to progress to Stage II, Development of Preventive Diplomacy,
of the three-stage process in accordance with the 1995 ARF Concept Paper.

148.

We noted the progress in the implementation of the ARF Ha Noi Plan of Action II
(2020-2025). We encouraged the ARF Participants to expedite the implementation
of the pending action lines and to consider updating the ARF Vision Statement to
reaffirm the role and enhance the effectiveness and relevance of the ARF in the
evolving regional security architecture. We also encouraged ARF Participants to
initiate discussion for the development of the next Plan of Action for the ARF.

149.

We underscore the need to undertake a holistic and comprehensive approach to
revitalise the ARF and maintain its relevance in the evolving regional security
architecture as well as its ability to address emerging political and security
challenges while fostering a more substantive, constructive and interactive
dialogue among the participants. In this regard, we noted the on-going discussions
of the ASEAN Senior Officials on revitalising the ARF, including a review on the
roles, achievements, and challenges of the ARF over the past 30 years, and
assessment on the low implementation rate of the ARF Ha Noi Plan of Action II, to
ensure it continues to function as the leading regional security forum in the AsiaPacific region, with a view to building capacity, developing expertise and enhancing
coordination in areas that can contribute to the region’s peace, security and
stability. We encouraged the ASEAN Senior Officials to complete their discussions,
including on the revitalisation of the ARF.
ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific

150.

We expressed concern on the intensifying geopolitical tensions in the region, and
further underlined the value and relevance of the AOIP to ASEAN’s peace,
security, stability and prosperity. We underscored ASEAN’s determination in
shaping and leading the evolving regional architecture that is built upon ASEANled mechanisms and to ensure that the geopolitical and geostrategic shifts will
continue to bring about, and not disrupt regional peace, security, and prosperity.

31

151.

We reiterated our determination to further promote the AOIP in our interactions
with partners and to mainstream and promote the implementation of concrete AOIP
projects and activities, including through workstreams under the four priority areas
in order to enhance win-win cooperation and to promote mutual trust, mutual
respect and mutual benefit through ASEAN-led mechanisms. We acknowledged
and continued to encourage the support of all our partners to the AOIP including
through the issuance of joint statements, as well as undertaking AOIP-related
initiatives in accordance with the objectives and principles contained in the AOIP.
We welcomed the convening of the ASEAN-Indo-Pacific Workshop on The Use of
Technology for Sustainable Aquaculture on 21-22 May 2024 in Bali, Indonesia and
looked forward to the convening of an AOIP Forum: Towards UN SDGs 2030 and
the ASEAN-Indo-Pacific Forum 2024 on the margins of the ASEAN Business and
Investment Summit (ABIS) in October 2024. We welcomed the adoption of the
Concept Paper on the Implementation of the AOIP from a Defence Perspective by
the 17th ADMM last November.

152.

We are committed to enhancing our engagement with other potential partners in
the wider Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. We looked forward to forging
cooperation between ASEAN and the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), and
between ASEAN and the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF).

REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
153.

We recognised the strategic importance of our region for our peace, security,
stability, and prosperity, as well as for those of our external partners. ASEAN and
ASEAN-led mechanisms remain inclusive, and open avenues that facilitate
constructive dialogue and concrete cooperation to address regional and
international issues that may impact our region.
South China Sea

154.

We discussed the situation in the South China Sea, during which concerns were
expressed by some Ministers on the land reclamations, activities, serious incidents
in the area, including actions that put the safety of all persons at risk, damage to
the marine environment, which have eroded trust and confidence, increased
tensions, and may undermine peace, security, and stability in the region. We
reaffirmed the need to enhance mutual trust and confidence, exercise self-restraint
in the conduct of activities that would complicate or escalate disputes and affect
peace and stability and avoid actions that may further complicate the situation. We
further reaffirmed the need to pursue peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance
with the universally recognised principles of international law, including the 1982
UNCLOS. We emphasised the importance of non-militarisation and self-restraint
in the conduct of all activities by claimants and all other states, including those
mentioned in the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea (DOC) that could further complicate the situation and escalate tensions in the
South China Sea.

32

155.

We reaffirmed the importance of maintaining and promoting peace, security,
stability, safety, and freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South China
Sea and recognised the benefits of having the South China Sea as a sea of peace,
stability, and prosperity. We underscored the importance of the full and effective
implementation of the DOC in its entirety. We welcomed the progress achieved so
far in the ongoing negotiations on the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea
(COC), notably the third reading of the Single Draft COC Negotiating Text (SDNT)
and encouraged continued positive momentum in this regard. We encouraged
efforts to make full use of the Guidelines for Accelerating the Early Conclusion of
an Effective and Substantive Code of Conduct in the South China Sea adopted at
the PMC Plus One Session with China on 13 July 2023 and looked forward to the
early conclusion of an effective and substantive COC that is in accordance with
international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. We emphasised the need to
maintain and promote an environment conducive to the COC negotiations, and
thus welcomed practical measures that could reduce tensions and the risk of
accidents, misunderstandings, and miscalculation. We stressed the importance of
undertaking confidence building and preventive measures to enhance, among
others, trust and confidence amongst parties, and we reaffirmed the importance of
upholding international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS.
Maritime Situation in the Region

156.

We recalled the ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Statement on Maintaining and
Promoting Stability in the Maritime Sphere in Southeast Asia issued on 30
December 2023, which, among other provisions, reaffirmed our unity, solidarity
and shared commitment to maintaining and further strengthening stability in our
maritime sphere to bring about overall peace, security, stability, and prosperity in
our region.
Developments in the Korean Peninsula

157.

We expressed concern over the recent developments in the Korean Peninsula and
stressed the importance of continued peaceful dialogue among all concerned
parties in order to realise lasting peace and stability in a denuclearised Korean
Peninsula. We expressed grave concern over the recent surge in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s (DPRK) intercontinental ballistic missile testing and
ballistic missile launches and the increased tension in the Korean Peninsula, which
are a worrisome development that threatens peace and stability in the region. We
called on the DPRK to comply fully with all relevant UNSC Resolutions and called
for peaceful dialogue among the concerned parties, and continue working towards
the realisation of lasting peace, and stability in a denuclearised Korean Peninsula.
We called for the full implementation of all relevant UNSC Resolutions and noted
international efforts to bring about the complete, verifiable, and irreversible
denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula in a peaceful manner. Diplomatic efforts,
including the creation of a conducive environment for peaceful dialogue among all
concerned parties should remain a priority. We reiterated our readiness to play a
constructive role, including through utilising ASEAN-led platforms such as the ARF
in promoting a conducive atmosphere for peaceful dialogue amongst the
concerned parties.

33

Developments in Myanmar
158.

We discussed the developments in Myanmar and expressed our deep concern
over the escalation of conflicts and humanitarian situation. We reaffirmed our
united position that the ASEAN Leaders’ Five-Point Consensus (5PC) remains our
main reference to address the political crisis in Myanmar. We also reaffirmed the
relevant Leaders’ decisions. We strongly condemned the continued acts of
violence against civilians and public facilities and called for immediate cessation,
and urged all parties involved to take concrete action to immediately halt
indiscriminate violence, denounce any escalation, exercise utmost restraint,
ensure the protection and safety of all civilians and create a conducive environment
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and inclusive national dialogue.

159.

We welcomed the progress of the provision of ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance
under Phase 1 (Life-Saving/COVID-19 response) and Phase 2 (Life-Sustaining) by
the AHA Centre in coordination with Myanmar to implement Point 4 of the ASEAN
Leaders’ 5PC. We noted that as of 10 July 2024, the total distributed value under
the Phase 2 response is around USD 1.88 million through the provision of food
(rice and food packages composed of rice, pulses, oil, salt) and non-food items
(family kits and personal hygiene kits) reaching the affected populations in Sagaing
Region, Magway Region, southern Shan State and Mon State. In this regard, we
commended the AHA Centre for its continuous efforts in delivering ASEAN
Humanitarian Assistance to Myanmar, and welcomed Thailand’s humanitarian
initiative, which are in line with the 5PC and coordinated with the ASEAN Chair
through the Special Envoy of the ASEAN Chair on Myanmar. We appreciated the
contributions by ASEAN Member States, external partners, and the private sector,
and called for all relevant parties in Myanmar to ensure the safe and transparent
delivery of humanitarian assistance, to the people in Myanmar without
discrimination, towards the more effective implementation of Point 4 of the 5PC.
Recognising the urgency of addressing the humanitarian emergency and the
implementation of the recommendations of the Joint Needs Assessment (JNA)
Report, we called for scaled-up additional financial support from the international
community for humanitarian assistance, including to ensure the safety and
livelihood of internally displaced persons (IDPs).

160.

We commended H.E. Mr. Alounkeo Kittikhoun, the Special Envoy of the ASEAN
Chair on Myanmar, for his efforts since his appointment in early 2024 as we
continue to promote progress in the implementation of the 5PC in its entirety. We
appreciated his efforts to continue reaching out to parties concerned in a
sustainable manner and are confident in his resolve to help the people of Myanmar
to achieve an inclusive and durable peaceful resolution that is Myanmar-owned
and -led for peace, security and stability in the region. In this regard, we welcomed
the convening of the informal consultation consisting of the current, previous, and
incoming Chairs of ASEAN on the implementation of the 5PC during the 57th
AMM/PMCs and Related Meetings and looked forward to the possible participation
of other interested ASEAN Member States at future sessions.

161.

We welcomed the appointment of H.E. Julie Bishop as the Special Envoy of the
UN Secretary-General on Myanmar and emphasised the need for close

34

coordination between the Special Envoy of the ASEAN Chair on Myanmar and the
Special Envoy of the UN Secretary-General on Myanmar.
162.

We will conduct our comprehensive review of the 5PC implementation and submit
our recommendation to the 44th and 45th ASEAN Summits.
Situation in Ukraine

163.

With regard to Ukraine, as for all nations, we continued to reaffirm our respect for
sovereignty, political independence, and territorial integrity. We reiterated our call
for compliance with the UN Charter and international law. We underlined the
importance of an immediate cessation of hostilities and the serious engagement in
a genuine dialogue for the peaceful resolution of the conflict. We supported the
efforts of the UN Secretary-General in the search for peaceful solution. We also
called for the facilitation of rapid, safe and unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance for those in need in Ukraine, and for the protection of civilians,
humanitarian personnel, and persons in vulnerable situations.
Situation in the Middle East

164.

We expressed grave concern over the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, which
has been exacerbated following the 7 October attacks. We condemned all attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, which have resulted in the alarming
number of casualties, particularly women and children, the restricted access to
food, water, and other basic needs, leading to the further deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza. We urged all relevant parties to accept the ceasefire
proposal as outlined in paragraph 2 of UN Security Council Resolution 2735. We
called for the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages, especially 23
ASEAN nationals, women, children, the sick and the elderly. We underscored the
importance of release from any arbitrary detention. We commended the efforts of
various ASEAN Member States in providing humanitarian assistance to Gaza, and
urged all ASEAN Member States and our external partners to continue providing
and facilitating such assistance for Gaza. We supported the UN Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the execution of its
mandate and the UN Senior Humanitarian and Reconstruction Coordinator for
Gaza to discharge her task effectively and efficiently, and to begin the work on
post-conflict reconstruction. We called for rapid, safe, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access to all those in need, including through increased capacity at
border crossings, including by sea. We called on all parties to the conflict to protect
civilians and to abide by international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We urged all parties concerned to work towards a peaceful resolution
to the conflict with a view to realising the two-State solution in accordance with
international law and the relevant UNSC and UNGA resolutions, including UNGA
resolution A/RES/ES-10/23 on the Admission of New Members to the UN dated 10
May 2024 which we all voted in favour. We took note, and some of us underlined
the importance of, the order on provisional measures issued by the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) on 26 January 2024. We acknowledge the Advisory Opinion
of the ICJ on 19 July 2024, which is of the opinion, among others, that the United
Nations, and especially the General Assembly, which requested this opinion, and
the Security Council, should consider the precise modalities and further action
35

required to bring to an end as rapidly as possible the unlawful presence of the State
of Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. In this context, we reaffirmed the
importance of upholding international law. We expressed great concern over the
escalation of tension in the Middle East and called on all parties concerned to
exercise self-restraint, avoid acts that may aggravate the situation, and resolve
differences through diplomacy and dialogue in the interest of maintaining peace
and stability in the region.
THE 58th ASEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS’ MEETING
165.

We looked forward to the convening of the 58th AMM, Post Ministerial Conferences,
26th APT Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, 15th EAS Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, and 32nd
ARF to be held in Malaysia, in 2025.

36

