ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

TABLE OF CONTENT

TABLE OF CONTENT

1

FOREWORD

2

EXCECUTIVE SUMMARY

3

AUSTRALIA

4

BANGLADESH

24

BRUNEI DARUSSALAM

51

CAMBODIA

74

CANADA

90

CHINA

112

EUROPEAN UNION

136

INDIA

150

INDONESIA

162

JAPAN

196

MYANMAR

215

NEW ZEALAND

221

PAKISTAN

239

THE PHILIPPINES

255

REPUBLIC OF KOREA (SOUTH KOREA)

283

RUSSIA

300

SINGAPORE

311

THAILAND

332

TIMOR LESTE

353

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

363

VIETNAM

411

1

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

FOREWORD

The

challenges

confronting
including

us

today,

escalating

Preventing Diplomacy. In doing so, the future role of
ARF shall promote greater synergy and collaboration
within an inclusive regional architecture.

geopolitical competition,
regional

conflicts,

the

In that vein, as the Chair of the 30th ARF, it is with

the

great honor to present the 24th edition of the ARF

COVID-19 pandemic, and

Annual Security Outlook (ARF ASO) for the year 2023.

the impact of climate

This document is a compilation of voluntary

change, have increased

contributions from ARF Participants, encapsulating

the complexity of the regional security landscape.

diverse perspectives and valuable insights of the ARF

Navigating these challenges becomes indispensable to

Participants on the contemporary regional landscape.

maintaining peace, stability, and prosperity in the

It also stands as a testament to their collective

Indo-Pacific region. Under the theme ASEAN Matters:

commitment

Epicentrum of Growth, Indonesia’s Chairmanship

cooperation, build trust, and ensure transparency in

determines to harness ASEAN and its mechanisms’ full

addressing complex and dynamic security challenges

strength to remain relevant in facing present

in our region.

repercussions

of

and

collective

efforts

to

foster

challenges and anticipating future ones.
In this regard, I would like to express my gratitude to
As one of the ASEAN-led mechanisms, the ASEAN

all the ARF Participants contributing to the publication

Regional Forum (ARF) has served as an important

of the 2023 ASO. Let us continue strengthening the

platform to build mutual trust and confidence among

ARF to remain adaptive and responsive to the

its 27 Participants for the last three decades, through

changing strategic environment in the region to

constructive dialogues and activities that strengthen

ensure a peaceful and prosperous Indo-Pacific region.

confidence-building efforts in the region. Yet, ARF
needs to be more responsive in addressing emerging
security challenges in the region. In light of this, as ARF
celebrates its 30th anniversary this year, there is a
shared aspiration among Participants for ARF to
evolve beyond its current focus on confidencebuilding measures and progress to the next stage of

Retno L.P. Marsudi
Chair of the 30th ASEAN Regional Forum
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia

2

EXCECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Annual Security Outlook is an annual publication document of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF).
This year's publication includes 21 voluntary submissions from 21 ARF Participants. It provides a
compilation of perspectives on the contemporary regional landscape, their national contributions to
regional and global peace and security as well as their expectations on the future role of the ARF. In
general, the Participants continue to reaffirm their commitment to enhance their efforts in the main
areas of cooperation of the ARF, which include counterterrorism and transnational crime, nonproliferation and disarmament, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, maritime security, and
security in the use of information and communication technology (ICT).
2023 ARF ASO have acknowledged that procuring security is becoming more challenging in today’s
dynamic and complicated environment. ARF Member States have noted that emerging security
challenges including the ongoing implications of COVID-19 pandemic, the persistence of
environmental degradation brought by climate change, and the evolving insidious forms of
transnational crimes have significant effect to regional and global security and stability. At the same
time, it has also been noted that traditional security threat emanating from ongoing great power
competition, geopolitical tensions, and militaristic rivalry is not an issue that should be easily
disregarded.
Marking this year as the 30th anniversary of ARF, ARF Participants have acknowledged the positive and
crucial role of ARF in strengthening security, promoting peace, and enhancing stability in the AsiaPacific region through multilateral cooperation. On ICT security, Participants have underlined
increasing strategic awareness and mutual understanding between states and relevant stakeholders.
On maritime cooperation, Participants emphasized that efforts to promoting greater interagency
cooperation and information sharing, including maritime domain awareness need to be enhanced. On
disaster relief and humanitarian assistance, Participants have provided practical support and expertise
and attempt to develop better coordination and integration. On non-proliferation and disarmament,
Participants highlighted the need to implement regional and international commitments and
framework. On counter-terrorism, Participants have done efforts that focus on practical training and
develop capacity of partners and stakeholders.
Despite an increasing hostile and dynamic environment, ARF Participants believe that ARF shall
harness its fullest strength and embody a more practical form of cooperation as a means for ARF to
address emerging security threats effectively and efficiently. In this regard, on the future role of the
ARF, Participants express the hope that ARF can accelerate its shift from its current stage, which mainly

3

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
revolved around Confidence Building Measures, into the next stage, which is preventive diplomacy
mechanism to effectively address emerging security threats. The increasing complexity of security
environment also calls for a broader cooperation and engagement, not only with regional security
architectures encompassing EAMF, EAS, and ADMM-Plus, but also with public and private
stakeholders.

4

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

AUSTRALIA
I.

Our Region
Australia and the countries of Southeast Asia have a long and proud history of cooperation
and partnership. As ASEAN’s first dialogue partner and now a Comprehensive Strategic
Partner, Australia supports ASEAN’s valuable contribution to the peace and stability of our
region. We work with ASEAN in an open and transparent partnership which upholds
ASEAN centrality and advances the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific. We believe that
all countries that seek to work with the region have a responsibility to engage
constructively with and through ASEAN. Australia’s engagement with the region is
underpinned by a commitment to protect and promote human rights and to achieve
gender equality.

II.

The Regional Security Environment
Our region is being reshaped. Australia shares ASEAN's wish for parties in the region to
consider how they can best contribute to upholding regional peace and stability, and avoid
the risk of miscalculation, including by de-escalating tensions. We share ASEAN’s vision of
a region where disputes are guided by international law and norms, not by power and
size. A region in which countries are not forced to choose sides, but work together to
shape the sort of region they want, and all countries benefit from a strategic equilibrium.
A region that is peaceful, prosperous, inclusive and predictable. Where our countries and
peoples can cooperate, trade and thrive, with inclusion and equity. Where we can
cooperate to build economic security and resilience for all countries, underpinned by our
commitment to strengthen the rules-based trading system. A regional order guided by the
ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP). We seek to navigate this period of change
together to create a region that is open, stable, prosperous and respectful of sovereignty.
Our collective efforts towards this vision are being tested, in particular by Russia’s illegal
and immoral invasion of Ukraine and the appalling violence and human rights violations
being perpetrated by the military regime in Myanmar.
Australia’s Defence Strategic Review, released in April 2023, found the challenges facing
our region continue to escalate, as the region is reshaped by a large-scale military buildup with no strategic reassurance. The Australian Government’s response to the review
will be the blueprint for Australia’s force posture and structure over the next decade, and
will serve to ensure the Australian Defence Force is equippedb for our current security

5

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
environment Australia is committed to countering disinformation that undermines the
region’s collective security, prosperity and sovereignty. Australia reaffirms our
commitment to working with partners to ensure ours is a region where all countries can
make their own sovereign choices and where people’s voices and values are heard,
respected and protected by the rule of law.

Australia reiterates the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait. We
remain concerned about the risks of miscalculation and we do not want to see any
unilateral change to the status quo.

Our diplomatic partnership with India, Japan and the United States through the Quad
reinforces and supports our respective visions for an open, stable and prosperous region,
respectful of sovereignty and with ASEAN at its centre. Quad partners are all ASEAN
dialogue partners, and the Quad’s positive and practical agenda is responding to the
region’s most pressing challenges including health security; climate change and clean
energy; infrastructure and connectivity; critical and emerging technology; cyber security;
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief; space; maritime security; and counterterrorism.

1. Ukraine
Australia has responded comprehensively to Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of
Ukraine. Russia’s invasion represents a flagrant breach of the UN Charter, including
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. It renders stark Australia’s
interest in a region – and a world – where no one country dominates, and no one
country is dominated. Russia’s invasion undermines the ASEAN principles of noninterference and respect for sovereignty and international law, as set out in the AOIP.
It also violates the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), to which
Russia and Ukraine are party.

Russia's invasion of Ukraine continues to further exacerbate the global food crisis.
Russia has destroyed Ukraine’s agricultural land and facilities used for storing,
processing and exporting staple foods. Its blockade of Black Sea ports has disrupted
Ukraine’s growing season and its capacity to export agricultural commodities. Russia’s

6

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
actions have caused significant and long-lasting disruptions to exports, increasing
food, energy and fertiliser costs.

Australia continues to closely monitor the humanitarian crisis unfolding in Ukraine.
There are more than eight million Ukrainians seeking refuge in Europe and around 5.4
million Ukrainians internally displaced. Russia continues to target Ukraine’s civilian
infrastructure, leaving millions of Ukrainians without power, heating, clean water or
adequate health care. We stand with Ukraine to mourn the tragic loss of life, and
violence inflicted, including conflict-related sexual violence.

Australia has supported Ukraine by committing to provide more than A$680 million
in assistance, including more than A$500 million in military assistance and A$65
million in humanitarian assistance. We have also imposed a comprehensive suite of
measures against Russia in response to its invasion, including targeted financial
sanctions, import bans on Russian oil, refined petroleum products, coal, gas, gold, and
export bans on alumina, bauxite and certain luxury goods. We continue to support
international legal mechanisms to hold Russia accountable for its actions in Ukraine.
Russia is responsible for this war and the human and economic suffering it is causing.

2. Myanmar
Australia remains deeply concerned about the worsening situation in Myanmar and
the appalling violence and human rights violations being perpetrated by the military
regime, including airstrikes against civilians, arbitrary arrest and detentions, and
allegations of torture and deaths in custody. The military coup in Myanmar has
reversed years of democratic, economic and development gains and plunged the
country into a deep political and humanitarian crisis. Australia continues to urge the
regime to end violence against civilians, engage in dialogue, release those unjustly
detained, and allow safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance. Australia
strongly supports ASEAN’s leadership as a key element in responding to the Myanmar
crisis and is dismayed that the regime continues to disregard its commitments under
the ASEAN Five Point Consensus.

After careful deliberation and consultation, Australia imposed additional autonomous
sanctions on 1 February 2023 on those directly responsible for the military coup and

7

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ongoing repression and violence in Myanmar. This includes targeted financial
sanctions and travel bans on 16 individuals who were responsible for the coup and
the ongoing violence and oppression of the military regime, and targeted financial
sanctions on two military-controlled entities. Australia will continue to monitor the
regime's actions. We will be looking to see improvements for the people of Myanmar
and moves towards the restoration of democracy, including credible elections.

Australia has consistently called for, and remains committed to, accountability for war
crimes, human rights violations and abuses, and atrocities committed in Myanmar,
including those committed against the Rohingya and other ethnic groups.

Australia will continue to support the people of Myanmar through provision of
sustained development and humanitarian assistance (A$120.6 million in 2022-23).
Our assistance is targeted toward meeting immediate needs and building community
resilience to respond to future challenges, with a focus on the most vulnerable.
Australia continues to support the promotion of peace and democratic values. Our
assistance is delivered through trusted partners including the United Nations and nongovernment organisations. Australia does not provide any direct funding to the
Myanmar military regime and we take proactive steps to ensure Australia’s assistance
does not provide legitimacy to the regime.

3. Climate Change
Climate change is an existential threat to our health, our environment, our economy,
and our national security. Australia recognises the urgency of the climate crisis. We
are taking strong action to decarbonise our economy and we are working with
countries to scale up global action.

Recognising the importance of ambitious action by all, the Australian Government
submitted an updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in June 2022, as one
of its first actions as a new Government. The NDC strengthens our 2030 target to 43%
below 2005 levels and reaffirms our net zero emissions by 2050 target. In September
2022, the Australian Government passed the Climate Change Act 2022, enshrining
these targets in legislation and providing policy and investment certainty. Australia
has announced A$2 billion in climate finance for 2020-25, a doubling of Australia’s

8

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
2015-2020 pledge. The Australian Government has increased support for our partners
in Southeast Asia to accelerate the region’s transition to net-zero, and we will
continue to work with ASEAN on energy transition issues through our Comprehensive
Strategic Partnership.

The Australian Government is deeply committed to taking real, significant and genderresponsive climate action at home and establishing Australia as a climate leader
internationally. We recognise that climate change is the single greatest threat to the
livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the Pacific. In July 2022, we
joined Pacific leaders in declaring that the Pacific is facing a climate emergency,
underscoring the urgency to scale-up ambition and implementation to limit global
warming to 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels.

The Australian Government is proud to join the Pacific family in co-sponsoring the
Vanuatu-led UN General Assembly resolution requesting an International Court of
Justice advisory opinion on climate change. Acting on climate change is a shared
responsibility for all states. Our co-sponsorship underscores Australia’s commitment
to supporting Pacific climate leadership. We are working in partnership with Pacific
islands countries to secure hosting rights for, and successfully deliver, COP31 in
Australia in 2026. Australia seeks to deliver a COP that brings profile to the unique
climate challenges faced by the region, and to accelerate global action to address
them.

Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine has had profound effects, including
on the global energy market. The invasion has also had severe impacts on energy
affordability, with the World Economic Forum finding that the conflict has nearly
doubled household energy costs worldwide, underlining the risk of over-dependence
on fossil fuels from limited sources. Robust supply chains can contribute to energy
security and support acceleration of the clean energy transition. Renewable energy,
supported by storage and transmission, is secure energy.

We need to accelerate the energy transition and develop new and resilient supply
chains for distributed energy production and storage, battery electric vehicles, clean
hydrogen and ammonia and renewable marine, aviation, and land transport fuels. By

9

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
working together, we can help drive a more rapid adoption of new technologies and
drive down emissions by giving greater confidence that supply chains can respond to
increasing demand.

APS Net Zero 2030 is the Government’s policy for the Australian Public Service (APS)
to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2030. Australia also joined the
Net Zero Government Initiative, launched at COP27 in November 2022, which
commits countries to achieving net zero emissions from government operations and
underscores the leadership role of governments in catalysing economy-wide climate
actions. Further information is available at APS Net Zero Emissions by 2030 |
Department of Finance.

The 2023 Defence Strategic Review considered climate change as a national security
issue. The Australian Government endorsed recommendations to develop national
resilience and response measures at local levels for adverse climate changes and to
accelerate the Australian Defence transition to clean energy to increase national
resilience.

4. South China Sea
Australia depends on a region that is governed by accepted rules and norms, where
all countries can cooperate, trade and thrive. The South China Sea is a vital waterway
for the entire international community. All States have a substantial interest in peace
and stability, freedom of navigation and overflight, unimpeded trade, and adherence
to international law, particularly the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS).

We support a region which is peaceful, stable and where the rights of sovereign states
are respected. We express serious concern about destabilising actions in the South
China Sea, including: the dangerous and coercive use of coast guard vessels and
‘maritime militia’; ongoing militarisation of disputed features; and efforts to disrupt
other countries’ resource exploitation activities. UNCLOS provides the comprehensive
legal framework for all activities in the oceans and seas. It provides the legal
foundation for peace, security and stability in the maritime domain. Australia will
continue to exercise our rights and freedoms under international law, including

10

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
freedom of navigation and overflight, and respect the rights of others to do the same.
All claims in the South China Sea should be made and resolved in accordance with
international law, particularly UNCLOS. Where claims have already been subject to
binding legal judgments, the parties have an obligation to abide by them.

Australia is not a party to ASEAN negotiations with China on a Code of Conduct for the
South China Sea. However, we have clear interests in ensuring an open maritime
environment and upholding international law, particularly UNCLOS. Australian
considers that any Code of Conduct should: not prejudice the interests of third parties
or the rights of all States under international law, particularly UNCLOS; reinforce
existing inclusive regional architecture; and strengthen States’ commitments to cease
actions that would complicate or escalate disputes, notably the militarisation of
disputed features.

5. DPRK
The DPRK launched an unprecedented number of ballistic missiles in 2022,
threatening the security of our partners, including Japan and the Republic of Korea,
and destabilising the Indo-Pacific region. The DPRK’s continued missile launches in
2023, including of intercontinental ballistic missiles, and reports that it remains ready
to conduct a nuclear test, are deeply concerning. Additionally, North Korea is
conducting increasingly sophisticated cyber attacks against financial institutions and
cryptocurrency exchanges to raise illicit funds for its Weapons of Mass Destruction
(WMD) and ballistic missile programs. The DPRK’s behaviour, in clear violation of
multiple UN Security Council resolutions, undermines the stability of our region and
is a serious challenge to international non-proliferation efforts.

Australia has joined many other countries in calling for the UN Security Council to
respond to the DPRK’s escalating behaviour. Australia will continue to take action
against the DPRK until it takes clear steps towards complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearisation. This includes regular deployments of military assets,
alongside partners, to monitor and deter shipments of sanctioned goods to the DPRK.
We join the broader international community in urging the DRPK to change course,
cease all provocations, and make a sustained commitment to meaningful talks with
the United States and the Republic of Korea.

11

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

6. Health Security
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted how disease outbreaks can threaten lives and
livelihoods, with serious impacts on economies and health systems, which
disproportionately affect individuals in vulnerable situations and those facing
intersecting inequalities. Australia has been a responsive and reliable partner for
Southeast Asian countries throughout the pandemic, including by providing more
than 49 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines to Southeast Asia, including Timor-Leste.
While the region has now moved beyond the acute phase of COVID-19, there
continues to be strong demand from ASEAN countries for health cooperation with
Australia, including to reduce risks associated with emerging infectious diseases.

Australia will improve health outcomes and promote regional prosperity and stability
through the Partnerships for a Healthy Region initiative, a new five-year program to
be implemented from 2023 to 2027. This initiative will support technical expertise to
build resilience in our region, and provide funding for research and development of
vaccines, drugs and diagnostics for diseases that affect Southeast Asia and the Pacific.

As co-chair of the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM)-Plus Experts’ Working
Group on Military Medicine, alongside Brunei Darussalam, Australia supports
practical military medicine cooperation in military operations other than war, with a
strong focus on pandemics and health security in the region.

III.

National Security and Defend Policy
Strategic competition in the region operates in several domains – economic, diplomatic,
strategic and military. All arms of Australia’s national power are required to address these
challenges, to deter aggression and coercion, and to maintain peace.

Australia is committed to an open, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific that respects
sovereignty and operates by agreed rules, standards and laws. We are focused on
transparent and consistent narratives in the region to counter negative perceptions being
utilised to manipulate societies and threaten democratic values. In pursuing these goals,
Australia remains unwavering in its support for ASEAN centrality, with ASEAN‑led

12

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
mechanisms pivotal in promoting a peaceful, inclusive and resilient Indo-Pacific, free from
coercion, along with full implementation of the Women, Peace and Security agenda.

Similarly, the Pacific Islands Forum, of which Australia is part, is central to protecting our
shared interests in the region. As a member of the Pacific family our priority is to ensure
the Blue Pacific remains peaceful, prosperous and equipped to respond to the challenges
of our times. It is the view of the Pacific Islands Forum, and our view, that the Pacific family
is responsible for Pacific security, and that regional security is enhanced when we work
together, when we respond to Pacific priorities, and when we respect Pacific institutions.

We are also deeply committed to transparency. Australia reports data on its military
expenditure to the UN in accordance with the UN Standardised Instrument for Reporting
Military Expenditures, which can be accessed at UNARM (un-arm.org). Detail on the total
number of personnel in the Australian Defence Force is published in the Department of
Defence Annual Reports, available at: https://www.defence.gov.au/about/informationdisclosures/annual-reports. The 2023 Defence Strategic Review has provided
transparency in Australia’s plans to invest in military capabilities, as one element of our
statecraft, to ensure we are postured for the current strategic environment.

1. 2023 Defence Strategic Review
The independent 2023 Defence Strategic Review is Australia’s most substantial
defence review since the Second World War. The Government’s response to the
Review will inform Australia’s strategic policy, defence planning and resourcing over
the coming decades, and will include the delivery of a National Defence Strategy in
2024. The Review recognises that investing in our regional partnerships – including
ASEAN – is essential, with enhanced diplomacy at the forefront of our efforts.
Australia will use all levers of statecraft to deter conflict and maintain strategic
balance, including by supporting ASEAN centrality, contributing with our partners to
the maintenance of the global rules-based order and encouraging major powers to
manage competition responsibly.

In implementing the Review, Australia will strengthen its defence capabilities in a
responsible and transparent manner. The Australian Government will build a fully
integrated and more capable Australian Defence Force (ADF) that will work seamlessly

13

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
across the five domains. Strengthening Australia’s defence capabilities – and working
with partners to invest in their capabilities – is a prudent response to the changing
strategic environment.

2. AUKUS
Australia is committed to supporting a region that is stable, peaceful, prosperous and
respectful of sovereignty. AUKUS complements Australia’s multi-faceted engagement
with our region, and our commitment to ASEAN centrality and the AOIP.

As a trilateral technology sharing partnership with the UK and US, AUKUS is one
element of Australia’s approach to addressing a more challenging strategic
environment. Complemented by Australia’s commitment to diplomacy, our new
defence capabilities will help protect our maritime approaches, deter threats in our
region and help ensure a strategic equilibrium is maintained in the Indo-Pacific.
Australia believes these enhanced defence capabilities will contribute to collective
security and lower the risk of conflict. Transparent engagement regarding defence
acquisitions is critical for reassurance and building a stable, predictable and
prosperous region.

In March 2023, AUKUS leaders announced the pathway for Australia to acquire
conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines. Our acquisition of nuclearpowered submarines is in the context of a strong and longstanding commitment to
non-proliferation, will be undertaken in full compliance with our obligations under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Treaty of
Rarotonga, and will not undermine the Treaty of Southeast Asia Nuclear WeaponsFree Zone (SEANWFZ Treaty). Australia has a proud record of leadership in the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. Australia will continue to engage with
the IAEA on a non-proliferation approach for our nuclear-powered submarine
program that sets the highest non-proliferation standard.

3. National Contributions to Regional Security
a.

Counter-Terrorism and Countering Violent Extremism

14

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Australia works closely with our ARF partners to counter terrorism and violent
extremism in all its forms, including through the Intersessional Meeting on
Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime (ISM-CTTC).
In July 2022, Australia co-chaired the inaugural ASEAN-Australia Dialogue on
Counter Terrorism, as envisaged in the ASEAN Plus Australia Senior Officials’
Meeting on Transnational Crime (SOMTC + Australia) Workplan. Australia was
pleased to co-chair the second ASEAN-Australia Dialogue on Counter
Terrorism in May 2023.

As Co-Chairs of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF) Countering
Violent Extremism (CVE) Working Group, Australia and Indonesia developed
a Gender Policy Toolkit. Australia is funding the Global Centre for Cooperative
Security to roll out practical training on the Gender Policy toolkit to policy
makers and practitioners.

Australia continues to partner with the Southeast Asian Network of Civil
Society Organisations, and is working to develop civil society organisations’
capacity to partner more effectively with regional governments and the
private sector on CVE.

Australia has also been a member of the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group
on Counter-Terrorism since its inception in 2011.

b.

Non-Proliferation, Counter Proliferation, arms control and disarmament
Australia is committed to redoubling its efforts towards the goal of a world
without nuclear weapons and to strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. This year marks 50 years since Australia ratified the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and we remain unwavering in
our support for this cornerstone treaty. Australia is committed to
mainstreaming gender in arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation.
The NPT has continued to make a vital contribution to international security,
through: driving nuclear disarmament; preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons; and ensuring that the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy and
technology are available to all. The near consensus outcome of the NPT

15

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Review Conference in August 2022, with only Russia objecting, demonstrated
the strength of commitment to the NPT.

Australia welcomes progress in our region toward universalisation of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) with ratifications from TimorLeste and Tuvalu in 2022 and Solomon Islands in January 2023. Australia
continues to support entry into force and universalisation of the treaty,
including through the CTBT Group of Friends Ministerial Meeting chaired by
Australian Foreign Minister Wong together with Japanese Prime Minister
Kishida in September 2022, and the annual UN General Assembly resolution
with co-leads New Zealand and Mexico.

In March 2023, Australia co-chaired with the Philippines the second ARF
Nuclear Risk Reduction Workshop in Brisbane. The workshop underscored the
role that risk reduction measures can play in disarmament processes and the
critical importance of reducing the risk of nuclear weapons use. Work has
been underway since 2020 on an ARF Nuclear Risk Reduction Guidance
Document that could be considered by ARF Ministers.

Australia was pleased to bring the work of the International Partnership for
Nuclear Disarmament Verification (IPNDV) into the region by hosting, for the
first time, the annual plenary meeting in December 2022. More than 70
experts representing 20 countries gathered in Sydney to advance practical
and effective nuclear disarmament mechanisms.

We also work with Indonesia, Japan, the Republic of Korea and others to build
practical safeguard capabilities through the Asia-Pacific Safeguards Network.

Australia’s collaboration with ASEAN partners, such as the Philippines,
contributed to a successful Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) Review
Conference in December 2022. A new BWC working group will be an
opportunity to advance cross-regional cooperation.

16

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
In 2022, Australia partnered with Malaysia through the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapon’s (OPCW) Mentorship/Partnership Program.
The partnership culminated in a co-hosted conference, with the OPCW, on
Chemical Weapons Convention implementation (CWC) for Pacific Island
States where Director General OPCW delivered the keynote address. The
program will serve as the model for advancing cooperation on CWC
implementation in the region.

Over the past year, Australia has been proactive in its contribution to the UN
Open Ended Working Group on Conventional Ammunition. The diversion of
conventional ammunition to unauthorized recipients remains a serious
concern, including to organised criminal groups and terrorists, as well as their
contribution to the intensity and duration of armed conflict, armed violence,
including gender-based armed violence.

c. Transnational

Crime

(People

Smuggling

and

Human

Trafficking;

Transnational, Serious and Organised Crime; Illicit drugs; Cybercrime)
Australia works closely with ASEAN partners to deal with transnational crime
threats in the region. This includes operational engagement, information
sharing and capacity building. Deterring and prosecuting the criminals who
profit from these activities is one of Australia’s highest priorities in the region.
We continue to engage on key issues through the ARF Intersessional Meeting
on Counter Terrorism and Transnational Crime, the ASEAN Plus Australia
Senior Officials’ Meeting on Transnational Crime (SOMTC) and ASEAN Senior
Officials on Drug Matters (ASOD). We provide technical assistance and other
support through activities under these mechanisms, as well as programs such
as the Mekong-Australia Partnership on Transnational Crime (MAP-TNC) and
ASEAN-Australia Political Security Partnership.

Australia seeks to disrupt and dismantle smuggling and trafficking networks
through information-sharing, coordinated action and joint operations.
Australia is co-chair, with Indonesia, of the Bali Process on People Smuggling,
Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime. A successful Eighth
Ministerial Conference of the Bali Process, and Third Government and

17

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Business Forum was held in Adelaide, Australia, on 10 February 2023. During
the Conference, Bali Process Members endorsed the 2023 Adelaide Strategy
for Cooperation, which includes strong regional commitments to: combat
trafficking into online scam operations; address the impacts of technology on
irregular migration; and further strengthen Bali Process engagement with civil
society and the private sector.

Australia continues to counter human trafficking in Southeast Asia through
the ASEAN-Australia Counter-Trafficking program (ASEAN-ACT), an A$80
million investment until 2028. ASEAN-ACT supports ASEAN Member States to
implement and report on their obligations under the ASEAN Convention
against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children. In addition,
Australia is supporting the Tripartite Action to Enhance the Contribution of
Labour Migration to Growth and Development in ASEAN (TRIANGLE in
ASEAN), an A$24 million commitment until 2027, delivered in partnership
with the Government of Canada and implemented by the ILO. TRIANGLE in
ASEAN promotes safe and fair labour migration in the region and works to
protect and promote the rights of migrant workers and reduce their risk of
being trafficked.

The global illicit drug trade presents a significant threat to the stability and
security of the region. The Australian illicit drug market remains a lucrative
and attractive target for transnational serious and organised crime groups
and the Southeast Asian region is used by these groups as both a source and
transit location. Crystal methamphetamine (ice) and its precursors continue
to be of great concern for Australia, though heroin, cocaine and synthetic
opioids also remain a threat. Australian Government agencies work closely
with regional and international counterparts to prevent and disrupt the
manufacture and trafficking of illicit drugs in the region, including through
joint operations, intelligence sharing and capacity building.

Australia is committed to continuing to work closely with our regional
partners in the UN Ad Hoc Committee on Cybercrime, to develop a long-term,
future-proof cybercrime convention that is consistent with the existing

18

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
international legal framework to address cross-border crimes. Australia’s
engagement in the Ad-Hoc Committee on Cybercrime is also reflective of the
focus and priority Australia places on combatting online child abuse, as well
as technology-facilitated gender-based violence. Australia is committed to
working with Member States to find consensus on these crimes to better
protect children worldwide. Under our SOMTC work plan, Australia cochaired with Singapore an ASEAN cyber capacity building workshop which
considered these and other cyber issues exacerbated by the COVID pandemic.

d. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) and Disaster Risk
Reduction
The Indo-Pacific region is experiencing disasters of increasing frequency and
severity, including cyclones, floods, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. In
the face of increasing climate and disaster risk, building resilience is more
important than ever. Australia’s long-standing commitment to the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 is at the core of our
regional engagement to lessen the impact of future shocks. In 2022, Australia
supported Indonesia’s hosting of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk
Reduction, hosted the Asia-Pacific Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction (September 2022) and is co-facilitating with Indonesia the Political
Declaration on the Midterm Review of the Sendai Framework in May 2023.

Australia is committed to accelerating progress in line with the Sendai
commitments by supporting anticipatory and locally-led solutions that
recognise, respect and strengthen leadership and decision-making by local
and national actors, and ensuring the most vulnerable are included in
resilience-building efforts.

Australia provides practical support and expertise to increase regional
engagement and cooperation on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief
(HADR) through ASEAN-led mechanisms and with regional and international
partners. In 2023, through the Australia Assists program, we are providing a
range of humanitarian specialists to support ASEAN Member States, including
in Indonesia, Lao PDR and the Philippines, and two deployments to work with

19

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the AHA Centre, to assist with training and the evaluation of ASEAN
emergency response and assessment systems.

e. Women, Peace and Security
Australia is a committed global champion of the Women, Peace and Security
(WPS) Agenda. It is a commitment shared by governments in our region, and
ASEAN, and we are working actively together to progress the Agenda.
Launched in 2022, the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action on Women Peace and
Security is a critical step in ASEAN Member States making progress on their
commitment to gender equality and the human rights of women and girls,
along with promoting sustainable peace and security in the region.
Australia is working with ASEAN and other partners to design and deliver
initiatives that:
o

support women peace mediator networks in Southeast Asia and the
Pacific;

o

strengthen channels for civil society engagement on WPS across Asia,
the Pacific and the Great Lakes Region of Africa;

o

provide technical support to governments to develop, implement and
review national action plans and the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action
on WPS;

o

develop research, communication tools and digital platforms for
engagement to support advocacy and accountability;

o

support

women’s

participation,

leadership,

inclusion

and

empowerment in countries facing dire peace, security and
humanitarian challenges; and
o

enhance exchanges of survivor-centred and gender-responsive
procedures,

tools,

learning

and

systems

amongst

justice

practitioners.
Australia also supports bilateral and regional programming on WPS,
including on cybersecurity and countering violent extremism. This includes
support through the ASEAN-Australia Counter Trafficking program, through
which capacity building activities focus on victim identification, protection
and support, as well as the protection of persons in vulnerable situations.

20

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Australia is attentive to the interconnections of the WPS agenda with both
the Climate, Peace and Security and space security agendas.

f.

Maritime Security
As a maritime nation, Australia is committed to working closely with regional
partners and through international forums to enhance maritime security and
promote habits of cooperation in the region. In the 2021-22 ARF
intersessional year, we co-hosted workshops on Maritime Law Enforcement
Cooperation with the European Union and Vietnam and on Law of the Sea
and Fisheries with India and Indonesia. We hope to co-host additional
workshops on maritime issues in the 2023-24 ARF intersessional year.
Australia is also working with regional partners to enhance maritime domain
awareness; combat illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing; disrupt
maritime transnational crime threats; uphold international law, including
UNCLOS; improve maritime safety; sustainably manage marine resources and
respond to marine environmental challenges. In 2021, Australia and India cohosted the Fifth East Asia Summit (EAS) Workshop on Maritime Security, and
in 2022 Australia, Singapore and India co-hosted an EAS Workshop on Marine
Debris. Australia continues to strongly support the Expanded ASEAN Maritime
Forum (EAMF), including co-sponsoring initiatives with the Philippines to
institutionalise the EAMF that were adopted by ASEAN Member States in
March 2023.

Australia has worked closely with partners to support successful regional
efforts to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea, including through the
Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Asia. As a member of the Heads of Asian Coast Guard Agencies
Meeting (HACGAM), Australia supports HACGAM initiatives to bolster
regional civil maritime security by promoting greater agency-to-agency
cooperation and promoting information sharing to achieve mutual outcomes.
Australia also contributes as a member of the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working
Group on Maritime Security, a key mechanism for discussion and exchange of
views on maritime security in the Indo-Pacific.

21

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
g. Cyber Security
Australia recognises that cyberspace and critical technology play an important
role in our vision for an open, stable and prosperous region. Australia’s Cyber
and Critical Tech Cooperation Program contributes to capacity building efforts
in our region, including ASEAN countries, to harness the opportunities of
cyberspace and critical technology, while mitigating the risks. Australia
continues to deliver activities that focus on: promoting the framework of
responsible state behaviour in cyberspace; cyber security and incident
response capabilities; promoting best practice use of technology for
economic, sustainable and inclusive development; advocating and protecting
human rights online; and also to promote regional coordination on critical
technology standards, telecommunications, and broader cyber and
technology resilience.

Australia is committed to multilateral cooperation in support of agreed rules
and norms, and to help address global challenges. This involves progress to
enhance strategic awareness and discussion of cyber issues in our region,
including through the ARF Open-Ended Study Group on Confidence Building
Measures to Reduce the Risk of Conflict Stemming from the Use of ICTs
(OESG) and the ARF Intersessional Meeting on Security of and in the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies (ISM on ICT Security).
Australia also continues to co-sponsor and manage the ARF Points of Contact
Directory on ICT Security (ARF Cyber POC Directory) with Malaysia. Australia
also contributes as a member of the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group on
Cyber Security, which supports increased defence cooperation on regional
cyber security challenges.

Australia strongly advocates for a global framework of peace and stability in
cyberspace. In 2022, the United Nations General Assembly First Committee
Open-Ended Working Group on security of and in the use of information and
communications technologies 2021-2025 (UN OEWG on cyber) adopted its
first consensus Annual Progress Report – providing guidance to keep
advancing the process, confirming shared understanding on priority areas and
recommending next steps to be taken in the future sessions.

22

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Australia demonstrates its commitment in implementing the framework of
responsible state behaviour in cyberspace by continuing to support and
promote the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research’s (UNIDIR)
website for countries to self-assess against the Survey of National
Implementation of the UN Group of Governmental Experts (GGE)
recommendations. Australia will continue to look for opportunities to expand
this work (including through capacity building) and continue to promote
elaboration of best-practice guidance and practical assistance to help States
implement the framework of responsible state behaviour.

Australia is concerned by the increased scale and severity of malicious cyber
activity occurring in the region and we are committed to ensuring
international law is upheld in cyberspace. Australia collaborates
internationally to coordinate our responses when these rules on responsible
state behaviour are broken, including attributing malicious cyber activity and
imposing sanctions if necessary. Australia believes that an effective cyber
deterrence posture is an essential pillar to the prevention of malicious cyber
activity occurring in the region.

Australia is especially focused on efforts to enhance regional implementation
of international law and agreed norms of responsible state behaviour in
cyberspace. Australia supports – with Singapore and the Netherlands – Cyber
Law International to conduct ASEAN-wide seminars and alumni workshops on
the application of international law in cyberspace, tailored to the regional
context.

Australia is reviewing its domestic and international policy settings for a new
2023–2030 Cyber Security Strategy. Priority areas for the new Cyber Security
Strategy include Australia’s ongoing international cyber engagement and
capacity building efforts based on tangible outcomes.

23

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
h. Space Security
Space is increasingly vital for Australia’s security and prosperity and plays a
critical role in supporting an open, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific that is
respectful of sovereignty.

Australia supports the creation of international rules and norms of
responsible behaviour in space to help deter and disrupt behaviour that poses
a risk to international peace, security and stability. Mutually agreed and
consistently applied rules and norms will increase global cooperation and
predictability and reduce the risk of miscalculation between states.

Australia is committed to fostering respectful cooperation with ASEAN
countries and advocating for rules and norms that support sovereign decision
making. Through bilateral and multilateral engagements (including the UN
General Assembly, UN Disarmament Commission and the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space), Australia seeks to enhance the capabilities of
ASEAN partners, deepen relationships and help identify and support regional
priorities regarding civil and peaceful uses of space, along with the prevention
of conflict.

IV.

Role of ASEAN Regional Forum
ASEAN centrality underpins Australia’s engagement in the region and Australia remains
committed to continuing its longstanding active engagement with ASEAN regional security
architecture, including the ARF, EAS and the ADMM-Plus, all of which provide a structure
for regional engagement and enable space for dialogue and for the peaceful discussion of
differences. As the region’s longest-established forum for security dialogue and
cooperation, we consider the ARF an important mechanism for constructive dialogue and
practical, working-level cooperation on regional security challenges. Australia will
continue to engage constructively in the ARF, including by co-chairing ARF work streams
and delivering workshops and seminars. We support Indonesia’s proposal as ASEAN Chair
in 2023 to brief EAS meetings on developments in the ARF intersessionally to enable
greater information sharing around developments on confidence building measures.

24

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

BANGLADESH
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
The world is presently in flux with emerging challenges, causing nations to re-evaluate
their alignments and alliances while searching for new ones to help them counter those
challenges. Moreover, parallel to traditional security threats, the world increasingly
appears to be preoccupied with non-traditional challenges, including food security, water
security, energy security, cyber security, climate security and most recently, the
unprecedented challenge of the global COVID 19 pandemic.

Like all global players, Bangladesh is also faced with a multitude of challenges: further
aggravated by the armed conflict in Ukraine on the back of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Nevertheless, the country has come a long way since it picked the pieces of a war-ravaged
land and started its journey as a sovereign and independent country, inspired by the
dream of the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman for a "Sonar
Bangla"- Golden Bengal. Today, this dream is within reach of the people of this country:
in February 2021, it received confirmation from the UN for the second time in a row that
it successfully fulfilled all the criteria for graduating from an LDC into a developing country.
This remarkable achievement is testimony to the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina, who steered the course of inclusive and sustainable economic growth over the
past decade, as well as political stability. As a result, the country remains on course to
fulfilling the vision to transform into a developed economy by 2041.

Bangladesh's guiding foreign policy principle, "Friendship to All, Malice towards None",
was enunciated by the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
Bangladesh puts special effort into maintaining balanced, friendly and harmonious
relations with all nations of the world, following non-alignment as a general guiding
paradigm. Securing her national interests, preserving her territorial integrity and
promoting sustainable socio-economic well-being of her people are the basic security
imperatives for Bangladesh.

Bangladesh would like to emphasize on the following:

Geopolitical and geostrategic location advantage: Bangladesh is uniquely located as the
link between two of the most vibrant economic regions of the world, Southeast Asia and

25

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
South Asia and seeks to promote itself as a hub of road, rail, riverine, maritime and air
connectivity for the landlocked countries/regions of South Asia to the outside world as
well as to the continental countries of Southeast Asia. Bangladesh strongly believes that
fully harnessing the potentials of the Bay of Bengal and smooth and seamless connectivity
could help to transform the condition of the region

Digitalization and Cyber Security: Bangladesh has identified digitalization as a means of
transforming society and achieving its target of sustainable economic development. The
Digital Bangladesh concept envisions delivering possible services to the people's
doorsteps through the digital platform. Bangladesh is also aware of the need to ensure
Cyber Security and has enacted Digital Security Act 2018 and established a Digital Security
Agency to ensure Cyber security, including data protection.

Terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism: Terrorism and indiscriminate violence
spawned through its tentacles are the major threats to global peace and development.
Bangladesh has "Zero Tolerance" for terrorism and has enacted laws and taken effective
action against all forms of terrorism. Bangladesh firmly adheres to its commitment not to
allow its territory to be used for terrorist activities against any other country.

Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding: Bangladesh is an active, leading and proud partner of
UN Peacekeeping and Peace Building activities. Bangladesh remains committed to fully
engaging in this process as an integral element in maintaining global security. Bangladeshi
peacekeepers, including women contingents, have been serving with distinction in some
of the most challenging global locations.

General and Complete Disarmament: Commitment to general and complete
disarmament is an essential pillar of Bangladesh's foreign policy, as enshrined in the
Constitution of Bangladesh. Bangladesh is signatory to most of the major international
treaties and agreements of disarmament and non-proliferation and remains actively
engaged in the UN disarmament process.

Climate Change: Global Warming and the impact of Climate Change has emerged as one
of the significant challenges of the world today. Countries like Bangladesh are emerging
as the worst victims of Climate Change, but Bangladesh has taken some notable initiatives

26

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
to minimize and mitigate the impact of climate change. Bangladesh has also achieved
remarkable success in disaster preparedness and disaster management. However, the
country is increasingly witnessing unpredictable weather patterns and multiple and
intense natural disasters resulting from the effects of global warming.

Rohingya issue: The issue of the 1.1 million Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals has
become one of the major security challenges for Bangladesh. This has placed a huge
burden on the economy, ecology and social security of Bangladesh. Bangladesh feels that
unless the Rohingya refugees are repatriated from Bangladesh, this will have major
security implications for the country and the entire region.

The COVID 19 pandemic: Bangladesh, with its 160 million population, has been quite
successful in containing the successive waves of the pandemic by adopting a prudent
policy of "balancing lives and livelihoods." Therefore, Bangladesh suggests that an ARF
Fund be created to support economies recovering from the impact of the pandemic.
Bangladesh also firmly believes that vaccines should be made available as a global public
good for the benefit of all humankind.

II.

Bangladesh Overview of National Security
1. Bangladesh's concept of national security is embedded in its long struggle for justice,
equality, sovereignty and emancipation and the nine-month-long war of liberation in
1971. Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman steered the
nation's course with the aim of eliminating inequality, injustice, and oppression from
society. Inspired by this vision and enduring legacy, our National Security policy keeps
global, regional and national imperatives in mind along with focusing on the country's
geostrategic location. The term 'National Security' for Bangladesh implies a condition
where all security imperatives relating to politics, military, economic, sociological,
technology, environment, legal, education, demography, health, food, water, energy
and ethical aspects would guarantee pursuit of happiness, political stability,
economic freedom, religious freedom, ethnic and communal harmony, equality,
equity and above all capability of defending the country from external and internal
traditional and non-traditional security threats.

27

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
2. The ripple-effect of global and regional security threats substantially impacts our
national security. Although Bangladeshis are renowned for their resilience, the
unprecedented natural and man-made disasters from within and its border
substantially affect the citizens' security. The dense population, shrinking land space,
and scarce resources continually threaten her people and society. The influx of over a
million Myanmar refugees has compounded the threat to our national security in
recent years. Millions of Bangladeshi expatriates in some of the most conflict-prone
areas like the Middle East are also a great concern. The effects of international
terrorism, violent extremism, radicalization, trans-border crime, illegal migration,
human, drug, illicit arms, fake currency trafficking, and cybercrimes are also threats
to our security. Our society is increasingly connected through the internet and digital
networks, exposing us to manifold threats and challenges for which we may not be
prepared or have the resources to combat. The new technology has created many
opportunities as well as vulnerabilities and has created a digital divide. With its
increasing geostrategic importance, Bangladesh is a gateway for connectivity to the
greater Asian region via the Bay of Bengal. Therefore, Bangladesh must remain vigilant
to avert potential security threats.
Overview of Defence Policy.
1. Bangladesh, with its unique linguistic, cultural and ethnic legacy and a solid
attachment to cultural heritage, has contributed to a set of distinctive national values,
including democracy, nationalism, socialism, and secularism. The fundamental
objectives of the state, as enshrined in the Constitution, are to realize, through the
democratic process, a society free from exploitation in which the rule of law,
fundamental human rights and freedom, equality and justice, political, economic and
social rights will be secured for all citizens. Bangladesh pursues her key national
interest by ensuring security through securing its people, resources, land, waters,
airspace, and core national values. It also seeks friendly and balanced relationships
with all countries and security arrangements through bi-lateral and multilateral
partnership with global, regional and sub-regional countries or organizations.
Bangladesh follows a global approach, which strengthens its diplomatic linkages in an
international community committed to maintaining global peace, environmental
protection, human rights, and the security responsibilities enshrined in the United
Nations (UN) Charter.

28

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

2. Defence diplomacy, deterrence and defeating hostile design form three pillars of
Bangladesh's defence policy. Keeping in view Bangladesh's national interest and
commitment to global peace and stability, the defence policy aims at protecting the
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity, socio-political stability, economic
prosperity, environmental protection, global and regional peace and stability etc.
These are addressed through a comprehensive security mechanism to accelerate the
national progression and well-being of the country's people. Bangladesh's defence
policy further focuses on compliance with all treaties and obligations undertaken by
the Government concerning international peace and security, reduction of means of
war and disarmament, and adherence to national security policy congruent with its
foreign policy, "Friendship to all, malice towards none".
Indo-Pacific Outlook of Bangladesh
Being a littoral State of the Bay of Bengal, Bangladesh considers the stability and
prosperity in the Indo-Pacific to be a crucial factor in realizing her “Vision 2041’, i.e.
building a modern, knowledge-based developed country by 2041. The Indo-Pacific area’s
collective share in global GDP, preponderance in international trade, enhanced climate
action and growing technological dynamism can be key determinants for ensuring
Bangladesh’s long-term resilience and prosperity. Bangladesh, therefore, envisions a free,
open, peaceful, secure, and inclusive Indo-Pacific for the shared prosperity for all.
Guiding Principles:
a. Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s foreign policy dictum
‘Friendship towards all, malice toward none.’
b. Constitutional mandate on the conduct of international relations based on the
principles of respect for national sovereignty and equality, political independence,
non-interference in internal affairs, peaceful settlement of international disputes,
as well as respect for international law and the principles enunciated in the United
Nations Charter; and striving for renunciation of the use of force in international
relations and for general and complete disarmament.
c. Adherence to the relevant UN treaties and international conventions, as
applicable, including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

29

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
d. Constructive regional and international cooperation for sustainable development,
international peace and security, humanitarian action, and fundamental rights and
freedoms.
Objectives:
Consistent with the above-mentioned principles, the following objectives will guide
Bangladesh’s Indo-Pacific outlook and engagements:
1. Strengthen mutual trust and respect, forge partnerships and cooperation, and
promote dialogue and understanding with the aim of ensuring peace, prosperity,
security and stability for all in the Indo-Pacific.
2. Strengthen existing mechanisms on maritime safety and security in the IndoPacific, including response to emergencies at sea and conduct of search & rescue,
and uphold the exercise of freedom of navigation & over-flight, in accordance
with international law and relevant international conventions, including UNCLOS,
1982.
3. Maintain meaningful and value-driven contribution to international nonproliferation, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and counter-terrorism efforts,
including with partners in the Indo-Pacific.
4. Support regional and international efforts towards combating transnational
organized crimes in the Indo-Pacific through both normative and practical
actions.
5. Expand global lead on the flagship agenda of a ‘culture of peace’, enhance focus
on the ‘women, peace and security’ agenda, promote interfaith harmony and
work towards building peaceful, just and inclusive societies in the Indo-Pacific.
6. Promote open, transparent, rules-based multilateral systems that enable
equitable and sustainable development in the Indo-Pacific and beyond through
inclusive economic growth, right to development and shared prosperity for all.
7. Enhance physical, institutional, energy, digital and human connectivity; facilitate
movement of goods, services, capital, and people in a systematic manner; and
promote technology transfer, access to innovations and responsible behaviour in
open and secure cyberspace and outer space.
8. Leverage the domestic agriculture, manufacturing and services sectors towards
building resilient regional and global value chains to better manage future crisis

30

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and disruptions and to promote unimpeded and free flow of commerce in the
Indo-Pacific.
9. Promote conservation, sustainable use and management of oceans, seas, and
marine resources in the Indo-Pacific in pursuance of SDG-14 and other relevant
internationally agreed development commitments.
10. Engage proactively in promoting food security, water solidarity, and disaster risk
reduction in the Indo-Pacific, including through disseminating home-grown good
practices.
11. Continue tangible work towards addressing the challenges of climate change,
biodiversity loss, marine pollution, and other significant and harmful impacts on
the environment in line with relevant international conventions and
commitments.
12. Foster cooperation among Indo-Pacific countries to ensure energy security for
all, including through investment and technology transfer on renewable energy.
13. Work towards developing coordinated response to future pandemics and
ensuring health security, including through access for all to global public goods
like vaccines, diagnostics and other equipment and treatment facilities.
14. Collaboration with sub-regional partners and relevant organizations towards
bolstering

regional

cooperation

and

enhancing

mutually

beneficial

complementarities.
15. Strengthen collaboration and cooperation in science, technology, research and
innovation for shared benefits of all, in keeping with the vision of 'Smart
Bangladesh’.

III.

Bangladesh in ARF
Keeping in view the objectives of ARF and the criteria for participation, Bangladesh first
expressed her interest in joining this Forum as early as 1998. Bangladesh became a
member of the ARF in 2006. Bangladesh is firmly committed to the guiding principles of
the Forum, most notably, peace and disarmament. Bangladesh has received international
acclamation in peacekeeping and peace building role as one of the largest troop
contributor countries. In the ASEAN region, Bangladeshi peacekeepers were deployed in
UN missions in Timor Leste and Cambodia. Bangladesh continues to catalyse the process
of regional Cooperation in South Asia and beyond. Given her geostrategic location,
Bangladesh is ideally placed in linking the countries of South Asia with South East Asia and

31

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
traditionally has had very close links with most of the ASEAN countries. These contacts
have further been reinforced through her membership in the Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multi-Sectoral Technical Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Asian Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) and
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA). Bangladesh has undertaken massive infrastructure
development to upgrade its roads, rails, riverways, ports, bridges, airports, riverine ports
and sea ports to connect the landlocked regions of South Asia, South East Asia, and East
Asia. Bangladesh has a clear stake in the security and prosperity of South East Asia. This
ranges from conventional security issues to emerging threats like trafficking in persons,
drugs and arms. Bangladesh opposes terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and fully
supports the ARF in combating this menace. Additionally, as one of the world's fastestgrowing economies, even during the COVID 19 pandemic, Bangladesh has the potential to
be a strong economic and trading partner for the ASEAN region and the ARF countries.

IV.

Bangladesh's Efforts in Countering Terrorism And Violent Extremism
Bangladesh maintains a policy of 'zero tolerance' towards all forms of terrorism including
financing of terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism - both nationally and
internationally and does not allow its territory to be used by any terrorist individual, group
or entity against any state or people.

Currently, there is no existence of any international terrorist outfit in Bangladesh.
However, some home-grown domestic terrorist organizations have been declared
"Proscribed" by the Government, and their activities have been banned.
We advocate for adhering to the relevant human rights and humanitarian principles in
counter-terrorism efforts.

32

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Comprehensive Strategy for CT & PVE
Bangladesh does not condone any act of terrorism on the pretext of their circumstances,
method or objective. A terrorist must be identified as a terrorist only, irrespective of their
race, colour, creed or religion. Bangladesh has already employed several hard and soft
approaches to deal with the threat of violent extremism. Hard approaches include
intelligence-led operations, continuous surveillance on suspected terrorists and arresting
or detaining terrorists. On the other hand, soft approaches seek to address the process of
radicalization and community engagement where all the stakeholders collaborate
through sharing their knowledge and experience.

The Government's initiatives intend to implement 'four pillars' resembling the global
efforts to combat terrorism:
a) To prevent radicalization: Bangladesh emphasizes promoting the essence of the
liberation war, culture and heritage, promoting family bonding and good
parenting, strengthening social cohesion, addressing women's role in preventing
radicalization, increasing state's capacity to prevent radicalization, engaging
relevant stakeholders to build social resilience.
b) For countering radicalization: Bangladesh is working on identifying online and
offline hotspots, mapping geographic and demographic vulnerabilities, countering
radical narratives, utilizing the information network, mass media and popular
platforms, community-based law enforcement, monitoring the cyber world and
trying to adopt people's diplomacy.
c) For Countering terrorism: Bangladesh is taking measures to deter, disrupt and
isolate groups that use terror, building the capacities of state security forces to
fight terrorist groups, and increasing the state's capacity to prepare, prevent,
protect and respond to terrorism.
d) The Government is also implementing a few de-radicalization programs to ensure
psychological disengagement, religious education, social reintegration and
rehabilitation.

Legal Measures
In recent years, Bangladesh has enacted a number of laws and developed several
strategies to counter terrorism and violent extremism. Some important legal measures
are as follows:

33

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
o

Anti-terrorism Act, 2009

o

Anti-terrorism (Amendment) Act, 2013

o

Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2012

o

The Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act, 2012

o

National Counter Terrorism Strategy, 2011

o

Accession to the Palermo Convention against Transnational Organized Crimes.

o

Digital Security Act -2018

o

The Prevention and Suppression of Human Trafficking Act -2012

Establishment of specialized units
a) ATU & CTTC: Bangladesh government has formed the Anti-Terrorism Unit (ATU)
and Countering Terrorism and Transnational Crime unit (CTTC) under the Dhaka
Metropolitan Police, which are especially responsible for conducting operations
and investigation of terrorist and extremism-related cases.
b) Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit: Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit
(BFIU) works as the national central agency for receiving, analysing and
disseminating suspicious transactions reports (STR)/suspicious activity reports
(SAR), cash transaction reports (CTR) and any information related to money
laundering, financing of terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. In addition, BFIU coordinates and cooperates with domestic
regulatory, investigating and law enforcement authorities to combat money
laundering (ML) & terrorism financing (TF). BFIU works very closely with Asia
Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG), Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and
Egmont Group of FIUs to provide a wider range of international cooperation.
c) Preventing terror financing & money laundering
To develop and formulate policies related to anti-money laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism, Bangladesh established in 2010 National
Coordination Committee (NCC), headed by the Hon'ble Minister, Ministry of
Finance.
d) National Committee on the Implementation of the United Nations Security
Council Resolutions on Combating Terrorism and Financing of Terrorism
Bangladesh has established the National Committee to monitor the
implementation of the provision of UNSCRs relating to terrorism, terrorist

34

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
financing and financing of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, headed
by the Foreign Secretary.
e) Banning of militant outfits
The Government of Bangladesh has already banned several militant outfits.
f)

Awareness Programs Undertaken to Prevent Violent Extremism
The Government has engaged public servants, civil society, NGOs, media and
educational institutions to strengthen the campaign against militancy. Imams
have contributed significantly to the Bangladesh government's CVE efforts.

g) International Cooperation
As a part of her commitment to the eventual elimination of terrorism in all its
forms, Bangladesh acceded to all 14 United Nations (UN)/ International AntiTerrorism Conventions/ Protocols. Bangladesh signed the UN Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime in December 2000 to support the process of
creating an international regime against terrorism and related crimes. Bangladesh
is very much engaged with Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)/ CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) pursuant to UNSCR 1373,
Sanction Monitoring Committee, and Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF).

V.

Cyber Security
The Government of Bangladesh has enacted a holistic law for combating the growing
menace of cybercrime in the form of the Digital Security Act 2018. The Government
has established a Digital Security Agency to coordinate with local and international
institutions to reduce the risk of digital crimes. In addition, a national digital Security
Council has been formed.

VI.

Contribution of Bangladesh to UN Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding
Bangladesh stands committed to the principles laid down in the United Nations (UN)
Charter, highlighting 'peaceful settlement of international disputes and maintenance of
global peace and security. The vow to establish peace and security by Bangladeshi
peacekeepers emanates from the principles enshrined in the Constitution of Bangladesh.
Bangladesh has responded promptly to the United Nations' call for strengthening world
peace and stability by contributing its troops and police for peacekeeping.

35

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Bangladesh successfully completed 55 Peacekeeping Operations in around 40 countries
with 1,79,701 peacekeepers. Bangladesh is also sending correction officials and judicial
officers in peacekeeping missions.

Bangladesh has pledged 26 components to the UN "Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System" to meet the UN requirement.

Women Engagement in Peacekeeping Operations
i. Bangladesh is deeply committed to the WPS agenda, founded by the security council
resolution 1325. As per the UN's Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy Bangladesh is
committed to increasing the participation of women. Bangladesh is on the way to
fulfil the requirement set by the UN for deploying 18% Women Military Staff
Officer/Military Observer in UN Peacekeeping Operations by 2021. Bangladesh has
deployed 400 Women peacekeepers as contingent members in different UN
missions. Bangladesh Armed Forces deployed Women officers as contingent
commanders of a military contingent in MINUSCA and the Central African Republic.
Bangladesh Police has also deployed 150 Women peacekeepers in MINUSMA,
MONUSCO and UNPOL.

ii. Bangladesh is the founding executive member of the Women Peace and Security
Chief of Defence Network (WCN) along with the UK and Canada. Bangladesh has
taken over the Chairmanship of the WCN in 2022.

Achievements of Bangladesh in UN Peacekeeping Operations
Bangladesh can hold its head high globally because the Bangladeshi uniformed personnel
have earned the gratitude of millions worldwide. The footprints of Bangladeshi
peacekeepers are now evident in almost all the troubled areas of the world. In this
context, the President of Liberia, Her Excellency Ms Ellen Sirleaf, also conveyed her
gratitude to the Bangladeshi peacekeepers for their contributions and commented,
"Bangladeshi contingent has gone beyond its protection mandate and helped to build up
the manpower capacity of the country".

36

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Response of Bangladesh Against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA)
Bangladeshi peacekeepers are known for their integrity and excellent conduct.
Bangladesh maintains a zero-tolerance policy concerning allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse. Any lapses in this regard are handled with utmost seriousness.
Hon'ble Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina was one of the earliest world leaders to join the
Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse
in United Nations operations (in 2017).

Efforts of Bangladesh towards Peace Building and Sustaining Peace
Bangladesh perceives peacebuilding and sustaining peace as an inclusive and broad-based
process beyond its traditional remit of short to medium-term post-conflict crisis response
and recovery.
Bangladesh is an active member of the UN Peacebuilding Commission and is currently the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the effort of the Peacebuilding Fund, including
implementing its 2020-24 investment strategy. Bangladesh's support to the peacekeeping
operations and the peacebuilding architecture of the UN is demonstrated by its pledging
monetary contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund this year despite COVID-19-related
austerity measures.

Bangladesh recognizes the importance of women and youth's full, equal, and meaningful
participation in peacebuilding. It is vital to reinforce the commonalities and
complementarities of the Women, Peace and Security (WPS) and Youth, Peace and
Security (YPS) agenda for peacebuilding. Both strategies must be integrated in
implementing UN PBF's investment strategy.

Bangladesh also acknowledges increased representation of women in various peace
negotiations and in increasing gender-specific provisions in peace agreements.
Bangladesh adopted the first National Action Plan (NAP) on Women, Peace, and Security
in 2019.It recognizes women's role in peacebuilding and puts emphasis on their
participation in peacebuilding activities. In 2017, Bangladesh and Canada acted as focal
points for implementing the Peacebuilding Commission "Gender Strategy".

37

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
As a part of encouraging global peace initiatives, Bangladesh Peacebuilding Centre started
its activities on 01 November 2016.

Bangladesh stresses the importance of national ownership in peacebuilding involving
relevant national institutions and all level stakeholders coupled with meaningful,
sustained, and well-calibrated international support. Bangladesh also considers that
institution-building is an important pre-requisite for sustaining peace.

Bangladesh Institute for Peace Support Operation and Training (BIPSOT) is promoting
global peace and security as an international Centre of Excellence. In response to the UN
Women Elsie Initiative Fund of uniformed women in the Peace Operations Secretariat,
Bangladesh proposed one project during 2020 under Elsie Project Fund. Implementation
of the project will significantly contribute to training more Women peacekeepers for
deployment in UN Missions.

Culture of Peace
Bangladesh took the lead in introducing the normative agenda item "Culture of Peace" in
the General Assembly and followed up with the flagship resolution entitled "Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace". The resolution was adopted on 13
September 1999, during the first tenure of Hon'ble Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. Since
then, Bangladesh has been facilitating this resolution every year.

The notion of a "culture of peace" continues to earn increasing importance across the
three pillars of the United Nations in addressing contemporary global challenges.
Bangladesh considers the "Culture of Peace" as an overarching notion strengthening the
message for peace in years to come and moving beyond the landmark Agenda 2030.

Bangladesh remains fully committed to the implementation of this concept through
action-oriented policy interventions in eight programme areas of the 'Program of Action
on Culture of Peace' − education, sustainable economic and social development, respect
for human rights, equality between men and women, democratic participation, tolerance
and solidarity, free flow of information and knowledge and international peace and
security.

38

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
VII.

Disarmament and Nuclear Non-Proliferation
"Strive for the renunciation of the use of force in international relations and for general
and complete disarmament"
-

Article- 25(a) of the Constitution of Bangladesh [on the principles of the state's
international relations]
Bangladesh's commitment to general and complete disarmament is anchored in its
Constitution and remains a fundamental pursuit of the country's foreign policy.
Therefore, despite living in the shadow of nuclear neighbours (India, Pakistan and
China), Bangladesh has unconditionally opted to remain non-

nuclear. "We believe that the security of our people can be ensured not through the
accumulation of expensive weapons but through education, ending segregation, the
promotion of democratic values, and the realization of human faculties by peaceful
means,' Hon'ble Prime Minister stated in her statement at the High-Level Meeting of the
General Assembly on Nuclear Disarmament.
Bangladesh strongly considers disarmament as an instrument for enhancing international
security and is concerned at the new arms race, rising geopolitical tensions, increasing
military spending, and weakening arms control architecture. As a member of the UN
Security Council for two terms during 1979-1980 and 2000-2001, Bangladesh was
particularly active and visible in international disarmament efforts.
In various international fora, we maintain that in a world of finite resources, there is a
close relationship between expenditure on armaments and economic and social

39

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
development. Yet, research shows that world military expenditure has topped 1.7 trillion
dollars.
Bangladesh successfully conducted the Presidency of the Conference on Disarmament
(CD) for the period of 06 July to 21 August 2020. As the President of the Conference,
Bangladesh continued to urge the Member States to revitalize multilateral negotiations
in pursuit of the disarmament goals.
Bangladesh has long been advocating the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
around the world. Following the nuclear test explosions by India and Pakistan in 1998,
Bangladesh took special initiative to ensure that South Asia remains a Nuclear Weapons
Free Zone to ensure peace and stability in the region. As the first South Asian country,
Bangladesh signed and ratified the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) in 2000 the
"Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of AntiPersonnel Mines and on Their Destruction" and the "Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction”.
In compliance with the UN Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons (PoA), Bangladesh has put in place stronger
legislative norms and administrative procedures to regulate lawful possession,
manufacture, export, import and transport of small arms and light weapons. Every year,
Bangladesh observes 09 July as the "Small Arms Destruction Day" to raise public
awareness about the human, social and economic cost of illicit trade in SALW.
Bangladesh is a State Party to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW).
Bangladesh submitted the Instrument of Ratification for its accession to the CCW
Amended Paragraph 1 and CCW Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War during the 68th
UNGA.
Bangladesh stands strictly against chemical weapons usage anywhere in the world.
Bangladesh is one of the earliest signatories of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), signed on 14 January 1994.
In the area of verification and nuclear safeguards, pursuant to provisions of the NPT,
Bangladesh has also signed a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA,

40

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
which entered into force on 11 June 1982. Bangladesh became a Member State of the
IAEA in 1972.
In the area of peaceful uses of nuclear technology, the Government of Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina has attached top priority to the generation of power for facilitating the
country's socio-economic development in line with its Vision 2021. Nuclear energy is now
considered to be a potential constituent of the country's overall energy mix as part of the
broader energy policy. Bangladesh has decided to implement the Rooppur Nuclear
Power Plant project with technical and financial support from the Russian Federation and
with technical assistance from the IAEA.
Bangladesh is a State Party to the Outer Space Treaty. Bangladesh has now a higher stake
in outer space after the launch of the Bangabandhu-1 satellite for communications and
research purposes.
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
Bangladesh voted in favour of UNGA Resolution 71/258 titled "Taking Forward
Multilateral Disarmament Negotiations" on 16 December 2016, establishing the mandate
for negotiating a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons. Bangladesh
actively participated in the negotiations on the draft legally binding instrument in 2017,
and voted in favour of adopting the negotiated outcome titled "Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons" (TPNW) on 07 July 2017. As a result, the Treaty was opened for
signature on during 72nd UN General Assembly in September 2017. Bangladesh signed the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) on 20 September 2017; and
ratified it on 26 September 2019.
VIII.

Climate Change
Climate change is a global phenomenon that goes beyond national borders. It is an issue
that needs to be addressed through collective efforts and innovative solutions not only at
the national level but also at the local and regional level. The Paris Agreement calls for a
coordinated and combined effort at the local and regional levels to ensure effective
climate action in a sustainable manner.

According to the Global Climate Risk Index 2021 published by Germanwatch, Bangladesh
is ranked 7th among the countries affected most from 2000-2019 due to climate change.

41

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
However, the country's contribution to global warming is negligible (it contributes less
than 0.47% of global emissions with per capita 0.98-ton CO2-eq emission).

Economic Impact: It is projected that Bangladesh could suffer annual losses of up to 9% of
its economy by the end of this century. Without changes to current global behaviour,
Bangladesh would see annual economic costs equivalent to 2% of its GDP by 2050,
widening to 9.4% by 2100 (ADB, 2014).

Bangladesh believes that the effective implementation of the Paris Agreement is a
collective responsibility for shared prosperity. Climate finance is a key to this end.
However, financing mechanisms like the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Least
Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) are severely under resourced.

Initiatives taken for addressing climate change in Bangladesh
To enhance climate resilience, Bangladesh has taken the following adaptation and
mitigation activities:

Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP): At the national level,
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) was formulated in 2009.
This is one of the most credible initiatives of any developing countries to address climate
change in a comprehensive manner for a 10 year programme, built on six thematic areas
namely (1) Food security, Social Protection and Health, (2) Comprehensive Disaster
Management, (3) Infrastructure, (4) Research and Knowledge Management, (5)
Mitigation and Low-carbon Development, and (6) Capacity Building and Institutional
Strengthening.

Bangladesh Climate Change Trust Fund (BCCTF): Bangladesh is the first country to set up
its own Climate Change Trust Fund from its own resources. As of August 2020, the
Government has allocated nearly US$443 million (3752 crore BDT) to BCCTF since 2009.
So far, the BCCTF has undertaken 800 projects with an investment of US$480 million to
implement strategic actions of the BCCSAP, which mainly focuses on adaptation,
mitigation and climate change research.

42

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
NAP Formulation: The Department of Environment, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change (MOEFCC) has already initiated the National Adaptation Plan (NAP)
Formulation Projects, with US$2.55 million financed by Green Climate Fund (GCF)
(Implementation support provided by UNDP).

Nationally Determined Contribution: Bangladesh prepared and submitted its Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC) on 26 August 2021. As an unconditional contribution,
Bangladesh will reduce its GHG emissions in the power, transport, and industry sectors by
27.56 Mt (CO2emission) (6.73%) below Business As Usual (BAU) in 2030 in the respective
sectors.

Clean Development Mechanism: Bangladesh is also involved in the Clean Development
Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
• Joint Crediting Mechanism: Bangladesh has a bilateral mechanism called Joint
Crediting Mechanism (JCM) with Japan for transferring energy-efficient technology,
providing up to 50% grants.

Climate Technology Centre & Network: Bangladesh is also involved in the Climate
Technology Centre & Network (CTCN) under the UNFCCC Technology Mechanism for
technology transfer. The Department of Environment is the National Designated Entity
(NDE) of the CTCN

Adaptation Project: The Department of Environment (DoE) under the MoEFCC has taken
a project on "Adaptation Initiative for Climate Vulnerable Offshore Small Islands and
Riverine Char Lands in Bangladesh" to improve livelihoods through about US$9.2 million
financial support received from Adaptation Fund.

The DoE has taken another two new projects, one entitled "Integrating Climate Change
Adaptation into Sustainable Development pathways of Bangladesh" with approximately
US$5.7 million financial support and the other one entitled "Building Climate Resilient
Livelihoods in vulnerable Landscapes in Bangladesh" with approximately US$8.9 million
financial support from the LDC Fund of the UNFCCC operated by the GEF.

43

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Construction of Cyclone Shelters: The Government has constructed 4291 cyclone shelters
all over the coast. Besides, additional 523 flood shelters have been constructed in floodprone areas in the country. In addition, 550 'Mujib Killa' (a specially designed raised land)
have been constructed to shelter the livestock in coastal regions during the cyclone/tidal
surge.

Plantation of 10 Million Tree Saplings: In order to celebrate the birth centenary of the
Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Bangladesh Forest
Department planted 10 million tree saplings across the country last year. Additionally, to
reduce the risk of death due to lightning, the Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief
has planted 5.4 million Palm trees which will also contribute to the carbon sink.

Initiatives on Renewable:
a. Solar Power: More than 6 million solar home systems (SHSs) have been installed
across the country, meaning that almost 18 million beneficiaries are getting solar
electricity, around 12% of the total population of Bangladesh.
b. Improved Cook Stoves: To reduce biomass burning emissions, over 3.5 million
Improved Cook Stoves (ICSs) have already been distributed to rural households in the
country.

National Solar Energy Roadmap: Bangladesh has recently drafted the National Solar
Energy Roadmap, 2021-2041 and set a time-bound achievable target of 30 GW by 2041.

Additionally, Forest Department under Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change (MoEFCC) has been implementing climate change adaptation activities in
vulnerable coastal and offshore communities:

IX.

Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience in Bangladesh
Bangladesh is ranked 26 out of 193 countries with a high INFORM Index for Risk
Management which indicates that the risk of humanitarian crisis and disasters that would
overwhelm national response capacity is high.

Bangladesh has signed the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR), which
requires proper monitoring and reporting coordination and progress. Under the Sendai

44

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Framework, Bangladesh submitted a progress report during the 7th Global Platform on
Disaster Risk Reduction 2022 Conference held in Bali, Indonesia. Bangladesh has taken a
holistic approach to reduce the risks stemming from disasters, both man-made and
natural.

X.

Rohingya Issue
It has been more than five years since the mass exodus of Rohingyas in 2017. Along with
previously displaced Myanmar Nationals, the total number of Forcibly displaced Myanmar
nationals residing in Bangladesh is 1.2 million at present. Despite Bangladesh’s continuous
effort, not a single Rohingya has been repatriated yet in absence of conducive situation in
Rakhine State. Without any certainty of returning to Rakhine State, the FDMNs are being
frustrated and engaging in various criminal activities like human and drug trafficking. This
tendency of FDMNs of getting involved in criminal activities is creating a major security
threat, not only for Bangladesh but also for the neighbouring countries. The huge number
of Rohingyas without any hope of repatriation may also incite trans- national/ transborder crimes including human trafficking. Sustainable and voluntary repatriation of the
Rohingyas through creating a situation conducive for return and ensuring political will not
only establish the plight of the Rohingyas to live in their place of origin but also contribute
to control these cross-border crimes. A regional effort under the ASEAN forum can play a
critical role in this regard.

XI.

South China Sea
Bangladesh respects the principles contained in the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea signed on 04 November 2002. Bangladesh deeply appreciates that
all parties concerned have reaffirmed their respect for and commitment to the freedom
of navigation in and over-flight above the South China Sea.

XII.

Maritime Security
The region faces many traditional and non-traditional safety and security challenges
including piracy, armed robberies at sea, terrorism, human trafficking, irregular
movement of persons, drugs trafficking, illicit trafficking in wildlife, trafficking of weapons,
crimes in the fisheries sector such as IUU fishing, degradation of ocean health, unlawful
exploitation of marine resources and climate change with its related repercussions on
environmental security. Freedom of navigation is vital for the smooth flow of maritime

45

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
trade but the above threats have the potential to seriously disrupt international trade and
thus hamstrung national and regional economic development. Furthermore, the lack of
regional maritime security architecture has prompted major powers to compete for
control over these resources and sea-lanes. This competition and potential escalation of
tensions in the region would surely hurt the openness of the region’s sea lanes and
subsequently disrupt trade and affect energy security.

A. Rule of law is critical to maritime security. The most pressing maritime challenges are
law enforcement and governance issues. The Maritime Security Index shows that
strong rule of law is closely correlated with many positive aspects of maritime security
and its absence is a predictor of a variety of maritime challenges. The Rule of Law
score in the Maritime Security Index encompasses a broad set of governance
indicators including corruption, government, port and customs efficiency, judicial
integrity and political inclusion.

In order to address maritime security challenges and implement maritime policy,
states ultimately need adequate naval and maritime law enforcement capabilities.
The potential gains from comprehensive legislation on maritime issues, international
and regional cooperation and blue economic growth cannot be fully realized if there
is a lack of assets available for enforcement.

Bangladesh currently has adequate domestic legal framework to ensure maritime
safety and security of Bangladesh. Bangladesh is one of the first countries in South
Asia to formulate an act to govern territorial waters and maritime zones. Father of the
Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman with his visionary leadership, presented
the country with ‘Territorial Waters and Maritime Zones Act 1974’. This Act laid out
the basis of all subsequent legal documents governing Bangladesh’s maritime safety
and security. However, due to international and regional developments, it was
necessary to update the Act. Hence, in May 2021, ‘Territorial Waters and Maritimes
Zones (Amendment) Act 2021’ was approved in the Cabinet and the gazette was
published in December 2021. This is a comprehensive document which covered all
relevant aspects, articulated relevant elements and decided the punishments for
violations. Maritime security and safety encompasses all the operations that are being
carried out to ward off threats from the sea, defend sovereign rights at sea and control

46

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
risks relating to maritime activities (fisheries patrol, accidents at sea, pollution, sea
rescue/shipwreck and assistance, legacy munitions clearance etc.). The 2021 Act
covers these issues in a comprehensive manner.

The government of Bangladesh has also enacted National Plan of Action for IUU
fishing in 2019. Law enforcing agencies of Bangladesh have been taking strong
measures against unlawful fishing and strengthening patrolling activities to stop
infiltration by other countries in our exclusive economic zone. Also, the Government
has decided to bring all fishing vessel under surveillance in order to eliminate IUU
fishing. The Department of Fisheries has already taken up a project to set up
Automatic Identification System (AIS) in thousands of boats, among those some are
satellite based. A project has been taken by the Department of Shipping titled
“Establishment of Global Maritime Distress and safety system and Integrated
Maritime Navigation Systems” is in progress to provide radio communication,
navigational aids, tracking of ships, search and rescue facilities etc. in Bangladesh sea
waters and beyond. Bangladesh is one of those few countries that have firm fish
conservation policy and has been acting upon accordingly in order to ensure the
proper growth of fish.

B. Another pressing maritime enforcement priority is continued development of
maritime domain awareness (MDA). There are some obvious challenges to that
including the relatively limited assets of some regional navies mentioned above, the
massive size of many member states’ maritime domains, the sheer number of vessels
active in the region, and the often blurred line between licit and illicit maritime
activity.

Thankfully, the Indian Ocean is home to some of the most well-developed collective
MDA and information-sharing structures of any region. These include the Information
Fusion Centre, and a series of developing platforms for sharing MDA information.
Information exchange between participating nations is currently largely conducted
through virtual communication, but will eventually be expedited through the
stationing of an increasing number of country-specific liaison officers at the centre.
Maritime law enforcement agencies can use the information extrapolated from

47

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
incident frequency and location to inform their operations and better monitor their
effectiveness.

Bangladesh engages itself to secure its maritime security interests in a cross-sectoral,
comprehensive, coherent and cost-effective way in conformity with existing treaties,
national and international laws in particular the UNCLOS and other relevant
conventions and instruments. Bangladesh is doing its part regarding MDA and the
government is making efforts to raise awareness of the relevant agencies concerning
MDA.

C. The physical and economic welfare of coastal communities, while sometimes
overlooked, is critical to maritime security. Poverty and conflict in coastal
communities can quickly undermine maritime security and governance. A lack of
economic opportunities can drive some in coastal communities to participation in
maritime crime, illicit economies, and potentially, participation in armed groups. All
of these factors can contribute to the possible funding of armed groups. In short,
economic and physical insecurity in coastal regions can generate a malicious cycle of
poverty and conflict in which security threats bleed from shore to sea.

The Government of Bangladesh has been extending Social Safety Net Programs
(SSNPs) through relief programs (cash transfer/food transfer), early warning,
infrastructure building programs, education and training programs, programs for
disadvantaged groups and others. The major social safety net programs in Bangladesh
are aimed at employment generation, coping with natural disasters and other shocks;
greater encouragement towards children's education; and incentives provided to
families. These programs cover the coastal people as well thereby mitigating the risk
that may grow out of the lack of opportunities.

D. Looking beyond socio-economic issues, the other component of coastal welfare is
physical safety. Here, a comparatively high level of organized violence in coastal areas
severely impacts coastal welfare. In the past, we have seen such insurgency and
terrorism in some coastal areas which severely undermine security both on shore and
at sea. These incidents threaten critical sea lanes and offshore energy and fan illicit
maritime trades in arms and narcotics with extremely detrimental impacts.

48

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
In order to sustain the progress already made in the region, economic growth will
need to be more inclusive in nature and collective action to address the root causes
of conflict must be made.

E. Piracy, armed robbery and kidnapping for ransom at sea are matters of significant
concern for states, the shipping industry and seafarers. These incidents threaten the
safety of seafarers, disrupt maritime trade and have the potential to fund the deadly
campaigns of violent non-state actors. Member states can take a leading role in
coordinating maritime law enforcement capacity-building efforts which would benefit
those states where this activity is centred.

F. Reports indicate that there are a significant number of armed robberies targeting
vessels at anchorage in the region. Limited berthing capacity in some regional ports
means vessels wait at anchorage for longer periods of time giving robbers and thieves
the opportunity to observe crew behaviour and plan and execute such attacks.
Increasing emphasis on port and anchorage security by enhancing surveillance and
improving port efficiency can help ensure that vessels remain undisturbed at
anchorage.

G. Illicit maritime trade in arms, drugs, wildlife and other illicit products undermines
global security and stability. This lucrative trafficking activity funds criminal
organizations and violent non-state actors and fuels conflict and terrorism. It also
undermines the development of the licit blue economy, thus fuelling the long-term
cycle of underdevelopment, conflict, and instability. Illicit trades remain an extremely
pressing challenge for the region. While illicit trade in various forms occurs across the
region, three particular trades deserve specific consideration due to their severity and
detrimental impacts on coastal economy-trade in illegal wildlife products, opium and
heroin trafficking, trafficking of synthetic drugs. In addition to attempts aimed at
curtailing production, efforts could be taken seriously on areas such as maritime
domain awareness, interdiction, and port security. Much of this maritime trafficking
utilizes small fishing vessels and ship-to-ship transfers which attempt to hide amidst
the sheer volume of small vessel traffic in the region. Collective efforts to enhance
shared maritime domain awareness and identity behaviour associated with trafficking

49

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
can help direct enforcement efforts more efficiently. In addition, strengthened port
security measures could help identify suspicious cargo at critical transit points.

The Government of Bangladesh enacted the Narcotics Control Act in 1990 that
regulates all aspects of narcotics and alcohol within the country, including production,
distribution, transaction, possession, transportation and cultivation. The major antitrafficking laws which provide punishments for the acts, processes and end products
of human trafficking are the Penal Code, 1860, the Suppression of Immoral Trafficking
Act, 1933, the Children Act, 1974 and the Prevention of Repression against Women
and Children Act, 2000 (as amended in 2003). Wildlife (Conservation and Protection)
Act 2012 has been in practice to curb illegal wildlife trade.

H. There are a variety of drivers of maritime mixed migration. Some migrants take to the
seas in search of economic opportunities in other states. Some are driven by conflict
and instability. Others still are deceived or coerced into maritime migration for the
purposes of trafficking and forced labour. It is important to note that irrespective of
motivation or cause, all migrants are extremely vulnerable to exploitation in a variety
of forms. What may begin as a voluntary migration can easily end in human trafficking,
violence, extortion, and exploitation. The region is no exception to the global
prevalence of these challenges and contains several hotspots for maritime mixed
migration.

Maritime mixed migration will continue as long as poverty and conflict drive migrants
to the sea in search of a better life. Addressing those root causes is the only long-term
solution. While it is an important consideration, no level of maritime enforcement
action will serve as a deterrent.

Countries should promote awareness, stability, education and employment
opportunities and reduce the drivers of forced migration, including by promoting
resilience, thereby enabling individuals to make the choice between staying or
migrating. Bangladesh, on its part, has been promoting safe and legal migration. In
recent times, awareness campaign has been conducted by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs supported by other agencies to raise awareness amongst the people in the

50

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
areas that produce significant number of migrants. The government is committed
towards that and will do everything to promote safe and legal migration.

In the more immediate future, ARF can play a critical role in helping member states
coordinate search and rescue operations and provide much-needed assistance to
destination states dealing with migrant inflows. In addition, ARF can drive collective
efforts among members to develop alternative, legal pathways for migration that help
mitigate the risks posed to migrants by dangerous human smuggling and trafficking
operations.

51

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment

The Asia-Pacific region constantly faces significant strategic changes with the
emergence and re-emergence of interests from regional and extra regional
powers to engage with and gain foothold in the region. All this while the region is
also grappling with lingering and emerging security challenges, both traditional
and non-traditional in nature.
Increasing interest to engage the region present both opportunities and
challenges, particularly as it accentuates the complexity of shoring multilateral
cooperation to effectively address these challenges. Nevertheless, holistic and
concerted efforts and initiatives in combating non-traditional security threats are
embedded in several ASEAN-led platforms, for instance, within the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) defence and security policy meetings, and the ASEAN
Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM)-Plus framework.
Brunei Darussalam remains committed in contributing and supporting efforts and
cooperation aimed at maintaining peace, stability, security and prosperity of the
region both bilaterally and multilaterally.
a. Traditional Security
i.

Evolving Geopolitical Environment

Current geopolitical issues urgently call for more cordial interactions through
dialogues and discussions with mutual defence and preventive diplomacy as we
collectively resolve the threats of traditional security. Although the region
continues to face competing national visions, concepts, and strategies which
further intensify the complex geopolitical environment, however, the existence of
regional partnerships continues to positively encourage hope for inclusive and
constructive engagements.

52

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

ii.

South China Sea

Brunei Darussalam underlines the importance of the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region including the South China Sea. It reaffirms the importance
of upholding and adhering to international law, in particular the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which sets out the legal
framework within which all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out.

ASEAN and China remain committed to continue promoting maritime security and
safety, and enhancing mutual trust and confidence. They have reaffirmed their
commitment to the freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South China
Sea, to exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate or
escalate disputes and affect peace and stability. In conjunction with the 20 th
Anniversary of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea
(DOC), they also reaffirmed their commitment to fully and effectively
implementing the DOC in its entirety, and emphasised the need to maintain and
promote an environment conducive to the negotiations on the Code of Conduct
in the South China Sea (COC). They further look forward to the early conclusion of
an effective and substantive COC that is in accordance with international law
including the 1982 UNCLOS, within a mutually-agreed timeline.
iii. Korean Peninsula
At the beginning of 2023, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) was
observed to accelerate its missile launches signalling that the future towards
achieving denuclearisation and non-proliferation in the region remains bleak.
Since the last talks held between the DPRK and the United States in 2021, the
progress to promote dialogue and negotiations on issues of denuclearisation with
DPRK has been exceedingly stalled, further impeding the motions of
denuclearisation and peace process between the DPRK and the Republic of Korea
(ROK). Despite the DPRK facing multiple sanctions, the recent military and nuclear
posturing may influence the DPRK’s stance to be more inclined to not give up its
nuclear weapons possession. Moving forward, inclusive and transparent

53

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

engagements between key parties remain one of the significant tenets to address
the issues of concern. Additionally, leveraging the existing mechanisms such as
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Chemical Weapons Treaty and Biological
Weapons Convention to manage the challenges of growing nuclear proliferation
in the DPRK, is seen as paramount to maintain the global security and stability.
In the Southeast Asian region, ASEAN reaffirms its readiness to play a constructive
role through the ARF, and this is further demonstrated by the reiteration of the
support towards nuclear non-proliferation in the ASEAN Chairman’s Statement
released annually.
b. Non-Traditional Security
The existence of the non-traditional security further exacerbates with the
complexities of multidimensional issues which continue to revolve around health,
technology, climate change and terrorism. In this case, Brunei Darussalam has
actively developed efforts to mitigate the issues through the dynamic cooperation
with other regional and international partners.
i. COVID-19 Pandemic
In the past 3 years, the Asia-Pacific region continues to face the impacts of COVID19 pandemics, alongside efforts of pandemic recovery. Since its identification in
December 2019, the COVID-19 virus has mutated and created impacts in what
was described as waves, with number of infected reaching peaks and lows. Since
February 2023, the World Health Organization (WHO) has warned of XBB.1.16, an
Omicron sub variant and labelled it as a ‘variant of monitoring’. XBB.1.16, also
known as the Arcturus variant, has garnered international interest following its
contribution towards a recent surge in cases. While experts emphasise that
current vaccines remain effective against Arcturus, anecdotal reports suggest the
new variant may cause new symptoms not seen with previous strains, as well as
has mutations that may make it more transmissible and cause a higher rate of
infection. In this regard, the international community may observe the

54

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

reinforcement of COVID-19 related restrictions, such as mask mandates, testing,
and travel restrictions
On the economic front, the Centre for Strategic and Policy Studies (CSPS) noted
how the pandemic, among others, could have compounding implications to
economic growth and development. Brunei Darussalam’s economy contracted by
4.2% in the first quarter of 2022. Brunei Darussalam has also largely felt the
implications of rising inflation in the country as consumer prices continue to
increase, surging to 3.9% of inflation rate in April; the highest-ever for the country
in more than 25 years.
ii. Terrorism, Radicalisation and Violent Extremism
The global reach of terrorism and the spread of violent and extremist influence in
societies remains a top concern for countries worldwide. The Global Terrorism
Index (GTI) 2023 report have indicated that terrorist attacks for the year 2022
have become more deadly, with the lethality of attacks rising by 26%. Notably, the
Islamic State and its affiliates remained the world’s deadliest terrorist group in
2022 for the eight consecutive year, conducting attacks in 21 countries. Other key
observations underscored by the report include how terrorism continues to thrive
in countries with poor ecologies and climate induced shocks, while drone
technologies and its use by terrorist groups continue to evolve, especially with
groups such as the Islamic State, Boko Haram and Houthis.
While the terrorism threat remains relatively low for Brunei Darussalam, regionwide and global terrorist activities have not excluded Brunei Darussalam entirely
from its implications. Previous reports and investigation highlighted how foreign
nationals are utilising Brunei Darussalam as a transit point and to harbour greater
support for their activities. This is further demonstrated through arrests of four
individuals linked to Daesh in 2017. Meanwhile, in 2018, an arrest was made on
an individual with possession of Daesh propaganda-related materials, deliberately
construed to garner sympathy and radicalise. Thus, these cases amplify the

55

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

serious risks posed by social media and the cyber domain in the circulation of
extremist ideologies and terrorist-related movements.
iii. Climate Change
Climate change is a security threat that can no longer be ignored. It is increasingly
affecting global stability, military readiness, humanitarian crises and will be a
‘threat multiplier’ in current and future conflicts. Increased climatic events will
inevitably require a shift in policy for the country’s national security strategy. As
climate change is now increasingly used as a bargaining tool in politics, a new
version of the climate trap can render indebted countries vulnerable. Recognising
this trend, countries have already adopted a dedicated White Paper to address
climate change. Climate change will also require countries to assess their climate
vulnerability index to ensure their socio-economic livelihoods are not affected.
This can be in the form of adopting more resilient measures such as the more
resistant infrastructure and a more sustainable form of agriculture.
The recent launch of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change’s (IPCC) 6th Assessment Report on 27 February 2022 further stresses how
the world is likely to pass a dangerous threshold within the next ten (10) years –
pushing the planet past the point of catastrophic warming. The report also
underscores how the current rate of warming stands at 1.1°C and is projected to
increase global warming by 3.2°C. The IPCC warns with ‘very high confidence’ that
risks and adverse impacts from climate change will escalate with increasing global
warming. As the warming of the plane is inevitable, the defence sector must
ensure it is adequately prepared to carry out its primary tasks, whilst concurrently
managing rising expectations to supplement and contribute towards
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief Operations (HADR), without the
detriment to its strategic postures.
Recognising the urgency of coordination and collaboration in addressing climate
change, Brunei Darussalam will establish the ASEAN Centre for Climate Change
(ACCC) by late 2023. It will function as an inter-governmental centre for climate

56

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

change among ASEAN Member States to realise a climate-resilient and low carbon
ASEAN region by conducting research, generating analyses and insights which in
turn could lead to innovative solutions and policy recommendations.
iv. Emerging Technologies
New technologies, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT) and
robotics, continue to evolve rapidly within the past decade. It is widely recognised
that these technologies had shown its potential as an enabler of developments
for various sectors, such as economic, social, and cultural, in the era of the fourth
industrial revolution (4IR).
In the defence and military realm, the technological integration in this sector has
present opportunities and benefits, allowing it to further enhance its defence
capabilities. Yet, the emergence of these new technologies has also exposed
deeper risks and vulnerabilities to the security sector. The new trend evolved
during the recent years has reshaped the nature of combats and brought about
new hybrid warfare strategies, through the means of cyberspace and space
domain. This itself denotes the expansion of technological scope in growing
conflicts which could challenge the security and stability of the world.
Looking ahead, this calls for a strategic approach, inclusive of all relevant actors in
short- and long-term perspective. This can be done through cross-sector
collaborations, where key international and regional organisations cooperate with
various partners both within and outside their usual area of engagement to
discuss ways on minimising the existing or potential negative impacts brought by
emerging technologies.
II. National Security and Defence Policy

a) Overview of National Security and Defence Policy
The 2021 Defence White Paper of Brunei Darussalam is an extended dedication in
supporting the three goals of National Vision 2035 which is in line with a
comprehensive approach of Whole of Government and Whole of Nations. The

57

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

policy-making contexts would also consider the Islamic sentiments through the
notion of Maqasid Syari’ah as it assures the values and principles of Islam to be
thoroughly and practically embedded in defence and security facets.
National security in Brunei Darussalam is further maintained with the formidable
and credible military readiness and preparedness as it provides an effective
means of defence for the people in Brunei. The Ministry of Defence and Royal
Brunei Armed Forces (RBAF) continues to retain the distinctive peaceful
environment and identity of Brunei Darussalam in developing the bilateral and
multilateral partnerships.
The defence deliverables are based in the seven key result areas called
IKWONDAMAI (Integrity, Preparedness and Readiness, Whole of Nation, Defence
Diplomacy, International Missions and Credible Defence Image). The approaches
of IKWONDAMAI include the protection of sovereignty and territorial integrity
which covers all military fields such as the land, maritime, air, space and cyber.
Second approach is the high level of preparedness and readiness which reflects
the adequate resources to respond productively and efficiently. The national
security is further enhanced through the cross-sectoral collaboration and
cooperation with other relevant stakeholders for national resilience. In addition
to that, firm defence diplomacy is effectively practiced between the defence and
military establishments through ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) and
ADMM-Plus countries. The defence deliverables also focus on participating in the
international missions such as the peacekeeping operations of International
Monitoring Team and United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
b) Defence Expenditure
For the fiscal year 2023/2024, the Ministry of Defence of Brunei Darussalam’s
defence budget is BND619,618,960.00 (approximately US$445,769,036.00
@1.39), marking an increase of about 1.03% from the previous financial year.

58

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
III. National Contributions to Promote Regional Peace and Security
Brunei Darussalam remains steadfast and is cognisant of the importance of cooperation
and engagements in the region to protect its interests and play its part as a responsible
member of the international community. Its participation in various multilateral regional
platforms, such as the ARF, ADMM and ADMM-Plus, present opportunities for Brunei
Darussalam to continue to engage constructively in dialogue and work together on
addressing common security challenges.

a) Defence and Security Achievements and Initiatives

The ADMM and ADMM-Plus have proved to be productive and efficient platforms in
strengthening Brunei Darussalam’s defence and military capacity and capability
development.

In its commitment to contribute towards regional security, Brunei

Darussalam initiated three proposals of cooperation during its ADMM Chairmanship in
2013, which have significantly progressed at various stages. These include:

i.

Logistics Support Framework

The ADMM Logistics Support Framework (LSF) intends to strengthen logistics cooperation
that will enable the military forces in the ASEAN region to address non-traditional security
challenges, including but not limited to Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
(HADR), Search and Rescue (SAR), Peacekeeping Operations (PKO) and anti-piracy in a
coordinated and effective manner. Upon the validation and verification of LSF in a TableTop Exercise (TTX) by all ASEAN Member States (AMS) in January 2016, the LSF was
endorsed by the ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ Meeting (ADSOM). In moving forward,
Brunei Darussalam is utilising LSF during the implementation of the ADMM-Plus Experts’
Working Group on Military Medicine project-based activity in 2023.

ii.

ASEAN Direct Communication Infrastructure

In recognising the importance of developing an ASEAN early warning system to prevent
the occurrence and/or escalation of conflicts, the ADMM has adopted the concept of
establishing and maintaining the ASEAN Direct Communications Infrastructure (ADI). ADI
sets to provide a permanent, rapid, reliable and confidential means by which any two
ASEAN Defence Ministers may communicate with each other at mutual decisions in
handling incidences or emergency situations. This communication platform aims to

59

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
prevent or defuse misunderstandings and misinterpretations, therefore preventing
escalation and promoting quick response cooperation in emergency situations.

The ADI is launched in phases. The first phase, which is in the form of an IP-based
mechanism, was launched on 24 October 2017, after the ADMM-Plus Meeting in Clark,
Pampanga, Philippines. AMS conducted an ADI Exercise on 21 February 2019 to
successfully test the functionality of the system and operationalise the SOP itself. The
second phase is currently under deliberation among the AMS co-chaired together by
Brunei Darussalam and the Philippines. The concept paper to expand the initiative to Plus
countries has also been adopted by the 13th ADMM in 2019. This is anticipated to further
promote open communications among the member states, and enhance regional and
wider confidence and security building measure. In June 2021, during the 15th ADMM, the
ASEAN Defence Ministers have agreed to adopt the Concept Paper on Enhancing the
Usage of ADI as Defence Communications Architecture in the ADMM Process. The
Concept Paper will further provide the policy and technical parameters for Phase 2 of the
ADI. The next phase will see the expansion of user case and include a routine exchange of
information.

iii.

ASEAN Defence Interaction Programme (ADIP)

ADIP is introduced to aspire defence junior officers towards working and interacting
together through people-to-people contacts. Brunei Darussalam held the first ADIP in
2014 which was continued by Malaysia in 2018. This interaction programme further
emphasises the common values in the spirit of unity in diversity through mutual trust,
respect and understanding. The momentum of the ADIP as a platform for knowledge
sharing and forging cooperation on emerging issues for the defence sector remains
encouraging for Brunei Darussalam, with Cambodia’s Chairmanship of the 4th ADIP in
October 2022 focused on the Youth, Peace and Security agenda, and Indonesia’s hosting
of the 5th ADIP in March 2023 with the theme of “Posturing Young ASEAN Defence Officers
for Future Leadership Challenges to Create a Region of Peace, Prosperity and Security”.

iv.

ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Groups

Within the ADMM-Plus, Brunei Darussalam is strongly encouraged by the progress of the
seven ADMM-Plus EWGs in the areas of HADR, Military Medicine (MM), Maritime
Security, Counter-Terrorism, Peacekeeping Operations, Humanitarian Mine Action and

60

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Cyber Security. Brunei Darussalam is fully committed and supportive of ADMM-Plus
endeavours and has worked alongside the Plus partners. This includes hosting the
inaugural multinational ADMM-Plus HADR and MM Exercise in 2013 together with China,
Vietnam, Singapore, and Japan. Brunei Darussalam also co-chaired the EWG on Maritime
Security with New Zealand from 2014 to 2017, culminating into the ADMM-Plus Maritime
Security and Counter Terrorism Exercise that took place in Brunei Darussalam and
Singapore, and a Maritime Security Field Training Exercise in New Zealand.

As for the new cycle of co-chairmanship of EWGs (2021-2024), Brunei Darussalam has
been working closely with Australia as co-chairs of the EWG on MM. In line with Brunei
Darussalam’s 2021 Chairmanship’s theme of “We Care, We Prepare, We Prosper”, the
EWG on MM is undertaking a component of Project-based Community Medical
Deployment (PCMD)/Medical Aid Provision (MAP) aiming to support an underprivileged
community in one of the ASEAN countries to enhance their healthcare provisions and
contribute to the community's progress in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
outlined by the United Nations.

The works of the EWGs have garnered understanding, promoted capacity building and
interoperability in all member states. More importantly, these have contributed towards
deeper trust and fostering stronger military-to-military relations among the armed forces
of the ADMM-Plus. Further to this, the practical cooperation in the EWGs contributes to
ASEAN’s collective response to addressing non-traditional security challenges. Particularly
on HADR, there have been increasing integration of HADR in the broader ASEAN disaster
response mechanism with efforts for closer coordination between military and civilian
responders.

b) Peacekeeping and Peace Monitoring Initiatives
Brunei Darussalam also remains committed to participating in peacekeeping and peace
support operations. Since 2008, the RBAF has been involved in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in which a total of 375 RBAF personnel have been deployed to
UNIFIL, and embedded under the Malaysian Armed Forces. The first contingent of the
RBAF in 2008 comprised five (05) personnel and has increased over the years, totalling
thirty (30) personnel in 2022. Throughout the fourteen years of RBAF’s involvement in the
UNIFIL, six female members of the RBAF served in the peacekeeping operations.

61

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

It has also deployed personnel for the International Monitoring Team (IMT) in Mindanao,
Southern Philippines since 2004, and in the 2021-2022 peacekeeping mission, there were
four (04) RBAF personnel and one (01) Royal Brunei Police Force (RBPF). Further to this,
Brunei Darussalam contributes to the Mindanao peace process as a member of the
Independent Decommissioning Board (IDB) alongside Turkey and Norway since 2014. Four
(04) RBAF officers are currently serving in the IDB Verification, Monitoring and Assistance
Team (IDB VMAT) in Mindanao, Southern Philippines.

At the operational theatre level, such initiatives provide exposure and knowledge in
operation in conflict environments for the personnel involved. The interactions and
engagements of RBAF with its foreign counterparts and organisations further contribute
to Brunei Darussalam’s defence diplomacy. At the same time, these initiatives showcase
the RBAF image as a professional force that can contribute meaningfully. For Brunei
Darussalam, this also reflects significant support towards regional and global efforts to
bring about peace and stability.

c) Countering Terrorism, Radicalisation and Violent Extremism
While overall threats from terrorism in Brunei Darussalam remain low, the country
remains equally vulnerable to the exposure and potential dangers posed by the spread of
extremist narratives and infiltration of any extremist elements. Brunei Darussalam has
heavily emphasised on preventive measures to ensure peace and stability with regards to
countering extremist narratives, radicalisation, and terrorism. The country’s counter
measures thus focus on a comprehensive Whole of Nation approach through various
forms of preventive measures, such as promotion of social harmony, while enforcement,
as well as monitoring platforms also exist to mitigate the impacts of terrorism.

Legal frameworks, such as the amended Anti-Terrorism Order (2012), Anti-Terrorism
(Terrorist Financing) Regulations 2013, as well as the Internal Security Act (Revised, 2008)
all exist to reinforce and strengthen counterterrorism efforts and commitment in Brunei
Darussalam. Brunei Darussalam also has a strong centralised authority on religious-related
affairs. This includes regulating a standardised education curriculum, preparation of
standardised text in sermons, and screening of both Muslim and other faiths religious
preachers to avoid misinterpretation of religious values, and deter the spread of deviant

62

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
or violent ideologies amongst society. The centralisation of religious authority suggests
that the government retains the sole responsibility of representing Islam and other
religions, in turn minimising the possibility of propagation of radical ideas among citizens.
Further, the community is regarded as playing an important proactive role to alert any
suspicious activities to the authorities’ attention.

Meanwhile, on the domestic front, the National Security Committee (NSC) has been
established to oversee security matters at the national level. Formally established on 15
February 2007, the Committee acts as the national body in overseeing key security
matters in the country. The Committee consists of five executive working committees,
looking at issues ranging from maritime security, law enforcement, intelligence,
technological support, and cyber security. Additionally, the Royal Brunei Police Force
(RBPF) and the Internal Security Department (ISD), both under the purview of the Prime
Minister’s Office (PMO), Brunei Darussalam, are two key agencies that retain
responsibility for internal security, especially with regards to law enforcement and
keeping peace.

d) Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
In Brunei Darussalam, the National Disaster Management Centre (NDMC) is the central
agency in undertaking the whole-of-nation approach towards disaster management in the
country. NDMC is under the administration of the Ministry of Home Affairs, established
under Disaster Relief Order 2006. According to Disaster Relief Order 2006, the country is
guided by two main documents in its efforts toward disaster management in the country;
National Standard Operating Procedure (NaSOP) and Strategic National Action Plan for
Risk Reduction (SNAP).

The NDMC looks at all aspects of disaster management ranging from prevention,
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery through policies, strategies, and
practices. It also acts as a leading government agency to coordinate the country’s multiagencies effort in any events that requires relief operation. The NDMC also initiates
interaction and engagement through its various community outreach program across the
four districts to create awareness and collect localised knowledge as part of its preventive
efforts. This is also to ensure the local community can prepare themselves and evade any
foreseeable disasters through early management.

63

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

While the primary responsibility for disaster management is under the purview of the
NDMC, the RBAF has served as a supporting role, particularly in the events that
overwhelms NDMC’s resources. The NDMC also manages multi-agency collaboration
along with the RBPF, the Fire and Rescue Department (FRD).

Brunei Darussalam has actively supported HADR efforts around the region. Through the
various ASEAN’s platforms and mechanisms, there has been improvements in national
disaster-response coordination and capabilities derived from the sharing of best practices
among member states as well as regional cooperation, when required. There has also
been better integration and coordination on HADR in the broader ASEAN disaster
response mechanism with effort for closer coordination between military and civilian
responders.

NATIONAL
Disaster Management Strategic Policy Framework (DMSPF)
The NDMC is currently working to develop a Disaster Management Strategic Policy
Framework (DMSPF) that will incorporate the targets of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. DMSPF aspires to synergize Climate Change
Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction. It aims to integrate a Whole-of-Nation approach
for effective disaster management planning and programming across agencies and
sectors. This framework will dissolve the Brunei Darussalam’s Strategic National Action
Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (SNAP) 2012-2025 and introduce a more updated policy
which will address wider scope of disaster in line with the establishment of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 as well as the AADMER work
Programme 2021-2025. DMSPF’s priority programmes will cover Disaster Research, Policy
and Governance, Disaster Risk Assessment and Monitoring, Disaster Mitigation and
Adaptation, Disaster Preparedness, Disaster Response and Immediate Relief, and Disaster
Recovery.

On 28 February 2023, NDMC in collaboration with Brunei Darussalam’s Ministry of Home
Affairs conducted a DMSPF Workshop and facilitated a Table-Top Exercise (TTX) at the
Ministry of Home Affairs. It was participated by the Minister of Home Affairs and attended
by representatives from relevant agencies in disaster management such as District Offices

64

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
(DOs), Brunei Fire and Rescue Department (BFRD), Brunei Darussalam Meteorological
Department (BDMD), Community Development Department (JAPEM), Royal Brunei
Armed Forces (RBAF), Royal Brunei Police Forces (RBPF), Emergency Medical Ambulance
Services (EMAS), Public Works Department (PWD), including grassroots and community
leaders. The objective is to test the response of multi-agencies on El Nino-related
scenarios (wildfires) and to test plans such as Tremor, Earthquake and Tsunami Response
Plan in 2022. This is one of the initiatives to ensure Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
measures are implemented and aligned with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030.

SOPs, Response and Action Plans
The NDMC has developed several plans and SOP namely National Standard Operating
Procedures (NaSOP); Flood Response Plan, Tremor, Earthquake and Tsunami Response
Plan and Temporary Shelter Management Plan (PPSe) which the NDMC has cascaded to
relevant agencies to improve capacity in managing all different types of disaster through
strong cooperation and coordination among relevant stakeholders.

Disaster Awareness Programmes
In order to become a disaster-resilient nation, it is important to have good engagement
with the community on disaster awareness and management. The NDMC is a strong
advocate for a knowledgeable and skilful community which understands its roles in
protecting itself against harms throughout the disaster phases that can contribute
towards effective disaster management efforts. Some of NDMC’s initiatives on disaster
awareness and management are the Community-Based Disaster Risk Management
(CBDRM) Programme, School-Based Disaster Risk Management (SBDRM) Programme and
Disaster Preparedness Coordinator (DPC) Programme conducted annually to promote an
understanding of DRR concept to the general population at all levels of society including
community and school. The programme modules are designed according to the target
audiences, for instance, grass root leaders or community leaders, school community, our
youth and public in general.

Recently, the NDMC in collaboration with the Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports has
conducted a Basic DPC Programme from 23-29 January 2023 at the Program Khidmat Bakti
Negara (PKBN) Training Camp in Batu Apoi, Temburong District for trainees under the 11th

65

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Intake of the National Service Programme. In addition, the NDMC celebrates the ASEAN
Day for Disaster Management (ADDM) thus programmes are elaborated through public
engagement and social media such as radio and quizzes on social media.

Brunei Darussalam conducts Public Safety, Health and Security Training Services (PSHS)
Courses through the CAE-Brunei Multi-Purpose Training Center (CAE-Brunei MPTC) as part
of an agreement between Brunei Darussalam and Canadian Aviation Electronics (CAE) Inc.
since September 2017. The training program aims to establish and enhance understanding
of disaster management, including providing initiatives that can be implemented at the
grassroots and community levels to collectively manage disasters. Furthermore, it
supports the objectives of the national vision Wawasan Brunei 2035, which are to have an
educated, highly skilled and successful population, as well as a dynamic and resilient
quality of life for the people and economy. Under this training program, a total of 19
courses have been offered over an 8-year period and have commenced according to an
agreed training plan prepared by the CAE-Brunei MPTC and the NDMC. A total of 76
Government and Non-Government agencies have since been invited to attend these
courses where a total of 7,033 participant have been successfully trained in the PSHS
Courses through on-site and online training. The training courses will continue to be
offered to Government and Non-Government agencies throughout 2023.

REGIONAL
As Focal Point for Brunei Darussalam for the ASEAN Committee on Disaster Management
(ACDM), the NDMC is continuously implementing initiatives towards supporting its
mission - towards a disaster resilient community and collective efforts of the ACDM and
its Working Groups, ASEAN Secretariat and the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management (AHA Centre) to support the ASEAN
Vision 2025 on Disaster Management in working together to build a safer and resilient
ASEAN Community.

A way forward with this vision is to ensure that the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (AADMER) would still be relevant and would
continue to serve as a comprehensive regional framework and policy backbone for
disaster management and emergency response in ASEAN. The implementation of
AADMER toward a people-centred, people-oriented, financially sustainable and

66

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
networked approach by 2025 will help to further strengthen the ASEAN Coordinating
Centre for Humanitarian Assistance in disaster management (AHA Centre)’s role as the
main coordinating body for disaster management, and to realize the vision of ‘One ASEAN,
One Response’.

In this regard, the NDMC continues to implement initiatives that cover four (4) phases of
a disaster management process, namely: 1) Prevention and Mitigation; 2) Preparedness;
3) Response; and 4) Recovery to develop resilience and to realize NDMC's vision to be a
Competent Coordinating Centre in Disaster Management in Brunei Darussalam.

Hosting of the 5th Meeting of the ACDM Working Group on Preparedness, Response and
Recovery (ACDM WG PRR) and the 16th Technical Working Group on Civil-Military
Coordination (TWG on CIMIC) in Brunei Darussalam
The NDMC is a Focal Point of the ASEAN Committee of Disaster Management (ACDM) and
Brunei Darussalam is a Governing Board Member of ASEAN Coordinating Centre on
Humanitarian Assistance in disaster management (AHA Centre). To enhance cooperation
with internal and external agencies, the NDMC has attended several meetings either
nationally, regionally or internationally. It allows the NDMC to work closely with relevant
agencies and other countries as well as to be up to date with our national initiatives done
by relevant agencies and what is happening in the region especially those who experience
a lot of disasters such as the Philippines and Indonesia on lessons learned and best
practices.

As Vice-Chair of the ACDM in 2023, Brunei Darussalam hosted the 5th Meeting of the
ASEAN Committee on Disaster Management (ACDM) Working Group on Preparedness,
Response and Recovery (ACDM WG PRR) Meeting and Other Related Meetings from 5-10
March 2023. The meeting was co-chaired by Malaysia, Myanmar & Singapore and
attended by ASEAN Member States (ACDM WG PRR) and other representatives from
regional and international organizations. In addition, Brunei Darussalam will conduct
several other ASEAN Programmes such as the ‘One ASEAN One Response’ Roadshow in
June 2023 aimed to provide stakeholders at the national level an understanding of
regional and international disaster management response mechanisms, the vision ‘One
ASEAN One Response’ - which is to bring together all of ASEAN when responding to a

67

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
major disaster either within the region or outside of the region, and their interoperability
with the United Nations (UN).

ASEAN Emergency Response and Assessment Team (ASEAN-ERAT)
Brunei Darussalam, through the NDMC, plays a role in assisting in emergency response
and humanitarian assistance in ASEAN Member States affected by disasters. In 2023, the
NDMC sent two (2) NDMC Officers to attend the 14th ASEAN Emergency Response and
Assessment Team (ASEAN-ERAT) Induction Course from 12-21 February 2023 in Da Nang,
Vietnam to improve their capacity and ability in terms of capacity development. To further
enhance the capacities of its ASEAN-ERAT Members, Brunei Darussalam has also sent two
(2) personnel from the NDMC and BFRD to attend the ASEAN-ERAT Level 2 Course on
Humanitarian Logistics held in Singapore and a further two (2) personnel from Tutong
District Office and Temburong District Office to attend the Level 2 Course on Civil-Military
Coordination in Singapore.

In addition, the NDMC has sent two (2) ASEAN-ERAT members from Brunei Darussalam to
Myanmar and the Philippines to conduct Rapid Assessment to assist the affected ASEAN
Member States in May and November 2022 respectively. As of now, there are 384
qualified ASEAN-ERAT Members and 29 nationals of Brunei Darussalam are active ASEANERAT Members. ASEAN-ERAT is a rapidly deployable response team to support the
affected ASEAN Member States during major sudden and slow on-set disasters. It is
collectively owned by all 10 ASEAN Member States and managed by the AHA Centre.

Donation Coordinator for ASEAN Village, Palu, Sulawesi, Indonesia, 2019
Brunei Darussalam’s practice during the 2018 Earthquake and Tsunami which hit Palu,
Central Sulawesi in Indonesia on 28 September was the first time in ASEAN that a nation
had managed to assist an affected ASEAN Member State where the contributions had
come solely from the public and the NDMC has been entrusted to coordinate the
contributions from the People of Brunei Darussalam to the AHA Centre and the
Government of Indonesia. The contribution has managed to construct 53 Permanent
Housing and 1 Mosque to the affected people. This highlighted the solidarity within ASEAN
to assist each other during disasters and highlighted the role and opportunity that the
public plays during disasters which we want to further strengthen towards a disasterresilient nation.

68

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Bandar Seri Begawan Declaration On The Strategic and Holistic Initiative To Link ASEAN
Responses To Emergencies And Disasters (ASEAN SHIELD)
During Brunei Darussalam’s Chairmanship of ASEAN in 2021, the adoption of the Bandar
Seri Begawan Declaration on Strategic and Holistic Initiative to link ASEAN Responses to
Emergencies and Disasters (ASEAN SHIELD) during the 38th and 39th ASEAN Summit also
underscores and maintains Brunei Darussalam’s commitment to enhancing the well-being
and livelihood of the ASEAN Communities to enable communities to thrive, prosper and
secure sustainable development when confronted with adversities resulting from natural
disasters and other emergencies. The adoption of the ASEAN SHIELD further captures the
spirit and values of ‘One ASEAN, One Response’ in times of crises.

MULTILATERAL
ASIA-PACIFIC Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction 2022 (APMCDRR 2022)
In September 2022, Brunei Darussalam through the Minister of Home Affairs participated
in the APMCDRR 2022 and delivered the Country Statement on behalf of Brunei
Darussalam. Among the key highlights presented in Brunei Darussalam’s shared during
the Conference include the development of a Disaster Management Strategic Policy
Framework (DMSPF) to reinforce the synergy between climate change adaptation and
disaster risk reduction towards achieving a disaster resilient nation. The DMSPF aligns with
the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency Response (AADMER),
reaffirming Brunei Darussalam’s strong commitment in accelerating national efforts in
reaching the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction targets.

Voluntary National Report On The Midterm Review Of The Sendai Framework For Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030 and Participation at the High-Level Meeting of the UN General
Assembly on the Mid-Term Review of the Implementation of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.

As the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 meets its half-way stage,
the Mid-Term Review provides the opportunity for Member States to assess the
implementation of the Sendai Framework to this juncture and assess the progress made
and challenges experienced by all Member States in improving and implementation
disaster risk reduction initiatives as well as take into account new and emerging threats

69

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
such as pandemics and the impacts of Climate Change. To assist the United Nations Office
for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) in developing the Mid Term Review Report of the
Sendai Framework, Brunei Darussalam through the National Disaster Council has
submitted its Voluntary National Report (VNR) which captures the outcome and national
efforts in accomplishing the goals of the Sendai Framework coinciding with the Country’s
commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

The VNR was developed by undergoing a Whole-of-Nation Approach through the
collection and consultation of qualitative data through mapping exercises amongst
agencies and organisations relevant to disaster management enabling the Country to
capture the challenges, barriers, opportunities and recommendations to improve disaster
management capabilities holistically.

Complementary to the submission of the VNR, Brunei Darussalam attended the High-Level
Meeting of the UN General Assembly on the Mid-Term Review of the Implementation of
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 (HLM MTR SFDRR) which
was held in New York, United States of America between 18-19 May 2023. The Delegation
was led by the Minister of Home Affairs in his capacity as the Chair of the National Disaster
Council. During the meeting which carried the theme “Working Together to Reduce Risk
for a Resilient Future”, Brunei Darussalam highlighted the importance of enhancing
regional cooperation with dialogue partners and organisations to develop innovative
solutions in disaster management to overcome the challenges face in the present and
future.

e) Non-Proliferation, Counter-Proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
Being a small nation, Brunei Darussalam sees the importance of adhering to nonproliferation, counter proliferation, arms control, and disarmament effort. Brunei
Darussalam is a signatory to various multilateral and global non-proliferation, counterproliferation, arms control, and disarmament agreements, notably those concerning
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Brunei Darussalam will continue its support for
non-proliferation, counter-proliferation, arms control and disarmament, as the country
believes consensus and universalisation of these instruments are needed to ensure peace
and stability, not only for Brunei Darussalam but the world.

70

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Brunei Darussalam illustrates such commitments by participating in confidence building
measures and activities, articulating support when needed, submission of reports to
ensure transparency, and capacity building through technical assistance and training.
With regards to the United Nations Security Council resolution (UNSCR) 1540, Brunei
Darussalam supported the resolution and continuously updating the UNSCR 1540 matrix
to fulfil the implementation of the resolution.

Brunei Darussalam also actively participates in regional effort for non-proliferation,
counter-proliferation, arms control, and disarmament, such as through ASEAN and ARF,
and in the international arena, the UN and its associating bodies.

f) Transnational Crime
Brunei Darussalam is equally vulnerable to various forms of transnational crimes. Brunei
Darussalam is a small country both in its size and population, thus diminishing some of the
pull factors for transnational criminal activities. However, while data generally record
minimal cases of transnational crimes, the COVID-19 pandemic have revealed
vulnerabilities in controlling certain forms of transnational crime. In particular, the country
observed an uptick of drugs and other related contraband trafficking and distribution.

Recognising the transnational nature such challenge, Brunei Darussalam remains
committed to working with regional partners bilaterally and multilaterally, particularly
with other AMS to strengthen international and regional cooperation in combatting
transnational crimes. This includes through the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on
Transnational Crime (AMMTC), which remains the central platform to strengthen
cooperation with regional and international partners. The current initiative that is
undertaken by the AMMTC is the ‘Work Plan of the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent and
Counter the Rise of Radicalisation and Violent Extremism (2019 – 2025)’ that aims to
provide a framework which will guide ASEAN sectoral bodies in carrying out necessary
activities and monitor effective in preventing radicalization and violent extremism.
Further, another ASEAN-led initiative is the ASEAN Plan of Action in Combating
Transnational Crime (2016 – 2025) which aims to continue AMS close cooperation to
prevent and combat transnational crimes as well as to enhance ASEAN’s capacity to
address transnational crimes in an effective and timely manner. Furthermore, guiding
documents such as the ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint 2025 remains

71

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
important in strengthening political and security cooperation as well as enhancing the
capacity of AMS to respond to both traditional and non-traditional security threats
through defence cooperation and confidence-building measures.

g) Maritime Security
Brunei Darussalam remains committed in addressing threats pertaining to maritime
security. The National Maritime Coordination Centre (NMCC) has previously identified
three main concerns to maritime security, namely terrorism, man-made disasters, and
activities of transnational crimes. In 2022, Brunei Darussalam held a ground-breaking
(perletakan batu asas) event for its first-ever National Coastal Surveillance System (NCSS)
project that supports efforts in maintaining and protecting the country’s maritime
domain. Its operations centre will be placed under the command of the NMCC at the Prime
Minister’s Office, Brunei Darussalam, to enable centralisation and coordination through a
whole-of-nation approach.

In the latest 2021 Defence White Paper, the document underscores the RBAF’s efforts to
forge credible and professional reputation through maintaining its engagements with
international partners. In turn, these engagements translate to providing opportunities
and support for the RBAF to strengthen its security; including but not limited to maritime
security.

IV. Role of ARF
Since its establishment, the ARF remains relevant to the attainment on constructive
dialogues and discussions, particularly on mutual interests and concerns involving the
issues of security. The platform gathers several stakeholders from various sectors such as
the subject matter expert from professional institutions to expand the information and
knowledge-sharing which is in line to the three goals of ARF related to confidence building,
preventive diplomacy as well as conflict resolution.

As the ARF is commemorating the 30th anniversary in 2023, Brunei Darussalam remains
committed to the ARF-related platforms in the defence sectoral that prove to be an
indispensable platform for member countries to deepen understanding of the different
perspectives on regional security concerns. Additionally, both ARF Defence Officials’
Dialogue (DOD) and ARF Security Policy Conference (ASPC) have long provided an avenue

72

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
for defence and military officials to establish networks, build confidence and promote
mutual trust among one another. Furthermore, the ARF Heads of Defence Universities,
Colleges and Institutions Meeting (HDUCIM) has been valuable in promoting military
education best practices and exchanges of research on security issues.

Brunei Darussalam commends the work and commitment of ARF Participants through the
various initiatives such as workshops and sharing of best practices, including in the
defence sector that can go a long way towards enhancing the region’s post-pandemic
resilience.

The ARF continues to undertake a holistic approach by including timely issues such as the
increasing security risks of and in ICTs, maritime security and the increased risk of nuclear
threats. With the presence of nuclear risks in the region and globally, this underlines the
ARF’s continued importance to discuss practical ways and measures to alleviate the threat
that arises which will have spill over effects on the region.

a) National Contributions to Enhancing the ARF and Regional Security

During Brunei Darussalam’s co-chairmanship of the ARF DOD with Australia in May 2021,
Brunei Darussalam proposed for the ARF DOD to have an institutionalised agenda on the
sharing of developments of other regional defence cooperation such as the ADMM and
ADMM-Plus as well as any other initiatives that could be shared to promote confidence
building and exchange of best practices. In line with the Guide to ARF Processes,
Procedures, Practical and Protocol as well as the ARF Ha Noi Plan of Action II (2020-2025),
the proposal intends to support the promotion of defence and security dialogue as well
as practical cooperation to enhance regional peace, security and stability which includes
enhancing synergy between ARF and the ADMM-Plus.

These various levels of engagements within the ARF underscore the inclusiveness and
ongoing efforts in fostering dialogue and consultations. Brunei Darussalam remains
committed to the ARF processes in promoting mutual understanding and working
together to address the wide range of regional security challenges. In an increasingly
uncertain regional security environment, engagements through dialogue, collaboration

73

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and cooperation at bilateral and multilateral levels are crucial to manage future risks in a
comprehensive manner.

b) Future of ARF
The ARF remains an important ASEAN-led mechanism and platform in enabling the
contribution towards peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region, complementing various
political, security and economic processes for its member states and wider security
environment. Overall, the ARF has been paramount in fostering capacity building, mutual
trust through Confidence Building Measures (CBM) and dialogue amongst Foreign
Ministers of its member states, and in ensuring consistent dialogue towards a secure
regional security environment amidst growing external challenges. However,
institutionally, the progressive expansion of activities and scope within the ARF may
warrant review of its initiatives to avoid repetition, and enable streamlining of the
platform’s significant thematic contributions.

74

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

CAMBODIA
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
The world today has long been faced with the challenges that arise in a rapidly changing
global environment. The current security context is shaped by a range of factors and
several broader trends that interact in a variety of ways to produce a volatile and
unpredictable security environment, characterised by both traditional and non-traditional
security threats. These are all contributing to a world that is more interconnected and
interdependent than ever before, but also more complex and unpredictable.

In recent years, the world at large seems to be encountering more and more new threats,
raising concerns about superpower rivalry, a changing world order, the rapid
technological revolution, the slow pace of economic growth and arms proliferation. The
rise of new strategies in the region and the recent establishment of partnerships followed
these challenges and the desire to change geopolitical conditions in the region.

Given the complexity of the current situation, it is clear that there are no easy solutions
to the challenges that we face. As the challenges are often diffused and difficult to predict,
they require sustained solidarity and cooperation among states and non-state actors. The
complex and interconnected nature of the security challenges today highlights the
importance of cooperation between countries in the region for safeguarding peace,
stability and security. Indeed, resolving issues, ensuring stability, building lasting peace
and harmony and promoting prosperity for the region and the world as a whole depends
on joint efforts taken with goodwill, understanding, transparency and mutual respect.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
The Ministry of National Defence of Cambodia released the latest strategic defence policy
- known as the Defence White Paper 2022 (DWP2022) - in May 2022. The ultimate goal of
the DWP2022 is to reshape Cambodia’s national defence objectives towards 2030 through
a carefully defined strategy of safeguarding peace, defending national interests, and
strengthening international cooperation. Cambodia’s defence policy intends to promote
a stable, secure, and rules-based order by pivoting on four key defence priorities,
consisting the border defence; internal security; military reform; and international
cooperation.

75

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Border defence remains one of the top defence priorities for Cambodia. While the process
of border demarcation with our neighbouring nations is showing notable progress, we
continue to face hurdles in misperception that could escalate at any time. Overlapping
maritime claims are unlikely to be resolved shortly and Cambodia must remain subtle in
avoiding any kind of tensions. In addition, cross-border illegal activities remain a security
concern, including drug, arms and human trafficking, and other transboundary crimes. In
response to these challenges, the effort of maintaining political and security dialogues
through existing bilateral and multilateral mechanisms is vital so as to maintain a peaceful,
stable, and developed borders with our neighbouring nations.

Over the years, the Royal Cambodian Government has taken measures to repel and
counter threats posed to domestic security. The attempts to ravage peace and stability
through subversive acts have come about over the past few years. The emergence of both
internal and external cybercrime of any form also poses an unprecedented threat to
national cyber security. Thus, the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF) will play a
leading role in countering cyber threats in the future.

In term of terrorism, Cambodia has so far not encountered any threats in the form of
international terrorism. Despite this fact, the spread of ideological extremism and
radicalism in the region, and the use of sophisticated technology such as artificial
intelligence (AI), robotics, and biotechnology have posed grave concerns not only to
regional and global security but also to the national security of Cambodia.

Moving beyond our borders, Cambodia is strongly committed to collaborating with our
regional and international security partners to safeguard and promote peace, security,
and stability in the region. We are firm in our support of existing regional security
architectures namely the ADMM, ADMM-Plus, East Asia Summit, and ASEAN Regional
Forum, among others. We will continue to build strong partnerships with regional
partners in human resource development, capacity building, and exchange of expertise.

Over the next 10 years, the RCAF will undertake its reform process aiming at restructuring
our defence and military institutions, improving military personnel management and
human resource capabilities, simplifying roles and responsibilities, and upgrading our
platform, including modernization of land, sea, and air defence capabilities. This

76

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
modernisation will enable the RCAF to increase participation in exercises and activities
under the ASEAN frameworks.

Ream Naval Base Modernisation
Cambodia has always displayed good will to strengthen and encompass military
cooperation with countries in the region and around the world, based on the principle of
respect of mutual interests. The development of the RCAF’s capability is an obligation of
the RGC in the same way as that of other countries in the world. The modernisation of
Ream Naval Base, which has been in progress for many years, is an important part of the
capability development of the Royal Cambodian Navy. This process aims to take more
effective control of Cambodia's maritime zones and to participate with other nations in
maintaining peace, stability and security in the region. The continuous baseless
accusations related to the foreign military presence, aimed at the disruption of this
development have revealed an intention to view Cambodia as being unable to master the
defence of its sovereignty. These unfounded accusations are a pretext for geopolitical,
hegemonic strategy in Southeast Asia and the Asia Pacific.

However, Cambodia always demonstrates its transparency and mastery of all activities
concerning the Ream Naval Base development. Cambodia has made a lot of concessions
when other countries are unable to do the same. We have opened for the visits to Ream
Naval Base for many military representatives which have been regarded as cooperation
through goodwill and friendship. In addition, we notified relevant parties, through official
correspondence and public announcement, that foreign-funded buildings in the base
were to be relocated. However, we find it difficult to accept any further demands that are
by nature an intention to search or investigate these areas. Such demands violate
Cambodia’s sovereign rights and territorial integrity, and contradict the spirit of
maintaining friendship and cooperation.

Cambodia will be the sole owner of Ream Nava Base in all circumstances. No foreign
countries will be given exclusive management of this Base. This is not only Cambodia's full
responsibility but also a commitment to its sovereignty which is enshrined in the
Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia and guaranteed through the strong policy of
the RGC. Nevertheless, Cambodia has repeatedly reaffirmed that any cooperation for
mutual interests is always welcome, including the use of Ream Naval Base, after the

77

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
completion of the development, by international partners with Cambodia as the exclusive
owner. In this regard, Cambodia reiterates that the modernisation of Ream Naval Base is
not a security threat, but instead, serves the interests of the entire region.

III.

Cambodia's Contributions to Regional Security
1. Counterterrorism
Terrorism is a threat to both global social and security orders, an issue to world
leaders and populations. Cambodia has taken a significant step to fight against
terrorism. Although the security scope has been shifted over to the world-long
stretching pandemic (COVID-19) since 2020, combatting international terrorism has
again taken its shape in our government and the National Counter-Terrorism Special
Force is in a ready posture, for both training and operations. We have planned for
national and international exercises with our counterparts to strengthen our skills,
information sharing and fighting capabilities. To make sure of a peaceful region by
preventing terrorist activities; deterring and combatting terrorism to maintain peace,
stability, and security and promoting cooperation in the region and the world.

In response to growing terrorism threats, the RGC has taken several important steps
which include:
-

Fighting for information and sharing them with our operational partners, both
nationally and internationally.

-

Support external partners at all levels on various counter-radicalization
initiate by the government such as educational programs and local
community supports, spreading soft approach agendas, nesting local
community regardless of their religions, races or colours by encouraging them
to share, talk and understand each other as a measure of preventing them
from being radicalized.

-

Enhancing maritime security via the empowerment of the National
Committee for Maritime Security and its maritime CT components, by
conducting joint training and exercises, and by sending relevant individuals
for joint planning exercises, information sharing workshops, seminars and
many other educational programs. All these activities can assure that
Cambodian CT elements are better equipped with knowledge and skills.

78

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
-

Implementing measures to improve land and sea border security as well as
closely cooperating with partners in strengthening response capabilities on
cross-border terrorism through monitoring and tracking terrorist movements,
activities and networks as well as supporting resources and supply routes.

Thus far, Cambodia can conduct fully self-reliant training and operations among its
Special Operation Forces. We have increased our operational capabilities to respond
simultaneously across the country, gaining control over any unforeseen and foreseen
situations that required quick release and response forces.

The government on the other hand has participated in different cultural, traditional,
and religious celebrations of the communities to show that the government is here to
support everyone equally at all costs and that everyone is part of the society, sharing
the same land, celebrating each other traditional, cultural and religious events. Doing
this lets everyone know that their cultures and traditions are fully accepted and
respected within this country.

2. Non-Proliferation, Counter Proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
The Kingdom of Cambodia has committed to a range of capacity-building for nonproliferation, counter-proliferation, arms control and disarmament regarding
national laws and legislations as well as regional and international legal instruments
on disarmament and non-proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) to
present the illicit trafficking of WMD and materials used in developing such weapons.
Cambodia has been actively engaging in various diplomatic efforts to ensure the
peaceful use of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) materials and
the national implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540
(UNSCR 1540).

According to Article 54 of Cambodia's Constitution, the manufacture, use and storage
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons shall be prohibited. To support the global
movement on the non-proliferation of WMD, the Kingdom of Cambodia has adopted
various international conventions and treaties to combat the use of WMD and
become a party to several organizations and treaties which include the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC),

79

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone, Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW), United Nation Security Council Resolution
1540 (UNSCR 1540), International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, ASEAN Convention on Counter-Terrorism, International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), and Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol.

At the national level, significant legal frameworks were adopted and have been
implemented such as Law on the Prohibition of Chemical, Nuclear, Biological and
Radiological Weapons; Law on Counter-Terrorism; Law on the Management of
Weapons, Explosives and Ammunition; Law on the Management of Pharmaceuticals;
Law on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism; Law on
Combating Financing of Mass Destruction Weapons; and Law on the Punishment of
Acts of Terrorism.

The Kingdom of Cambodia established the National Authority for the Prohibition of
Chemical, Nuclear, Biological and Radiological Weapons (NACW) to serve as a national
central point for effective liaisons with international organizations and States Parties
in disarming and combating the proliferation of CBRN weapons. The NACW is also
missioned to disseminate, educate and raise public awareness of national and
international laws.

The Kingdom of Cambodia recognizes the importance of developing an integrated and
comprehensive approach to mitigating CBRN risks/threats and works with
international partners to minimize such dangers by developing the CBRN National
Action Plan (NAP) to focus on prevention, detection, and preparedness and response.
The CBRN NAP covers a wide range of CBRN activities and is tailored to addressing
CBRN hazards – whether natural, accidental or criminal in origin – of greatest
relevance to the country.

The Kingdom of Cambodia is fully in line with many initiatives including the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), European Union CBRN
Centre of Excellence (EU CBRN CoE), United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute (UNICRI), Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization

80

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
(CTBTO), United Nation Office of Disarmament Affairs (UNODA), the activities of the
Committee established according to the United Nation Security Council Resolution
1540 (UNSCR 1540), International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), World Health
Organization's protocol for assessing National Surveillance and response capacities
for the International Health Regulations (IHR), International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL), World Customs Organization (WCO), Network of ASEAN
CBR Defence Experts, and countless partner countries in the region and world.
Cambodia also faithfully cooperates and implements the law on combating the
finance of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in Cambodia. It means
that Cambodia values collective efforts and is ready to collaborate and cooperate with
all countries in the region and global arena to mitigate CBRN risk and threat to the
security and peace of the people.

3. Transnational Crime
Transnational Crime is a common concern and poses a complicated challenge in the
Southeast Asian region, including Cambodia. Currently, transnational crime has not
yet decreased. which poses a threat to the stability, security, economic development
and public order of each country in the region. Although there has been cooperation
between the countries in the region to suppress and prevent crime, it is still evolving
along each country's borders. Furthermore, criminal groups have well-organized
structures and networks. At the same time, globalization and regional integration
have made the movement along national borders, the flow of people, finance and
technology from one country to another become free and much easier. Moreover,
the rapid development of information technology is a factor that eases those
criminals' communication and their activities.
There are various types of transnational crimes, most notably:
a. Cybercrime: is a crime in the information technology era which includes
spreading fake news against legitimate government and hacking to steal
important data from public institutions and private companies, which causes
significant financial losses. This crime is now a contentious issue that also
presents a serious challenge.
b. Illegal Arms Smuggling: this is also a concern that needs to be closely
monitored amid the rising threat of terrorism and separatism against the

81

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
government. Terrorist groups could have used the weapons that they got from
illegal trade to attack government forces.
c. Drug Trafficking: this is still a challenge that needs to be carefully monitored,
particularly in the regions along the Mekong River due to the flow of drugs
from the Golden Triangle Region (the border between Myanmar, Thailand and
Laos). Local authorities have seized the illegal drugs that were planned to
export outside the region and the number of seizures is still on the rise.
International criminals are still trying to use Cambodia as a country to
produce, process and transport drugs in all forms through land, sea, and postal
means. Provinces along the border, especially in the northeast, remain
vulnerable to drug trafficking despite crackdowns on major cases and criminal
organizations. Furthermore, it is challenging for the government to monitor
the situation as criminals attempt to use small entry points to illegally cross
the borders. Nowadays, illegal drug production and trafficking trends across
the world continue to rise, especially the production of synthetic drugs (ATS),
which is a major threat in every region including Cambodia.
d. Human Trafficking and Labour Exploitation is still a challenge in the region.
Tens of thousands of victims have been trafficked along the borders and
deceived by middle persons to work without payment. Some women have
been forced to work overtime or been sexually exploited. Despite travel
restrictions during COVID-19, Cambodia remains concerned about cases of
people being trafficked through illegal entry points along the borders.
e. Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing is a common concern in the
region and the world because syndicates and terrorist groups always launder
their money through transferring, trading and doing business from one
country's bank to another. Cambodia is among the countries that are
vulnerable to money laundering and terrorist financing. Therefore, the
government has closely monitored these issues.

Measures and Cooperation to Suppress the Transnational Crimes
●

Cybercrime
The RGC has both legal and institutional mechanisms such as:

82

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
-

The adoption of Digital Government Policy 2022-2035 on 28 January 2022,
which also focuses on the development of Digital Government infrastructure
and Cyber Security.

-

Law on Anti-Cybercrime (finalized drafting stage).

-

Sub-Decree on National Internet Gateway (NIC) which took effect on 16
February 2021 will allow the authority to maintain and protect the security and
safety of the Internet in Cambodia.

-

Established a Department of Anti-Cybercrime under the General Commissariat
of National Police, Ministry of Interior, to suppress all offences related to
cybercrime.

●

Illegal Arms Smuggling
-

Strictly enforce measures in checking and monitoring all flows of goods in all
target zones and border checkpoints in the country and along the borders.

-

Increase cooperation in the region to share information related to any case or
individual suspected of arms smuggling and ammunition -Improve
effectiveness in implementing the law on Arms control Explosive Substance
and Ammunition

●

Drug Trafficking
-

Enforce the capability to check and find narcotic substances by providing
modem equipment for law enforcement institutions.

-

All countries shall strictly enforce the law and punish criminals.

-

Raise awareness and educate the population, especially the youth, about the
risk and harmful impacts of consuming drugs.

-

Impose control measures on dual-use chemicals (which can be used as
precursors to produce illegal drugs) and plan to draft laws to control chemical
substances that can be used to produce illegal drugs.

-

The issuance of the seventh "one-year campaign strategy to combat illegal
drugs from 1 January to 31 December 2022 after the sixth successful "one-year
campaign strategy" to combat illegal drugs.

-

International cooperation with bordering countries.

83

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

Human Trafficking
-

Raise awareness and educate the population to understand the laws and
regulations such as labour law, the law on immigration, law on marriage with
foreign nationals, and explain the risks of illegal immigration so that they can
protect themselves from being exploited by crooks or some brokers.

-

Enforce the law on Immigration by the authority and strictly punish the
criminals in accordance with the law.

-

Strict control of the borders, as well as the corridors between the neighbouring
countries, is needed to prevent the pandemic and monitor illegal crossing
activities.

●

Combating against Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing
To combat money laundering, Cambodia adopted the law on Anti-Money Laundering
and Combating the Financing of Terrorism on 27 June 2020. This law paves the way
for effective enforcement of measures in combating illegal activities of terrorist
groups. On 18 January 2022, The Ministry of Justice formed a task force to fight money
laundering and the financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
terrorism, led by the minister of justice.

4. Humanitarian Assistant and Disaster Relief (HADR)
The continuation of competitions between powerful nation-states for geopolitical
influences, economic influences, and territorial integrity, brought greater challenges
to the global system which greatly influences the world's social, political, economic,
and security stability in the region and throughout the world. Complexities from these
challenges exert greater problems for many nation-states to access resources such as
food, medication, shelter, and energy. Compounded with the war in Ukraine,
environmental degradation, cyber security, socio-cultural and geopolitical changes
through civil wars and national identity have created even greater uncertainty and
complexity in our global environment. Furthermore, with the borderless global
environment, we are continually being exposed to even more vulnerability,
uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity (VUCA) in the global environment.

Beyond these transnational challenges, regional countries and nation-states
throughout the world are continued to struggle to contain the spread of the pandemic

84

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
diseases, which have significantly affected the economy, security, health, and wellbeing of our daily lives. During the spread of Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in 2019,
the RCAF and the Royal Gendarmerie played a significant role in implementing various
measures to thwart the spread of the pandemic diseases throughout the country.
Additionally, other non-traditional threats such as natural disasters have also been
increasingly prevalent in our global environment. As far as natural disasters and made
disasters are concerned, relentless typhoons, hurricanes, landslides, flash floods,
earthquakes, forest fires, building collapses, and traffic accidents have increased in
frequency at an alarming rate possibly due to the impact of climate change as well
human carelessness activities. Furthermore, traditional threats such as drug
trafficking, human smuggling, illicit arms trade, piracy, and other violent extremist
movements have affected our daily lives and well-being as well. Therefore, disasters
such as these often outweigh the capabilities of our respective governments, and
individual nation-states deal with them quickly in providing humanitarian assistance,
and responding to these disasters.

Even though, Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is no longer a major problem to the
regions as well as the whole world, the RGC has been continuing working endlessly
with its ASEAN member states, partner nations, civil societies, national and
international non-governmental organizations to establish and ratify new concepts,
procedures, guidelines, regulations, and law on disaster management. In addition,
the RCAF and the Royal Cambodian Gendarmerie have been implementing, and
participating through either bilateral or multilateral exercise activities on
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations with ASEAN militaries as well
as regional militaries in line with the ASEAN charter, agreement, protocol and other
existing mechanisms; and is committed to supporting all Defence cooperative
activities conduct by the ASEAN militaries, regional militaries. To further contribute to
national, regional, and world security, the RCG, the RCAF, and the Royal Cambodian
Gendarmerie have carried out measures in disaster relief operations through the
implementation of national legislation, and national policy; as well as through the
establishment of National Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM).
Additionally, the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces and the Royal Cambodian
Gendarmerie continue their participation in both bilateral and multilateral Defence

85

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
cooperative activities; particularly in Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
Operations (HA/DR).

Endlessly continuing its participation in Command Post Exercises, Field Training
Exercises (CPX/FTX), workshops, and seminars will undoubtedly strengthen the
capacity of our arm forces in performing humanitarian and disaster relief operation
tasks. For instance, recently the RCAF and the Royal Cambodian Gendarmerie
participated in a bilateral Gold Dragon HA/DR table-top exercise and field training
exercise with the Chinese Liberation Army. Respectively, five Cambodian gendarmerie
officers will be participating in an ASEAN HA/DR table-top exercise and field training
exercise in Indonesia which is co-hosted by Indonesia and India. Undoubtedly,
disaster preparedness and readiness are the key element to the strategic blueprint
for the ASEAN Community, and regional partners to hedge against this uncertainty as
well as the key element to promote a successful outcome and turn vision into reality.
In summary, continued efforts to strengthen the relationship and closer cooperation
while implementing more frequent pragmatic Defence cooperative activities among
the ASEAN militaries, and regional partners will undoubtedly build trust, confidence,
professionalism and partnership. In addition, our ASEAN militaries, and regional
partners will possess the capabilities, skill sets, and intellectual knowledge to respond
to these challenges while anticipating and preparing for those of tomorrow. To
succeed, we must harness and integrate all aspects of our capabilities, and intellectual
knowledge, and work closely with allies, friends, and partners.

In conclusion, we strongly believe that promoting closer defence cooperation and
implementing more pragmatic defence cooperative activities among the ASEAN
member states, and partner nations through either bilateral or multilateral exercises
would undoubtedly enhance our military's tactical, operational, and strategic
capability which eventually help to strengthen our national security, regional security,
and the world security as a whole.

5. Maritime Security
Regional Maritime development has been highly regarded as ASEAN’s growth centre,
pivot and heart of world trade linking the East and the West and one of the richest
regions of the world such as fishery, forest, oil, natural gas and mineral resources. The

86

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
sea is the gateway for trade and tourism; thus, the sea must be peaceful and stable.
Along with these developments, ASEAN faces a variety of challenges including piracy,
sea robberies, IUU fishing, transnational crime, human and drug trafficking,
contraband smuggling, terrorism, environmental destruction, climate change, and
other non-traditional threats. In particular, Cambodia has actively taken part in
several initiatives to develop the global maritime policy.

In response to maritime threats, the RGC established the National Committee for
Maritime Security (NCMS), which put into place overarching constitutional provisions,
national strategy and vision for Maritime Security. NCMS is a national inter-agency
mechanism responsible for leading two primary missions: (1) defending the country’s
maritime sovereignty and (2) managing cohesive maritime law enforcement for the
Kingdom of Cambodia. Identifying that Maritime Security requires operations from all
involved agencies of the government beyond Defence, NCMS facilitates and provides
cohesions for national cooperation strategically and tactically. NCMS has organized a
large-scale biennial national training exercise named MOHAROUM-EL since 2017,
aimed at strengthening collaboration and inter-agencies skills. Furthermore,
Cambodia has participated in almost all forms of maritime security fora including ARF,
AMF, EAMF, ACGF, EAS, ADMM, ADMM-Plus, etc. Cambodia is still an active member
of the Southeast Asia Maritime Law Enforcement Cooperation (SEAMLEC) which was
changed from the Southeast Asia Maritime Law Enforcement Initiative (SEAMLEI).

The Royal Cambodian Navy (RCN) plays a pivotal role in the defence of Cambodia's
coastline, islands and maritime sovereignty, monitoring the security of its main deepwater ports and crucial waterways. The RCN has been carrying out its international
missions under the framework of the ASEAN Charter, ASEAN Political-Security
Community (APSC) and spirit of ACDFM, ADMM and ADMM-Plus as a compass and an
integrated approach in maintaining peace, security and stability in the region. To
achieve a common goal of promoting sustainable maritime security the RCN continues
to work closely with other ASEAN navies in strengthening cooperation through
promoting constructive and collective participation including intelligence, education,
joint patrol, operations, logistics, exchange visits of high-ranking officials and
organizing interaction platforms such as ASEAN Navy Chiefs' Meeting (ANCM), ANCMStaff Meeting, ASEAN Navy Young Officers' Interaction Program (ANYOI), Guidelines

87

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
for Maritime Interaction, ASEAN Cadet Seminar and ASEAN Cadet Sail, ASEAN Navy
Training Experiences Exchange Program(ANTEEP), ASEAN Multilateral Naval Exercise
(AMNEX) and International Liaison Officer (ILO) to be stationed at the Information
Fusion Centre (IFC) to promote mutual understanding, effective working in solidarity,
enabling its navy to adapt and respond positively when dealing with unexpected
circumstances. Moreover, the RCN has been actively participating in international
activities including International Fleet Review (IFR), ASEAN - India Maritime Exercise
(AIME), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), ASEAN Maritime Forum (AMF), ASEAN Security
Outlook (ASO) and other international activities.

Cambodia has developed a maritime security policy and has also joined in several
initiatives to develop the global maritime policy. Especially, the NCMS and the RCN
express their fullest commitment and support to any effort or initiative with the
objectives to promote cooperation for maintaining regional maritime peace, security,
stability, prosperity and sustainable development.

6. ICTs Security
regularly participating in the ASEAN Cyber SEA Game, a notable regional capture-theflag competition conducted with the collaboration of Japan as well as the Singapore
Cyber Conquest, which were hosted by Singapore.

Since 2017, an annual cyber exercise, codenamed Cyber Angkor, has been conducted
to evaluate the cyber incident response readiness and crisis management capabilities
of chief information officers or officials in charge of IT across various ministries in
Cambodia. The primary objective of this exercise is to simulate a realistic cyberattack
scenario, enabling the response officers to become familiar with effective incident
processes and procedures, while also enhancing their expertise in cyber crisis
management and recovery.

The attraction of young, talented individuals to the ICT Security profession is of
paramount importance for Cambodia in its efforts to secure its cyber-infrastructure
and online services throughout the country, thereby facilitating regional connectivity.
To this end, Cambodia annually organizes a cyber competition, codenamed

88

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
"Cambodia Cyber Contest," which is open to university students and the public under
30 years old, with the aim of promoting interest in this crucial field.

In the recent year Cambodia has rolled out two policies, namely the Cambodia Digital
Economy and Society Policy Framework 2021-2035 and the Cambodia Digital
Government Policy 2022-2035 in the years 2021 and 2022. These policies are crucial
in strengthening Cambodia's ICT Security infrastructure and Secure data. To achieve
this objective, Cambodia is currently drafting laws on Cybersecurity and Personal Data
Protection. The adoption of these laws will reinforce the country's legal framework
and enhance the security of its ICT infrastructure and data.

Cambodia will launch its "Improvement on Cyber Resilience" project in 2023 with the
support of Japan. The primary goal of this initiative is to enhance the services provided
by the Cyber Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT). Additionally, the project aims
to promote cooperation and engagement with related organizations and stakeholders
such as CII operators and the public in the field of cybersecurity. Lastly, it intends to
identify laws, regulations, and standards to improve cybersecurity measures.

Regarding awareness-raising programs, Cambodia has partnered with industry
partners to conduct several seminars, workshops, and training sessions.

IV.

Role of ASEAN Regional Forum
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is the first region-wide Asia-Pacific multilateral forum for
official consultations on peace and security issues. An outgrowth of the annual ARF
activities, with the participation from 10 ASEAN member states plus 17 dialogues
partners, the ARF provides a setting for discussion and diplomacy and the development
of cooperative responses to regional Security issues. The principle and modalities of
dialogue and cooperation fostered by the ARF, such as mutual respect, dialogue on an
equal footing, and non-interference in each other's internal affairs together with the
cooperative security concept, are increasingly accepted by countries in the region.

The uniqueness of the ARF is that the forum serves as an effective platform where regular
collaboration and meetings between military and civil elements in the region take place.
The ARF continues to be the most comprehensive multilateral security forum in the

89

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
region. As an active and responsible ARF member, Cambodia is contributing to regional
peace and stability and supporting the development of a more robust, rules-based
regional order, while upholding the central role of ASEAN in any ASEAN-led forums,
Cambodia will also continue to make a valuable contribution to the forum through its
continuous active participation, contributing ideas and initiatives in many ARF activities,
including co-chairing various ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting with other ARF member states.

V.

Others
Cambodia would like to clarify that Cambodia has never had any cooperation project with
the US Naval Medical Research Unit 2 Detachment (NAMRU-2), comparable to those said
to be in operation in other countries. In 1998, the Ministry of Health of Cambodia had a
cooperation project with NAMRU-2 on “Vector Control Program for communicable
diseases, especially malaria and dengue fever”. This project ended the following year and
was not deemed relevant for further renewal, thanks to significant improvement of
Cambodia’s capacity.

90

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

CANADA
After 46 years as an ASEAN Dialogue Partner, and as we commemorate 30 years of cooperation
through the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), Canada is proud of our longstanding partnership with
ASEAN. This partnership is built on close to five decades of mutually beneficial collaboration.
We also reaffirm our strong support for ASEAN centrality and shared commitment to advancing
cooperation in line with the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific. ASEAN is central to Canada’s
Indo-Pacific Strategy, released in November 2022, which sets out an ambitious plan for Canada’s
increased engagement in the region over the next decade.
Canada deeply appreciates the support of our ASEAN partners as we look to elevate our status
to Strategic Partner at this year’s ASEAN-Canada Summit, reflecting our deepening engagement
with ASEAN and the ARF. Working with partners in the region, supported by our Indo-Pacific
Strategy, Canada will continue to take an active part in, and help strengthen, ASEAN-led
mechanisms. When ASEAN is stronger and more effective, we all benefit from its increased
ability to promote regional peace and stability.

I. Overview of the Regional Security Environment
The Indo-Pacific region will play a critical role in shaping Canada’s future over the next
half-century. Encompassing 40 economies, over four billion people and $47.19 trillion
in economic activity, it is the world’s fastest growing-region and home to six of
Canada’s top 13 trading partners. The Indo-Pacific is rapidly becoming the global
centre of economic dynamism and strategic challenge. Every issue that matters to
Canadians—including our national security, economic prosperity, respect for
international law, democratic values, public health, protecting our environment, the
rights of women and girls and human rights—will be shaped by the relationships
Canada and its allies and partners have with Indo-Pacific countries. Our ability to
maintain open skies, open trading systems and open societies, as well as to effectively
address climate change, will depend in part on what happens over the next several
decades in the Indo-Pacific region.

The Indo-Pacific region, with a strong ASEAN at its core, is important to Canada. As a
Pacific country, we deeply value a free and open Indo-Pacific, which is inclusive,
prosperous, secure, based on the rule of law, and that protects shared principles

91

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
including sovereignty, territorial integrity and peaceful resolution of disputes,
fundamental freedoms and human rights.

The rise of the Indo-Pacific and the profound impacts the region will have on the lives
of all Canadians demand a comprehensive, whole-of-society strategy to guide
Canada’s actions. That is why, in November 2022, Canada launched its Indo-Pacific
Strategy. The Strategy outlines five interconnected strategic objectives: promote
peace, resilience and security; expand trade, investment and supply chain resilience;
invest in and connect people; build a sustainable and green future; position Canada
as an active and engaged partner to the Indo-Pacific. Overall, Canada will defend its
national interests. Stability in this region directly impacts the safety, prosperity and
security of Canadians. Canada will invest in an enhanced military presence, along with
intelligence and cyber security, to promote security in the region and ensure the
safety of Canadians. Canada will build on its Women, Peace and Security agenda and
its established security partnerships to reinforce regional capabilities and promote
stability.

a.

Korean Peninsula

North Korea’s weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballistic missile programs are
a violation of UN Security Council (UNSC) resolutions and remain one of the most
critical threats to regional and international peace and security. Canada continues to
call on North Korea to completely, verifiably and irreversibly dismantle its WMD and
missile programs, and to avoid any further provocations. Canada is deeply concerned
by North Korea’s repeated ballistic missile launches throughout 2022 and 2023,
including launches of inter-continental ballistic missiles. We are also concerned by
indications that North Korea is preparing to resume nuclear testing. Given the
significant implications of this threat for the region, Canada believes that this issue
should be a central focus of the ARF’s work, including at all relevant inter-sessional
meetings. Canada is committed to working with ARF members and the broader
international community to ensure effective and coordinated implementation of
UNSC sanctions against North Korea.

Furthermore, Canada firmly believes that dialogue and diplomacy represent the only
path to security, stability and economic prosperity for the North Korean people, and

92

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
strongly supports the United States, South Korea and Japan in their efforts to
strengthen diplomatic engagement with North Korea in order to pursue
denuclearization and reduce the risk of conflict.

Canada calls on North Korea to cease all malicious cyber activities and to abide by the
norms of responsible state behaviour in cyberspace. Canada continues to call for
humanitarian access, noting the lack of delivery of humanitarian assistance and access
by trusted humanitarian organizations since North Korea’s decision to close its
borders in response to the pandemic. Since 2005, Canada has provided over CA$40.4
million in humanitarian assistance funding through international organizations to
address urgent needs in North Korea. Canada also remains gravely concerned by
North Korea’s human rights violations and the basic denial of freedoms of North
Korean citizens.

b.

Terrorism and Violent Extremism

Canada believes that effective and sustainable counter-terrorism (CT) and counterviolent extremism (CVE) measures require a global approach, combining domestic and
international efforts. These efforts must be guided by the principles of respect for
human rights and the rule of law, and be driven by partnerships. Such approaches
should also be evidence-based and gender-responsive. They must build on local
strengths and capabilities in order to foster sustainable resilience to violent
extremism among those affected.

Canada advocates for a coordinated, global civilian-led approach to CT and P/CVE that
safeguards democracy, human rights, the international rules-based order, and
integrates gender considerations and the Women, Peace and Security Agenda into CT
and P/CVE initiatives.

Canada’s CT efforts link domestic and international efforts, including intelligence,
policing, criminal justice, diplomatic, military, development and capacity building.
Canada supports international efforts to CT and prevent and counter violent
extremism, encompassing not only security-based CT measures but also preventive
steps to address the underlying conditions that drive individuals to join violent
extremist groups. Terrorism and violent extremism are global problems, not tied to

93

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
any particular religion, ethnicity or ideology. Canada strongly supports the UN’s Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the UN Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism.

Canada maintains strong bilateral relationships and is active in a number of
international forums in addressing issues related to CT and P/CVE. These include the
UN, the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) which Canada currently co-chairs with
Morocco, the G7 Roma Lyon Group, the Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering (FATF), and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

Canada continues to support the Global Coalition against Daesh in its military and
civilian-led efforts in Iraq and Syria. Under Canada’s whole-of-government Middle
East Strategy, Canada has provided over CA$3.5 billion in funding to respond to the
crises in Iraq and Syria, and address their impact on the region. While the Coalition
has succeeded in the territorial defeat of Daesh in the region, Daesh remains an
insurgent threat and continues to exploit instability in Iraq and Syria.

Canada is deeply concerned with the rise of ideologically-motivated violent extremism
(IMVE), both at home and abroad. IMVE threat actors operate in a decentralized
manner and pose a challenge to law enforcement because they exist primarily on the
web, making it difficult to identify them in the real world.

Canada will continue to build on its partnerships domestically and internationally to
counter the threats posed by terrorism, radicalisation and violent extremism through
bilateral and multilateral mechanisms. Addressing the underlying conditions
conducive to such threats is essential.

At the Christchurch Call 2022 Leaders' Summit, Canada announced CA$1.9 million in
funding over three years to Tech Against Terrorism for Phase 2 of their Terrorist
Content Analytics Platform (TCAP), a secure online tool that automates the detection,
notification, and analysis of verified terrorist content. This funding is made available
through the Canada Centre for Community Engagement and Prevention of Violence’s

94

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Community Resilience Fund (CRF), which supports partnerships and innovation in
countering radicalization to violence in Canada.

c.

East and South China Seas

Canada is concerned by escalatory and destabilizing actions in the East and South
China Seas. Activities such as the militarization of disputed features; the use of naval,
coast guard and maritime militia vessels to intimidate and threaten the ships of other
states; and the unilateral declaration of administrative authority over disputed
features are not conducive to the peaceful settlement of disputes. Canada opposes
all unilateral actions that escalate tensions and undermine stability and the rule of
law. Canada also reiterates its steadfast commitment to maintaining peace and
stability across the Taiwan Strait. The Taiwan Strait is an indispensable element in
security and prosperity in the international community and it is in the interest of all
parties to maintain the peaceful and accessible nature of this waterway.

Canada places great importance on lawful commerce, navigation and overflight rights,
as well as the sovereign rights and jurisdiction of coastal states, exercised in
accordance with international law, including UNCLOS. These fundamental principles
are essential to a secure, stable and prosperous maritime region. In this regard,
Canada reiterates that the 2016 South China Sea Arbitral Tribunal ruling is final and
binding on the parties. This ruling continues to be a significant milestone and a useful
basis for peacefully resolving disputes in the region.

Canada continues to urge that China and ASEAN Member States make concerted
efforts to implement the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea
(DOC). Canada is encouraged by ongoing negotiations between ASEAN Member
States and China to develop a Code of Conduct for the South China Sea. We encourage
transparency in the negotiations and reiterate than any agreement must be
consistent with international law, and without prejudice to the rights of third parties.
Despite diplomatic negotiations on a COC, Canada notes a continued deterioration of
the security situation in recent years, caused by increasing militarization and unsafe
and unprofessional conduct on by some militaries. Canada urges all sides to take steps
to de-escalate by removing military assets from disputed features, ensuring
interactions are conducted in a safe and professional manner, and engaging in good-

95

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
faith negotiations with a view to managing or resolving disputes in accordance with
international law. Canada is pleased to be contributing to initiatives that are helping
to build confidence and restore trust in the region and advance a comprehensive COC.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
Canada is committed to strengthening peace and security and to enhancing its
defence relations and engagement in the Indo-Pacific. In June 2017, the Government
of Canada released its defence policy, Strong, Secure, Engaged (SSE). Through this
policy, the Government of Canada directs the Department of National Defence (DND)
and the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) to deepen engagement with the Indo-Pacific
region and ASEAN. In particular, SSE directs DND/CAF to have a more consistent,
predictable, and sustainable presence in the region, including through seeking
membership in the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting – Plus (ADMM-Plus) and
increased participation in ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) events.

In November 2022, Canada released its new Indo-Pacific Strategy (IPS), which
reinforces the guidance extant in SSE and sets out an ambitious plan for Canada’s
increased engagement in the region over the next decade. The IPS is supported by
dedicated new investments totalling nearly CA$2.3 billion to enable unprecedented
engagement in the region. It commits to seeking membership in the ADMM-Plus,
strengthening Canada’s diplomatic presence in the region and increasing security
cooperation with ASEAN and its members. In this way, the IPS continues to recognize
and support ASEAN centrality in the region, including by reinforcing alignment
between Canada’s IPS and the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific, and our shared
commitments to the principles of openness, transparency, inclusivity, and good
governance.

Canada has taken steps consistent with the intent of SSE (2017) and the IPS (2022),
including increased contributions to the peace and security of the Korean Peninsula
through ongoing personnel contributions to United Nations Command, and consistent
participation in regional humanitarian assistance and disaster-relief efforts. Canada
has taken concrete steps to strengthen defence relations and cooperation with
partners in the Indo-Pacific, including by expanding its network of defence attaché
offices, establishing a more enduring naval presence, and increasing its regional

96

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
military contributions, notably through Operation NEON, which supports
international monitoring of North Korean sanctions evasion activities.

In recent years, Canada has increased its participation in regional military exercises
and high-level defence forums, such as the Shangri-La Dialogue and its related Sherpa
Meeting, the ARF Defence Officials’ Dialogue and Security Policy Conference, which
are both taking place in-person again after three years of virtual meetings, and the
ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Groups on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
and Maritime Security, both of which offer select activities that Canada can now
participate in given its achievement of Observer Status in 2023. Canada has also taken
key steps to support the deepening of cooperation with ASEAN defence institutions
by moving to establish new Memorandums of Understanding, Terms of Reference,
and defence policy and military staff talks with Southeast Asian partners, and seeking
to expand official talks and high-level defence dialogues with additional ASEAN
members in due course.

Canada’s defence policy also reaffirms our commitment to capacity building projects
and mutual education, training and assistance. The Military Training and Cooperation
Program (MTCP) supports cooperative, non-lethal training and military professional
development activities across the region that enhance interoperability, expand and
reinforce Canadian bilateral defence relations, and promote Canadian democratic
principles, the rule of law and the protection of human rights. The MTCP offers
training in broad categories such as language, staff officer, peace support operations
and professional development. There are 13 MTCP members within the Indo-Pacific
region, with over 3,500 candidates in this region having received sponsored training
to-date. In 2019-2020, DND trained 305 personnel from the Indo-Pacific region. The
COVID-19 pandemic paused much of MTCP’s activities, both inside and outside of
Canada, throughout 2020-2021. As a result, DND contributed lower than normal
figures in 2020-2021, training 42 personnel in the Indo-Pacific region. The program
has since adapted to delivering a selection of courses and training via distance
learning for the time being. Once conditions allow, bilateral training courses hosted
in Indo-Pacific countries will resume. DND will continue using the MTCP to build and
reinforce partnerships with Indo-Pacific countries and support Canada’s engagement
objectives across the region.

97

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

In Canada’s 2021-2022 fiscal year, Canadian federal government departments,
including the Department of National Defence, incurred a total of CA$31,976 million
in defence-related expenditures. Detailed information on Canada’s military
expenditure return is available below. Figures are reported in millions of Canadian
dollars (CA$).
Table 1. Canada’s FY 2021-2022 military expenditure in millions of Canadian dollars
(CA$)

98

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

III.

National Contributions to Regional Security
a.

Counterterrorism

Terrorist threats are complex, multifaceted and constantly evolving. They are not
tied to any particular religion, ethnicity or ideology. Terrorist threats represent a
global challenge that calls for flexible and forward-looking approaches that combine
domestic and international efforts.
Countering violent extremism and terrorism requires a whole-of-society vision that
puts partnerships, in particular with civil society, as one of its core pillars. Canada
believes that long-term sustainable success in countering terrorism and violent
extremism requires civilian-led, evidence-based efforts that respect human rights,
emphasize inclusion and diversity, and build on local strengths and capabilities. To
be effective and sustainable, efforts must also be guided by the principles of respect
for the rule of law and be gender responsive.
Canada is concerned about the evolving and increasing threat posed by violent
extremists, including the use of the Internet to recruit, to encourage violence, and
to spread hateful messaging.
Canada supports international efforts to counter terrorism and prevent and counter
violent extremism, encompassing not only security-based measures but also
preventive steps to address the underlying conditions that drive individuals to join
violent extremist groups.
Canada maintains strong bilateral relationships and is active in several international
forums to address issues related to terrorism and preventing and countering violent
extremism. These include the UN, the Global Coalition against Daesh, the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), the G7 Roma Lyon Group, the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF), and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Canada strongly supports the UN’s Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the UN
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, and we are pleased
to be working alongside our Tunisian partners to co-facilitate this year’s Strategy
review process.

99

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
b.

Non-Proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament

Canada’s steadfast efforts to advance non-proliferation, arms control and
disarmament are grounded in its commitment to the rules-based international order
and an inclusive, human-centred approach. As an active State Party to the major
international treaties and conventions, Canada will continue to work with ARF
partners to promote their universalization and full and effective implementation.
These include: the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Arms
Trade Treaty, the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention
(Ottawa Treaty), the Convention on Cluster Munitions, as well as other
arrangements such as The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile
Proliferation and the Missile Technology Control Regime. Canada is a strong
proponent of measures to prevent non-state actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, underpinned by UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1540 and its
successor resolution (UNSCR 1977). Canada also continues to advocate the long
overdue commencement of negotiations on a treaty banning the production of
fissile materials for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. Finally,
Canada supports the contribution of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones, such as the Treaty
of Bangkok, to regional security and nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
Canada welcomes all efforts aimed at securing the signatures of the Nuclear
Weapons States to the Treaty of Bangkok.
Canada promotes these priorities with partners through its Weapons Threat
Reduction Program (WTRP), our flagship contribution to the G7-led Global
Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction (GP).
The WTRP’s programming is closely coordinated with the ASEAN Secretariat and its
member states (including the Philippines) to enhance the security of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) weapons and related materials in the
region, including through the ARF. The ASEAN region is vulnerable to CBRN
trafficking owing, inter alia, to its geography, role as a transportation nexus, lack of
advanced export controls in certain nations, extremist groups active in the region,
and the presence of improperly secured radioactive sources as well as endemic
diseases, both with potential to be weaponized.

100

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Since 2011, Canada’s WTRP has delivered more than US$53 million in threat
reduction programming in the ASEAN region. Activities have focused on:
strengthening biosafety and disease surveillance capabilities; providing physical
protection security upgrades to facilities housing nuclear and radiological material;
strengthening measures to combat nuclear smuggling; building the competencies of
nuclear security personnel; and, building partner capacity to meet international
obligations set out in UNSCR 1540. Key efforts include the Mitigation of Biological
Threats in the ASEAN Region Programme, a highly successful collaboration between
the WTRP, the ASEAN Secretariat, and ASEAN member states to build capacity to
prevent, detect, and respond to naturally occurring, accidental, and deliberate
biological threats (US$26 million since 2013). The WTRP has also committed over
US$30 million to address North Korea’s weapons of mass destruction proliferation
activities, including building international capacity to implement UN sanctions and
investigating North Korea’s sanctions evasion activities.
Canada also makes concrete contributions to strengthen nuclear and radiological
security in Southeast Asia, through the WTRP’s support to the IAEA Nuclear Security
Fund and through implementing partners (including the US Department of Energy,
INTERPOL and the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute). One such project is upgrading security systems at medical facilities in
Thailand and Malaysia housing on-site high activity radioactive sources. Another
project is enhancing law enforcement and state intelligence agency capacities in
Cambodia, Laos, and Philippines, to prevent the illicit trafficking of nuclear and other
radioactive material.
Canada is pleased to have been the inaugural chair of the Nuclear Security Contact
Group, which aims to implement nuclear security commitments, identify ways of
addressing new and emerging threats, and maintain momentum on enhancing
global nuclear security. The NSCG currently includes a number of ASEAN members,
including the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore and Vietnam.
Acknowledging the role of nuclear technology to meet the increasing energy
demands of states and in achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goals, Canada
supports the peaceful uses of nuclear technology in a safe and secure manner, in full
cooperation with the IAEA. Canada strongly believes that implementation of the
IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol (AP) constitute

101

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the safeguards verification standard. Through signing and ratifying the AP, ARF
members and Dialogue Partners can support transparency and confidence in the
peaceful nature of their nuclear applications. Canada has consistently supported
efforts to build state capacity to implement the AP, and believes that the ARF can
help promote its universal implementation in the Indo-Pacific region.
c.

Transnational Crime

Canada is committed to working with Indo-Pacific partners, including through the
ARF, the ASEAN Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime (SOM-TC), and the
Bali Process, to counter threats to governance and stability arising from the activities
of transnational crime groups in the region, including cybercrime. Canada is also
committed to enhancing capacity building assistance in the region through the
recently announced, which will aim to support Indo-Pacific countries, including
ASEAN Member States, in their efforts to reduce threats from transnational
organized crime and international terrorism.
Frequently linked to organized crimes are trafficking networks, including trafficking
in persons, illicit drugs and/or firearms, migrant smuggling, money laundering, and
wildlife trafficking, which underscore the transnational dimension of these
challenges. Through the Anti-Crime Capacity Building Program, (ACCBP) Canada
currently supports 18 projects to address these threats, valued at over CA$28.9M.
Migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons are areas of particular concern. Canada
is currently an observer nation to the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking
in Persons and Related Transnational Organised Crime with a particular interest in
the trafficking in persons and migrant smuggling element of its mandate. Canada will
also seek full membership in the Bali Process at its next Ministerial meeting. In the
meantime, Canada remains an active observer and regularly participates in the
various Bali Process working groups and the Ad Hoc Group Senior Officials Meetings.
Through the ACCBP, Canada also works with regional partners to address these
issues, often in coordination with international organizations such as the UNODC,
the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and INTERPOL. ACCBP
programming focuses primary on countering migrant smuggling, cybercrime, and
the trafficking of drugs and other illicit substances, strengthening national and
regional approaches to identify, investigate, and counter migrant smuggling
102

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ventures; increasing the resilience of ASEAN member-states to combat cybercrime
in all its forms; and enhancing the capacity of law enforcement officials in
information sharing, safe-handling, monitoring, and awareness of synthetic opioids
across the region.
Canada is also a regular contributor to the annual International Narcotics Control
Board Conference on Precursor Chemicals and New Psychoactive Substances (NPS).
This conference is focused on practical measures countries can take to prevent the
diversion of precursor chemicals and trafficking of NPS. The Conference is held
annually in Thailand, which recognizes the specific challenges faced by the region
with respect to NPS trafficking and precursor diversion. Additionally, through the
ACCBP Canada supports the INCB Global Rapid Interdiction of Dangerous Substances
(GRIDS) Program which seeks to coordinate INCB’s global operational response to
non-medical synthetic (NMS) opioids and fentanyl-related substance trafficking, by
delivering tools, task force support, technical expertise and training to target regions
around the world.
In response to the opioid crisis, Canada, through the ACCBP, has recently signed onto
the UNODC’s global response to the Opioid Crisis – UNODC Opioid Strategy project.
This initiative aims to build the capacity of beneficiary law enforcement, forensic
laboratories and border control agencies officers to predict, prevent, and protect
against the challenges posed by synthetic opioids. This will be achieved through the
provision of equipment and training of law enforcement and border control officers
in Latin America and Asia.
Finally, the ACCBP has been reviewing potential cybercrime and cybersecurity
projects in the region and is currently supporting three regional cyber projects being
implemented by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the
Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House). These projects seek to
improve cyber resilience in the ASEAN countries through increased understanding
of the measures needed in preventing and prosecuting cybercrime, develop
information sharing networks between ASEAN stakeholders, and create a more
inclusive process at the UN cybercrime negotiations by supporting civil society
organizations to facilitate their meaningful participation.

103

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Canada continues to promote anti-corruption engagement in the region including
through participation in the APEC Anti-Corruption and Transparency Experts
Working Group and is working to increase visibility of regional anti-corruption efforts
across multilateral forums.
d.

Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief

The increasing intensity and frequency of natural disasters underscores the
importance of strengthening practical cooperation among Indo-Pacific partners on
disaster preparedness and response. Canada continues to be an active contributor
to humanitarian relief efforts in the region, by providing timely, effective,
coordinated and needs-based assistance, and working closely with partners in the
region to enhance cooperation, coordination, and awareness. Ongoing discussions
on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HA/DR) issues can serve to improve
the delivery of such capabilities in the future, particularly in a region which will likely
see ARF members respond to the same disaster.
The health-security capacity that Canada has helped to build in the ASEAN region
has meaningfully strengthened the capacities of ASEAN partners to respond to all
manner of biological threats, including COVID-19 and other emerging infectious
diseases. This includes support to the ASEAN Emergency Operations Center
Network, the ASEAN Plus Three Laboratory Network, and the ASEAN Biodiaspora
Virtual Centre. Canada is committed to further bolstering health-security capabilities
through targeted investments in the ASEAN Centre for Public Health Emergencies
and Emerging Diseases. Additionally, Canada is helping to build sustainable capacity
in Laos to detect, diagnose and respond to emerging viral pathogens of bioweapons
and bioterrorism concern.
Reiterating the importance of enhancing our response mechanisms through close
collaboration and exchange of best practices, Canada has been pleased to co-chair
the ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on Disaster Relief (ARF ISM-DR), together with Lao
PDR and China since 2019. Canada continues to reiterate the importance of finding
synergies between the numerous disaster relief initiatives in the region, and to
underline the importance of adopting a gender-sensitive approach in all aspects of
disaster management, from preparedness through responses and recovery.

104

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Likewise, Canada encourages all ARF members to adopt a more proactive approach
to collaboration, communications, planning and execution for the effective and
strategic delivery of disaster relief assistance. Moreover, Canada is pleased to be a
member of the Regional Consultative Group (RCG) on Humanitarian Civil-Military
Coordination for Asia-Pacific and considers that the Group represents a valuable
forum to share best practices on civilian-military cooperation in disaster response
and to improve predictability and interoperability in the region.
With the number of engagements related to disaster response in the region, Canada
looks forward to working with ARF partners to better assess opportunities for
synergies between the ARF and other mechanisms, including the RCG, EAS, and
ADMM+, that strengthen ASEAN capabilities and advance local approaches to
disaster response and risk reduction.
e.

Maritime Security

As a Pacific nation, Canada is committed to contributing to maritime security,
upholding international law, and preserving peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific
alongside our ARF partners. ARF cooperation on maritime security issues will
continue to support the region’s security and prosperity as well as global economic
health by ensuring the efficient and secure movement of goods and people.
Canada regularly deploys military ships, aircraft, and personnel to work with our
allies and partners in the region. Canada deploys vessels to the Indo-Pacific region
to promote maritime security, uphold navigation rights, enhance interoperability
with partners, build mutual trust and increase readiness to respond to natural
disasters. When deployed, the Royal Canadian Navy regularly conducts port visits
and participates in cooperative deployments and joint and multinational exercises.
Canada also supports multinational efforts to counter North Korea’s maritime
evasion of UN Security Council sanctions.
More broadly, Canada is committed to working with international organizations to
meet the security challenges of a complex maritime environment and recognizes the
importance of broadening international consensus when addressing these
challenges. We are actively engaged in a number of international forums, including
the International Maritime Organization and the North Pacific Coast Guard Forum –
which brings together experts from maritime safety and security agencies in Canada,
105

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
China, Japan, South Korea, Russia, and the United States. The North Pacific Coast
Guard Forum fosters multilateral cooperation and best practices through
information sharing on matters related to fisheries enforcement, maritime security,
illegal migration, illegal drug trafficking and combined operations.
Civil society and Track II initiatives can also make a useful contribution to developing
informed options for regional partners in areas such as regional connectivity and
preparedness to address incidents at sea. Canada will continue to support initiatives
to organize workshops and seminars in ARF countries on these themes, and will
encourage civil society, academics and others to contribute to the discussion by
submitting constructive, original and non-zero-sum proposals that can advance
solutions for peaceful resolution.
f.

Cyber (ICT)

The ARF region is susceptible to cyber threats emanating from both state and nonstate actors, whether through the theft of intellectual property and sensitive
information, the compromise of systems and critical infrastructure, the theft of
money, and other malicious activity. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the
threat of malicious activity against the health sector, where cyber threats to
hospitals and other health care providers have increased, in addition to cyber means
being used to spread misinformation related to the pandemic. The pandemic has
also highlighted concerns relating to how states seek to censor, control and partition
the Internet under the pretext of cyber security and the misuse of cyberspace by
criminals.
The ARF first addressed cyber-security issues in 2006 and has been steadily
increasing its engagement ever since. The establishment of an Inter-Sessional
Meeting (ISM) in 2016 was undertaken to support the process specifically on ICT
(cyber) issues. Canada is working with Indonesia, South Korea as they Co-Chair until
2024.
The ARF has also put in place an Open Ended Study Group (OESG) on CBMs to Reduce
the Risk of Conflict Stemming from the Use of ICTs. The ARF’s work on cyber CBMs,
including the Establishment of ARF Points of Contact Directory of Security of and in
the Use of ICTs, and the Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Consultations
Mechanism has been particularly useful.
106

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Canada believes that peace and stability in cyberspace is grounded on the
acceptance of the applicability of existing international law, the adoption of norms
for responsible state behaviour in cyberspace, and the implementation of CBMs.
Canada welcomes the efforts undertaken by the ARF to develop and implement
CBMs that will enhance transparency and dialogue while reducing the risk of
misunderstanding, miscalculation and conflict in cyberspace.
Internationally, Canada collaborates with close allies and a wider coalition of
countries that share our vision for a free, open and secure cyberspace that in order
to promote can be a vehicle for political, social and economic development, and to
counter efforts of repressive regimes to control the Internet and its content.
Canada is continuously working with friends and partners, including the ARF and its
participating countries, to enhance cyber security by identifying cyber threats and
vulnerabilities, and by preparing to respond to a broad range of cyber incidents.
Canada has also supported regional capacity-building efforts aimed at bolstering the
ability of states to respond to and mitigate cyber threats. For instance, Canada
supports two projects with the UNODC and INTERPOL valued at CA$2.4M and
CA$1.3M respectively, which seeks to improve the capacity of ASEAN member states
to increase cyber resilience to effectively combat transnational crime, including
human smuggling facilitated via the darknet and virtual assets. Canada is also
contributing CA$1.5 million to a Chatham House led project to increase cyber
capacity in the ASEAN countries tailored cyber development programs. The project
will also bring stakeholders from several ASEAN countries together to participate in
bilateral simulations exercises and one regional simulation, based on a bespoke
toolkit, which will test the ability of several ASEAN countries to coordinate a regional
response to a large-scale cyber incident and to cooperate amongst each other.
Finally, Canada is also supporting another project with Chatham House valued at
US$900,000, which works to increasing knowledge amongst civil society
organizations from around the world on key cybercrime concepts, issues and existing
UN processes and establishes a platform that facilitates their input into the UN treaty
negotiations on cybercrime.
Canada has agreed to participate in the ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity Centre of
Excellence (ASCCE), which involves delivery of capacity-building courses to the

107

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ASEAN region. The recently established ASCCE has been limited to delivering online
training due to the pandemic, but it can do more. Canada committed to delivering
training on stakeholder engagement in 2022 in conjunction with the EU and New
Zealand. Possible areas of further collaboration include conducting research and
providing trainings in areas spanning international law, cyber strategy, legislation,
cyber norms and other cybersecurity policy issues.
Canada is committed to continuing the collaboration developed within the ARF to
support regional confidence-building and help support collective efforts to maintain
a free, open, and secure cyberspace. This commitment is re-enforced by Canada’s
intent to seek a Co-Chair position of the ISM on ICTs when next it becomes available
(likely 2024).
g.

Women, Peace and Security, and Peace and Stabilization Operations

Program in Asia
Canada recognizes that while everyone is affected, women and men, girls and boys,
(including gender non-conforming and intersex persons in all their diversity)
experience conflict differently. They bring different perspectives to conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Women broaden the agenda beyond that of the
warring parties, and the link between their meaningful participation and durable
peace agreements has been established. Yet, women are often excluded from formal
peace processes. In recognition of this, Canada has been a strong supporter of the
Women, Peace and Security agenda from its inception and co-sponsored UNSCR
1325 as a non-permanent member of the body in 2000. Canada’s National Action
Plan on Women, Peace and security (WPS) guides the efforts of over nine federal
departments and agencies to implement the agenda both at home and
internationally.
Canada is committed to increasing its engagement on WPS in the Indo-Pacific region.
In August 2019, Canada led the adoption of the ARF’s first Ministerial “Joint
Statement on promoting the Women, Peace and Security agenda at the ASEAN
Regional Forum”. In March 2021, Canada, Thailand and Indonesia co-chaired the
ARF’s first workshop on Women, Peace and Security to advance commitments
outlined in the Joint Statement. The 3-day workshop hosted over 140 participants,
including government officials, civil society, and academic representatives, mainly

108

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
from the Indo-Pacific Region. The workshop addressed ways to strengthen existing
regional coordination mechanisms and mainstream WPS agenda into ARF activities,
and develop and advance regional commitments in implementing the WPS agenda.
Canada will continue to deepen its engagement in Asia on all fronts, making sure to
embed the WPS agenda into all its processes.
In 2021, Canada launched a new 5-year, CAD 8.5 million initiative with ASEAN and
UN Women, “Empowering women for sustainable peace: preventing violence and
promoting social cohesion in ASEAN – Advancing WPS in ASEAN”. This project, which
was formally endorsed by the ASEAN Committee of Permanent Representatives, will
support ASEAN to build regional and national capacity and become a knowledge hub
on WPS. This will be the first multi-year regional project co-created by ASEAN, for
ASEAN with all the key ASEAN bodies and actors. To complement this initiative,
Canada is supporting the ASEAN Institute of Peace and Reconciliation (ASEAN-IPR)
to develop WPS training modules to build regional capacity to implement the WPS
agenda and mainstream gender equality in the peace and security sector.
Canada’s Peace and Stabilization Operations Program (PSOPs) is designed to prevent
and respond to conflict and crisis abroad. PSOP’s approach to stabilization includes
targeted efforts to anticipate, prevent and respond to violent conflict and promote
long-term stability. PSOPs provides a strong Canadian voice through policy
leadership and advocacy, coordinates a whole-of-government response to various
conflicts and crises, and provides visible and concrete assistance through targeted
programming and expert deployments. PSOPs current engagement in Southeast Asia
totals over US$15 million focuses on peace and stability programming to protect and
promote human rights, implement peace agreements, and advance the role of
women and youth in the participation and promotion of peace and security.
For example, through the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, Canada is
supporting the empowerment of Bangladeshi and Burmese women and youth so
they are equipped to lead and participate in community-based peacebuilding and
decision-making at local, national, and regional levels. The GNWP is working with
representatives of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to
strengthen the commitment of Member States to further the implementation of the
Women, Peace and Security and Youth, Peace and Security agendas. In particular,
GNWP amplified the recommendations from women and youth for sustainable

109

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
peace and gender equality in Myanmar to ASEAN and other global policymakers.
GNWP plans to implement the first national consultation on the National Action Plan
to integrate issues confronted by Rohingya refugee and host community women and
girls and advocate for their participation in the implementation in late 2021.
In addition, through funding to the Nobel Women’s Initiative, Canada recently
supported the Women’s Peacebuilder Network, which works with grassroots
women’s organizations and peacebuilders in the Korean Peninsula, and in
Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, Canadian support to the International Civil Society Action
Network (ICAN) sustains and strengthens the impact of women peacebuilders and
organizations. In Afghanistan, with Canadian support, the Women’s International
League for Peace and Freedom works to strengthen alliances by mobilizing men to
work with women for peace and to implement the Women, Peace and Security
agenda.
In March 2019, UN Women, alongside the UN Executive Office of the SecretaryGeneral and the Department of Peace Operations, announced the launch of the Elsie
Initiative Fund for Uniformed Women in Peace Operations with a five-year mandate
that have been extended until December 2025. The Elsie Initiative Fund is designed
to use collective resources to increase the meaningful participation of uniformed
women in UN peace operations, with a focus on police and military roles. It provides
funding to countries that contribute troops and police to UN peace operations to
carry out barrier assessments of their T/PCC military and police institutions, to
identify the factors impeding the deployment of uniformed women peacekeepers to
UN missions as well as flexible funding to increase their deployment of trained and
qualified uniformed women. The Fund also includes the provision of the innovative
‘Gender Strong Unit Premium,’ which is a results-based payment for the deployment
of military contingents and Formed Police Units that include the substantial
representation of women across all units and functions, and which meet criteria to
ensure an adequate work environment. The Elsie Initiative Fund has completed two
programming rounds, and recently launched its third programming round on March
30 2023. Canada encourages all troop and police contributing countries in the ASEAN
region to consider submitting a letter of interest in the current programming cycle,
which is expected to close by 31 July 2023.

110

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
To date, the Elsie Initiative Fund has received contributions and pledges of
US$34.4M toward its US$40M fundraising target from Canada (CA$17.5M), the
United Kingdom, Germany, Finland, Australia, the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark
and South Korea. UN Women serves as the permanent UN co-chair of the Fund, with
Canada serving as the other co-chair for the initial five-year term. Other seats on the
Steering Committee are occupied by three Member States - currently Rwanda (as a
representative of T/PCCs), the United Kingdom (as a donor representative), and
Uruguay (as representative of the Elsie Initiative Contact Group) – as well as the UN
Department of Peace Operations, and the UN Executive Office of the SecretaryGeneral. The three seats that belong to member states rotate every two years. More
information is available at www.elsiefund.org.

IV.

Role of ARF
a.

National Contributions to the ARF (ASEAN)
The ARF is a key security forum within the Indo-Pacific region and an important
component of Canada’s engagement in the region’s evolving security architecture.
We will continue to engage constructively with our partners to build capacity and
ensure that the ARF continues to contribute to security and stability in the region as
per the action lines of the Hanoi Plan of Action II (2020-2025) and the principles of
the 2009 ARF Vision Statement.
Canada has expanded its diplomatic presence across the region and since 2015 has
had a resident diplomatic presence in all 10 ASEAN member states. In 2020, defence
representation in Malaysia and Vietnam was upgraded to full defence attaché status
with the opening of defence attaché offices. Further, Canada’s appointment of its
first dedicated ASEAN Ambassador in 2016, as well as a standalone mission to ASEAN
the same year, demonstrate our strong commitment to ASEAN and engagement
with the ARF and our partners in the region.
In the 2022-2023 inter-sessional year, Canada participated in and made significant
contributions in a wide range of ARF events. Canada co-hosted the second ARF
Workshop on Health Security, COVID-19 and Beyond: Maintaining Momentum for
the Next Global Health Emergency, which was held in Ottawa, Canada from June 2830, 2023 in hybrid format. Canada also co-chaired the 21st ARF Intersessional

111

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Meeting on Disaster Relief (ISM on DR), held virtually on 22 May 2023. Going forward
for inter-sessional year 2023-2024, Canada will co-chair the 5th ARF Workshop on
Implementing UNCLOS and other International Instruments to Address Emerging
Maritime Issues.

b. The Future of the ARF (ASEAN)
The regularity of exchange facilitated through the ARF is increasingly important to
sustaining an atmosphere of cooperation in a region of global strategic importance.
In this respect, Canada encourages a pragmatic and cooperative approach to the
ARF’s work. By delivering concrete initiatives, we can demonstrate the constructive
role played by the ARF in the regional security architecture.
As a mature organization and in the spirit of preventive diplomacy, the ARF can
continue to provide a forum for active discussion of issues and perspectives without
jeopardizing the activities and exchanges that members support. The ARF has been
most successful in bringing together policy practitioners and experts to address
specialized security issues that require interagency cooperation across borders. Its
inclusive membership highlights the importance of the Indo-Pacific region and the
interconnected nature of the global security environment. Canada believes it is
essential for the ARF to maintain a global perspective about the evolving security
challenges affecting the region, including to condemn with one voice Russia’s illegal
and unjustifiable invasion of Ukraine. The consequences of Russia’s egregious
violations of international law and the rules-based international order extend well
beyond Ukraine’s borders, affecting regional and global stability, including in the
Indo-Pacific region.
As the ARF marks its 30th iteration in 2023, Canada is pleased to have contributed to
the development of the burgeoning security community that works together to
protect the region’s vitality and continued economic growth. In line with the
consistent efforts of other ARF members, Canada is committed to playing a positive
and constructive role in the continuing evolution of the ARF over the next 30 years
and beyond.

112

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

CHINA
I.

Overview of the Security Environment of the Asia-Pacific
In 2022, the Asia-Pacific maintained overall stability and recovery. Regional countries on
the whole began economic recovery, regional cooperation and economic integration
moved forward, and the digital economy and energy transition made faster progress. In
the meantime, the resurgence of Cold War mentality, rampant hegemonism and
unilateralism, complex regional hotspot issues and intertwining traditional and nontraditional security threats highlighted the risks and challenges faced by the region. In
particular, a certain country has advanced its so-called “Indo-Pacific Strategy”, by
increasing military and security deployment in the region, seeking to bring NATO to the
Asia-Pacific, and introducing nuclear proliferation risks to the region, which seriously
undermines regional peace and stability. It has put together exclusive blocs such as the
Quad, and imposed decoupling and industrial and supply chains disruption, stoking
division, confrontation and bloc rivalry. Moves of some individual country to discharge
nuclear-contaminated water that jeopardize the marine environment and public health
also deserve close attention. To safeguard peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific and
promote its development and prosperity remains an arduous task that requires redoubled
efforts from all parties.

Right now, changes of the world, of our times and of history are unfolding in ways like
never before. The historical trend of peace, development and win-win cooperation is
unstoppable. Promoting peace, security, development and prosperity in the region
remains the shared pursuit of most Asia-Pacific countries. The Global Security Initiative
(GSI), put forward by Chinese President Xi Jinping, champions the spirit of solidarity to
adapt to the profoundly changing international landscape, and advocates the win-win
mindset to address the complex and intertwined security challenges. It is committed to
eliminating the root causes of international conflicts and improving global security
governance. It aims to mobilize global efforts to bring more stability and certainty to an
age of instability and transformation, and realize enduring peace and development in the
world. On February 21, 2023, China launched the Global Security Initiative Concept Paper
to expound the core ideas and principles of the GSI and lay out its 20 priorities of
cooperation as well as the platforms and mechanisms of cooperation. The GSI is
underpinned by six commitments, namely, staying committed to the vision of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security; staying committed to respecting

113

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries; staying committed to abiding by
the purposes and principles of the UN Charter; staying committed to taking the legitimate
security concerns of all countries seriously; staying committed to peacefully resolving
differences and disputes between countries through dialogue and consultation; and
staying committed to maintaining security in both traditional and non-traditional
domains.

The 21st century is an Asia-Pacific century. The future trajectory of the Asia-Pacific’s
security bears on the development of the region, the well-being of the people, and the
future of the world. To sustain peace, stability, development and prosperity serves the
common interests of all Asia-Pacific countries. The core concepts and principles of the GSI
fit well with Asia-Pacific countries’ tradition of mutual respect, seeking common ground
while shelving differences, and peaceful coexistence. China stands ready to work with
countries in the region to act on the spirit of the GSI, build partnerships based on mutual
trust, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, pursue coordination and sound interactions
among major countries, and consolidate the political foundation for regional peace and
stability; coordinate development and security, resolve differences through development,
and firm up the economic foundation for regional peace and stability; practice true
multilateralism, advance the development of regional multilateral security mechanisms,
and establish a balanced, effective and sustainable regional security architecture; and
resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation, promote the political
settlement of hotspot issues, and foster an enabling environment for regional peace and
stability.

II.

China’s Defence Policy and Multilateral Military Diplomacy in the Asia-Pacific Region
China firmly pursues a defensive national defence policy. China’s nature as a socialist
country, strategic decision to follow a path of peaceful development, independent foreign
policy of peace, and peace-loving tradition determine its unswerving commitment to the
defensive national defence policy. Commitment to never seeking hegemony, territorial
expansion or spheres of influence is a salient feature of China’s defence in the new era.
China’s record on peace and security is the best among major countries in the world. In
recent years, the Chinese military has been actively providing public security goods to the
international community in such fields as peacekeeping, maritime escort operation and

114

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
COVID-19 response. History has proven and will continue to prove that the Chinese
military is always a staunch force for world peace.

China conducts active national defence. It adheres to the principles of defence, selfdefence and post-strike response. China advances coordinated progress of defence
development and economic growth, and decides on the appropriate scale of its defence
expenditure. In recent years, in a bid to safeguard national sovereignty, security and
development interests as well as to better fulfil China’s international responsibilities and
obligations as a major country, the Chinese government has kept a reasonable and steady
growth of defence expenditure on the basis of sustained, sound economic and social
development, enabling the buildup of its national defence capability in step with
economic strength. In 2023, RMB 1.58 trillion has been earmarked as defence spending in
central government expenditures.

By engaging in international military cooperation, the Chinese military contributes to
safeguarding China’s sovereignty, security and development interests, promoting world
peace and stability, and building a community with a shared future for mankind. China
faithfully acts on the GSI. It deepens military exchanges and cooperation with Russia,
including those under existing bilateral mechanisms, and enhances mutual trust between
the two militaries. It maintains overall stability in the mil-to-mil relationship with the
United States, and urges the US side to work in the same direction with China, act on the
common understandings reached by the two presidents, keep open lines of
communication, address disputes and differences appropriately, and strengthen crisis
management. It actively carries out cooperation on the implementation of international
arms control treaties, resolutely safeguards national strategic interests, and promotes
global strategic stability. China has been an active participant in China-ASEAN Defence
Ministers’ Informal Meetings and other mechanisms. It sent high-level military
delegations to the Shangri-La Dialogue, the Moscow Conference on International Security
(MCIS) and other multilateral dialogues and cooperation mechanisms. China held the first
“Shared Vision” International Peacekeeping Forum and Beijing Xiangshan Forum
Webinars.

115

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
III.

China’s Efforts in Promoting Security in the Asia-Pacific
a. Relations with Major Regional Countries and Cooperation Mechanisms
i. China-ASEAN cooperation. China always takes ASEAN as a priority in its
neighbourhood diplomacy, firmly supports ASEAN’s community building, supports
ASEAN centrality in East Asian regional cooperation, and supports ASEAN in
playing an even greater role in regional and international affairs.

The year 2022 was the first year for building the China-ASEAN Comprehensive
Strategic Partnership. On November 11, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang attended the
25th China-ASEAN Summit in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. The Summit adopted the
China-ASEAN Joint Statement on Strengthening Common and Sustainable
Development, China-ASEAN Joint Statement on the 20th Anniversary of the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, and China-ASEAN
Joint Statement on Food Security Cooperation. It also welcomed the adoption of
the Annex to the China-ASEAN POA (2022-2025): Advancing China-ASEAN
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership. On August 4, State Councillor and Foreign
Minister Wang Yi attended the China-ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in Phnom
Penh.

The year 2022 continued to be declared China-ASEAN Year of Sustainable
Development Cooperation as was 2021. A series of activities were held in fields
relating to sustainable development, including the China-ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting on Disaster Management, China-ASEAN Environmental Cooperation
Forum, China-ASEAN Dialogue on Climate Change and Environment, China-ASEAN
Social Development and Poverty Reduction Forum, and China-ASEAN Agricultural
Cooperation Forum.

Steady progress was also registered in other areas of China-ASEAN cooperation,
with institutionalized meetings successfully convened. In January, the second
China-ASEAN Digital Ministers’ Meeting was held via video link. In June, the 13th
China-ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Informal Meeting and the 11th Meeting of ChinaASEAN Joint Science, Technology and Innovation Committee were convened via
video link. In August, the China-ASEAN Education Cooperation Week was
launched in Guiyang, China. In September, the 21st China-ASEAN Economic

116

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Ministers’ Meeting was held via video link, and the 19th China-ASEAN Expo was
held in Nanning, Guangxi Province in China. In October, the sixth Meeting of
China-ASEAN Ministers Responsible for Culture and Arts, the 21st China-ASEAN
Transport Ministers’ Meeting, and the second China-ASEAN Ministerial Meeting
on Disaster Management were held via video link.

ii.

China-Russia relations. China and Russia are each other’s biggest neighbour and
comprehensive strategic partners of coordination. As the world’s two major
countries and permanent members of the UN Security Council, China and Russia
develop a relationship that is defined by mutual-respect, peaceful coexistence
and win-win cooperation on the basis of no-alliance, no-confrontation and not
targeting any third country.

Since 2022, presidents of the two countries have maintained close contact
through in-person talks, virtual meetings, phone calls and correspondence. On
February 4, 2022, President Vladimir Putin attended the opening ceremony of the
Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics upon invitation. From March 20 to 22, 2023,
President Xi Jinping paid a state visit to Russia, during which he and President
Putin reached new consensus on expanding bilateral exchanges and cooperation
in various fields. High-level exchange mechanisms have been leveraged to the full,
including the mechanism of regular meetings between the two heads of
government and its subcommittees in various fields, exchanges between leaders
of legislatures, strategic security consultations, law enforcement and security
cooperation, and foreign ministers’ meetings. This has helped deliver on the
consensus reached by the two presidents and ensured the progress of
cooperation across all fields.

Practical cooperation made steady headway. In 2022, China-Russia trade reached
US$190.27 billion, up by 29.3%. The two countries have kept close coordination
on the global stage, stayed firmly committed to the UN-centred international
system and the international order underpinned by international law, and
maintained close communication and coordination in the United Nations,
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), BRICS, G20 and other international and
multilateral mechanisms.

117

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

iii. China-US relations. China-US relations have faced serious difficulties since 2022.
China continued to explore the right way for the two countries to get along, while
firmly opposing the misconceived China policy of the US

Single-mindedly regarding China as its “primary competitor” and “the most
consequential geopolitical challenge”, the US continued to contain and suppress
China on all fronts. It made erroneous statements and actions that interfered in
China’s internal affairs and undermined China’s interests on such issues as Taiwan,
Xinjiang, Hong Kong, Tibet, human rights, religion, economy and trade,
technology, and people-to-people and cultural exchanges, and forged various
international groupings targeted at China. China responded resolutely to counter
those hegemonic and bullying acts, and firmly defend its sovereignty, security and
development interests.

At the same time, the two countries maintained high-level interaction and
communication. In 2022, President Xi Jinping and President Joe Biden had a video
call in March, a phone conversation in July, and a meeting in Bali, Indonesia on
November 14. President Xi Jinping underscored that China and the US should
follow the three principles of mutual respect, peaceful coexistence and win-win
cooperation, and find the right way for two major countries to get along. He also
drew the red line on major issues of concern for China, including Taiwan,
democracy and human rights, development path, political system, decoupling and
severing supply chains. President Biden made some positive remarks, stating that
the US respects China’s system and does not seek to change it; it does not seek a
new Cold War, does not seek to revitalize alliances against China, does not support
“Taiwan independence”, does not support “two Chinas” or “one China, one
Taiwan”, does not seek to use the Taiwan question as a tool to contain China, and
has no intention to have a conflict with China or to contain China.

China and the US had some exchanges and cooperation in such areas as economy
and trade, climate change, energy security, public health, military-to-military
relations, counter-narcotics and agriculture. Two cooperation documents on
public health and agriculture were signed. Communication were also maintained

118

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
by the two sides on international and regional issues, including the Ukraine crisis,
the Korean nuclear issue, the Iranian nuclear issue, the Middle East and
Afghanistan.

iv. China-Japan relations. The year 2022 marked the 50th anniversary of the
normalization of China-Japan relations. Bilateral relations remained generally
stable and the two countries maintained high-level communication and
exchanges. In November, President Xi Jinping met with Japanese Prime Minister
Fumio Kishida on the sidelines of the 29th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting in
Bangkok, Thailand. The two leaders reached important common understandings
on working to build a constructive and stable China-Japan relationship that
answers the call of the new era. The two teams also reached a five-point consensus
on stabilizing and growing bilateral relations. On September 29, President Xi
Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang exchanged congratulatory messages respectively
with Prime Minister Fumio Kishida on the 50th anniversary of the normalization of
China-Japan relations. Receptions commemorating the 50th anniversary were held
respectively by China in Beijing and Japan in Tokyo, which were attended and
addressed respectively by Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the
National People’s Congress Ding Zhongli, and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan
Yoshimasa Hayashi. In August, the ninth China-Japan high-level political dialogue
was held in Tianjin, China, co-chaired by Yang Jiechi, member of the Political
Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and
Director of the Office of the Central Foreign Affairs Commission, and Takeo Akiba,
Secretary General of the National Security Secretariat of Japan. In May, State
Councillor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi held a virtual meeting with Foreign
Minister Yoshimasa Hayashi.

Economic and trade cooperation between China and Japan enjoyed steady
development. Japan is China’s fifth largest trading partner, and China is the largest
trading partner of Japan. In 2022, total trade between China and Japan reached
US$357.424 billion. Due to the impact of COVID-19, around 377,600 travels were
made between the two countries in 2022.

119

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
v. China-India relations. In 2022, the relationship between China and India showed
an overall momentum of recovery. High-level interactions guided the development
of bilateral ties, and coordination and cooperation were carried out on bilateral
and multilateral fronts. On July 25, 2022, President Xi Jinping sent a congratulatory
message to Droupadi Murmu on her inauguration as President of the Republic of
India. In October, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi sent a congratulatory
letter to President Xi Jinping on his re-election as General Secretary of the CPC
Central Committee. In March, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi paid a
working visit to India, during which he met with India’s National Security Advisor
Ajit Doval and held talks with External Affairs Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar.
In July, State Councillor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi met with External Affairs
Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar in Bali on the sidelines of the G20 Foreign
Ministers Meeting. During the meeting, Wang said that since March, 2022, thanks
to efforts of the two countries to maintain communication and effectively manage
differences, bilateral relations have shown an overall momentum of recovery. The
two sides should implement the important consensus reached by the two leaders
with concrete actions to bring bilateral relations back onto the right track as early
as possible. Minister Jaishankar said that India looked forward to a positive,
cooperative and constructive India-China relationship, and expressed readiness to
work with the Chinese side to improve bilateral relations.

In 2022, China and India held two meetings of the Working Mechanism for
Consultation and Coordination on China-India Border Affairs and four rounds of
Corps Commander-Level Meeting. The two sides kept communication over the
boundary question through diplomatic and military channels, and worked to
further deescalate tension in border areas. Troops of the two countries have
disengaged in Galwan Valley and other three points along the western section of
the China-India boundary, and the situation in border regions remained stable in
general. The two sides also maintained communication and coordination on
various multilateral platforms, including the SCO, BRICS and G20.

vi. Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The year 2022 marked the 20th anniversary
of the SCO Charter and the 15th anniversary of the Treaty on Long-Term GoodNeighbourliness, Friendship and Cooperation Between the SCO Member States.

120

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Committed to the Shanghai Spirit, the SCO continued to expand political, security,
practical, cultural and other cooperation, and actively advanced the membership
expansion process, significantly raising its global influence.

On September 16, 2022, President Xi Jinping attended the 22nd Meeting of the SCO
Council of Heads of State. At the meeting, leaders of SCO member states signed
and released the SCO Samarkand Declaration; issued several statements on
protecting international food and energy security, tackling climate change, and
keeping supply chains secure, stable and diversified; signed the Memorandum of
Obligations on Iran’s status as a permanent SCO member; launched the procedure
for Belarus’ accession; admitted Bahrain, the Maldives, the UAE, Kuwait and
Myanmar as dialogue partners; and approved a series of documents in the form
of resolutions, including the Comprehensive Plan for the Implementation of the
Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighbourliness, Friendship and Cooperation Between
the SCO Member States for 2023-2027.

On November 1, 2022, Premier Li Keqiang chaired in Beijing the 21st Meeting of the
SCO Council of Heads of Government via videoconference. A joint communiqué
was signed and released, and multiple cooperation documents and resolutions on
trade, economy and other fields were adopted. On July 29, 2022, State Councillor
and Foreign Minister Wang Yi attended the Meeting of the SCO Council of Foreign
Ministers in Samarkand, which made all-round preparations for the SCO summit.

b. Cooperation on Non-Traditional Security
i. Cooperation on disaster relief. In 2022, China actively engaged in multilateral and
bilateral cooperation on disaster relief in the Asia-Pacific region. It hosted the first
Coordinators’ Meeting of the Belt and Road International Cooperation Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction and Emergency Management (BRIDRREM). It held the
second China-ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Disaster Management and the first
China-ASEAN Forum on Emergency Management Cooperation, providing disaster
management capacity building programs for disaster management officials, rescue
personnel, community workers and young people from ASEAN. Under the
framework of ARF, China held the 20th Inter-Sessional Meeting on Disaster Relief,

121

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
exercises for urban search and rescue after earthquakes, and the 5th Workshop on
Urban Search and Rescue. China served as co-chair of the APEC Emergency
Preparedness Working Group (EPWG), and co-hosted the 15th APEC Senior Disaster
Management Officials Forum and the 18th APEC Emergency Preparedness Working
Group Meeting. It also conducted bilateral exchanges and cooperation on disaster
relief with countries including Russia, Mongolia, Pakistan, Laos and Cambodia.

The Asia-Pacific is a key region for the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). To better
protect life and property in Belt and Road countries and ensure sustainable
economic and social development, China welcomes other Asia-Pacific countries to
join the BRIDRREM. It is ready to strengthen communication and coordination with
relevant parties to implement the consensus reached at relevant ministerial
meetings and promote cooperation on disaster management under the
frameworks of ARF and APEC, supports ASEAN in establishing a ministerial meeting
mechanism with China, Japan and the Republic of Korea (ROK) on disaster
management, and will continue to promote the establishment of a LancangMekong Cooperation mechanism on disaster management.

ii. Cooperation on maritime security. Since 2022, China has actively participated in
maritime security cooperation in the Asia-Pacific despite obstacles caused by
COVID-19. China and Japan held the 14th round of high-level consultation on
maritime affairs virtually and the 15th round in person. The two sides agreed to
continue holding joint maritime search and rescue exercises under the framework
of China-Japan Agreement on Maritime Search and Rescue, and cooperate in such
fields as combating crimes at sea and promoting exchanges between law
enforcement personnel. China and the ROK held the second meeting of the
dialogue and cooperation mechanism on maritime affairs, and kept
communication going between their militaries, coast guards and authorities for
maritime affairs, fisheries and environment. China and ASEAN countries continued
to fully and effectively implement the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the
South China Sea (DOC), strengthened practical maritime cooperation in marine
science, environmental protection, search and rescue, and actively advanced
consultations on the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC), to jointly
preserve peace and stability in the South China Sea. The 35th Meeting of the Joint

122

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Working Group on the Implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea (JWG-DOC) was held via video link, and the 36th and
37th JWG-DOC meetings were held in Cambodia. China also hosted the second
Training Course on Marine Scientific Research in the South China Sea, the ChinaASEAN workshop on marine information technology, the workshop on overall
marine management in the South China Sea, and the third International Workshop
on Maritime Cooperation and Policy Harmonization.

China attaches great importance to keeping sea lanes safe. It continued to take an
active part in regional cooperation mechanisms including the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ship in
Asia (ReCAAP). Since 2022, delegations of the Chinese government has attended
the 16th and 17th meetings of the Governing Council of the ReCAAP Information
Sharing Center (ISC), and held consultations with ReCAAP member states on
combating piracy and armed robbery against ships, keeping sea lanes safe, and
supporting the ReCAAP ISC in conducting capacity building and cooperation with
external parties.

China is actively engaged in cooperation on maritime law enforcement. It held the
5th China-ROK Coast Guard High-Level Meeting, the 2022 China-ROK Fisheries Law
Enforcement Meeting and the sixth China-Viet Nam Coast Guard High-Level
Meeting. China Coast Guard held the second working-level meeting with Pakistan
Maritime Security Agency via video link, conducted two joint patrols in the Beibu
Gulf with Vietnamese coast guard, and conducted a joint patrol with the ROK
Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries in provisionally designated waters under the
China-ROK Fisheries Agreement. China also took an active part in activities under
bilateral and multilateral mechanisms, including the China-Japan high-level
consultation on maritime affairs, the China-Philippines bilateral consultation on
the South China Sea, the China-Viet Nam working group on cooperation in less
sensitive sea-related areas, the ARF, the JWG-DOC, the Governing Council of
ReCAAP ISC, the Workshop on Implementing United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and other International Instruments to Address Emerging
Maritime Issues, and Great Wall-2022 International Forum on Counterterrorism.

123

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
China is actively engaged in cooperation on maritime search and rescue and ferry
safety. The Chinese side co-hosted the 4th ARF Workshop on Ferry Safety with the
Marine Department of Thailand and has worked for the establishment of an Expert
Group on Ferry Safety under the ARF framework. China continued to advance the
e-certificate data exchange pilot project with Singapore. China actively
participated in the activities of the International Maritime Rescue Federation
(IMRF), and promoted regional exchanges and cooperation in this field through
the IMRF’s Asia-Pacific Regional Center. China did its utmost to address maritime
emergency and distress concerning foreign vessels in its rescue area of
responsibility and sea areas under its jurisdiction, and provided search and rescue
services for foreign ships in distress.

China is committed to providing maritime security public goods for the region. The
South China Sea Tsunami Advisory Center (SCSTAC) operated by China provides
efficient and steady all-weather earthquake and tsunami early warning services
for ASEAN countries along the South China Sea. Forecast Information for Voyage
on the Maritime Silkroad (FIVMS) offers refined forecasting services for maritime
transport, maritime escort and disaster prevention of 102 major cities along the
South China Sea and the north Indian Ocean.

As a country of responsible fishing, China highly values the scientific conservation
and sustainable utilization of fishing resources and actively fulfils its international
obligations. China has put in place a well-fledged ocean fishery management
mechanism and combated IUU fishing together with the international community.
The Chinese side has taken measures on its own initiative to conserve fishery
resources, including by implementing voluntary fishing moratorium on the high
seas, assigning on-board observers to prevent transhipping on the high seas and
conducting research and assessment of international fishery resources. China
supports efforts to crack down on IUU fishing through port supervision and is
actively considering joining the Agreement on Port State Measures of the FAO and
the Cape Town Agreement of the IMO. China has joined eight regional fishery
management organizations, and has worked with other members to formulate
through consultations and faithfully implement fishery resources conservation
and management measures. China will continue to work with other countries to

124

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
promote the conservation and sustainable utilization of international fishery
resources.

iii. Counterterrorism cooperation. At present, counterterrorism and security
situation in the Asia-Pacific is complex and challenging. Some regions are facing
active terrorist activities. Terrorist organizations are stepping up the use of cyber
means to incite, recruit and plan for terrorist attacks. Extreme separatists in the
region are fast colluding with international violent and terrorist forces, posing
grave threats to peace and security in regional countries.

Terrorism is the common enemy of humanity. The international community needs
to foster a sense of a community with a shared future for mankind, support the UN
in playing a central role of coordination, strength cooperation and solidarity, and
increase consensus and synergy for counterterrorism. It is important to abandon
“double standards” and a selective approach to counterterrorism, oppose
politicizing and instrumentalizing counterterrorism, and firmly fight against all
types of terrorism. A holistic approach needs to be followed to address both the
symptoms and root causes and eradicate the root causes of terrorism.

China is actively engaged in international and regional counterterrorism
cooperation. It has strengthened international counterterrorism cooperation
under the SCO framework, organized joint counterterrorism exercises, cracked
down on illegal trafficking of arms, ammunition and explosives, carried out
cooperation to identify and sever channels of infiltration, and promoted
international counterterrorism intelligence exchange and sharing. As the rotating
chair of BRICS, China hosted the 7th Meeting of BRICS Counterterrorism Working
Group and the related thematic seminar, organized on-line training for BRICS
police personnel, participated in the 19th ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on
Counterterrorism and Transnational Crime, the ARF Seminar on Anti-money
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism, and meetings related to the
Global Counterterrorism Forum.

iv. Cooperation on combating transnational crime. China attaches great importance
to combating transnational crime. By fully harnessing bilateral law enforcement

125

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and judicial cooperation mechanisms as well as multilateral platforms such as the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, China has
actively engaged in various types of cooperation with other countries to prevent
and combat transnational crime, with a view to building a community with a
shared future for mankind that enjoys universal security.

In 2022, China’s law enforcement agencies actively carried out practical
cooperation with their counterparts in ASEAN countries. China attended the 9th
China-ASEAN and 12th ASEAN Plus Three ministerial meetings on transnational
crime. Through law enforcement cooperation between the police forces of China
and ASEAN countries, 450 suspects were arrested in ASEAN countries. China
worked with Cambodian law enforcement agencies to combat crimes committed
by Chinese offenders in Cambodia, worked with Laos to conduct a special joint
campaign on combating crimes along the Boten-Vientiane section of the ChinaLaos Railway, and worked with countries on the Indochina Peninsula to crack down
on crimes related to guns and explosive devices. China continued to enhance its
cooperation with other countries to combat crimes related to cross-border
gambling. China hosted the meeting of Greater Mekong Sub-region drug control
liaison officials and attended the 44th Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law
Enforcement Agencies for Asia and the Pacific Region. China participated in the 7th
ASEAN Plus China coordination meeting on drug control cooperation and the 15th
ASEAN Plus China, Japan and the ROK working group meeting on drug control, and
conducted the 2022 joint patrol and law enforcement action with Laos, Myanmar
and Thailand against cross-border crimes along the Mekong River.

v. Cooperation on cybersecurity. China has always been a builder, defender and
contributor for global cybersecurity. China is working actively for a community
with a shared future in cyberspace, and is committed to fostering a cyberspace
featuring greater fairness, equity, openness, inclusiveness, security, stability and
vitality. To this end, China put forward the Global Initiative on Data Security, issued
a Cooperation Initiative on Data Security with the League of Arab States, and
reached the Data Security Cooperation Initiative of China+Central Asia with the
five Central Asian countries. China stands ready to discuss and develop rules for

126

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
global digital governance with other parties on the basis of the Global Initiative on
Data Security to jointly advance global governance on cyberspace.

China consistently supports the UN in playing a central role in the global
governance of cyberspace and international rules-making. China believes that the
international rules governing cyberspace should be formulated under the UN
framework and be widely acceptable to all countries, and efforts could be made
to explore the formulation of legally binding international instruments. In 2022, at
China’s initiative, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on information
security containing the idea of building a community with a shared future in
cyberspace for the third time. China played a constructive role in the meeting of
the Open-ended Working Group on security of and in the use of information and
communications technologies 2021–2025, and took the lead in proposing that
major countries should lead by example in observing the framework for
responsible State behaviour in the use of ICTs, a concept incorporated into the
Annual Progress Report of the Working Group. China took a constructive part in
UN negotiations for a convention against cyber crimes, and worked to ensure
progress in the negotiations.

China actively engages in dialogue and cooperation with Asia-Pacific countries on
cyberspace, with a view to jointly maintaining peace and security in cyberspace.
In 2022, China established the World Internet Conference (WIC), hosted the 2022
WIC Wuzhen Summit, held the second ASEAN-China Cyber Dialogue and
participated in the Singapore International Networking Week. China actively
promoted the cybersecurity process under the ARF and the SCO, held the meeting
of the BRICS Working Group on Security in the Use of ICTs and facilitated the
conclusion of the BRICS Roadmap of Practical Cooperation on ensuring security in
the use of ICTs. China deepened bilateral cooperation in this field with countries
like Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand, and expanded practical cooperation with
the rest of the world in such areas as digital technology and cyber infrastructure.

Through bilateral police cooperation and channels such as the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), China actively cooperated with law
enforcement agencies of Singapore, Viet Nam, the Philippines, Malaysia and other

127

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
countries to share information on cyber fraud, hacking, child pornography, and
online terrorism. China actively engaged in international and regional symposiums
and experience sharing on cybersecurity law enforcement, co-hosted the second
ARF Workshop on Countering the Use of ICTs for Criminal Purposes, and attended
multilateral meetings including the second ASEAN-China Cyber Dialogue.

vi. Cooperation on non-proliferation and disarmament. China firmly upholds the
international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime underpinned by
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). China submitted
an updated national report on its implementation of the NPT and six working
papers to the 10th NPT Review Conference, took a constructive part in the review
of the substantive matters, and proposed that the NPT needs to promote peace
and development as its new mission.

China is committed to the path of peaceful development and a nuclear strategy of
self-defence, and keeps its nuclear capabilities at the minimum level required for
national security. China actively stands for and advocates the complete prohibition
and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons worldwide, and undertakes not to
use nuclear weapons first at any time or under any circumstances. China is
unequivocally committed to a policy of not using or threatening to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states and nuclear-weapon-free zones
unconditionally.

China believes that nuclear disarmament should follow such fundamental
principles as “maintaining global strategic stability” and “undiminished security for
all” and proceed in a gradual manner. Countries with the largest nuclear arsenals
should fulfil special and primary responsibilities in nuclear disarmament, and
should further make significant and substantive reduction of their nuclear arsenals
in a verifiable, irreversible and legally binding manner, so as to create necessary
conditions for ultimate, complete and thorough nuclear disarmament. To this end,
China played an active role in securing the Joint Statement of the Leaders of the
Five Nuclear-Weapon States on Preventing Nuclear War and Avoiding Arms Races
issued in January 2022. The Joint Statement emphasized that a nuclear war cannot

128

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
be won and must never be fought and reaffirmed that none of the five countries’
nuclear weapons are targeted at each other or at any other state.

China firmly upholds the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. China
believes that eliminating the risks of nuclear proliferation is crucial for
international and regional peace and stability. The international community should
pursue political and diplomatic resolution of regional hotspot nuclear issues, and
reject double standards in the area of non-proliferation. The so-called “nuclear
sharing arrangements” run counter to the provisions of the NPT and increase the
risks of nuclear proliferation and nuclear conflicts. Nuclear-weapon states should
withdraw their nuclear weapons deployed overseas, and should not replicate the
so-called “nuclear sharing arrangements” in other regions of the world.

China firmly supports the efforts of ASEAN countries to build a nuclear weaponfree zone in Southeast Asia. In August 2022, China pushed for the issuance of the
Statement on Reiterating Commitment to Preserve Southeast Asia as a Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone at the ASEAN Regional Forum. The Global Security Initiative
Concept Paper proposed by China unequivocally calls for supporting the efforts of
countries in relevant regions to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones. In March
2023, Chinese State Councillor and Foreign Minister Qin Gang, during his meeting
with ASEAN Secretary General Kao Kim Hourn, stated that China is willing to take
the lead in signing the Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone. China will continue to enhance communication with ASEAN
countries, with a view to signing the Protocol as early as possible.

China believes that the nuclear submarine cooperation among the US, the UK, and
Australia undermines regional peace and stability, provokes arms race, and poses
serious nuclear proliferation risks. It is a violation of the object and purpose of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. China expresses serious
concern over and resolute opposition to such cooperation. The three countries
have pressed the IAEA to invoke Article 14 of the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement (CSA) for the purpose of making safeguards arrangements with
Australia regarding nuclear submarines, which is essentially coercing the IAEA
Secretariat into making safeguards exemption arrangements. They claim that

129

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Article 14 of the CSA allows for non-application of safeguards for the use of nuclear
material in “a non-proscribed military activity”, despite a lack of consensus among
the international community on the definition of such an activity and huge
divergences on the interpretation of this Article. An arrangement between
Australia and the IAEA Secretariat invoking Article 14 would set a precedent, and
concerns the interests of all IAEA member states. Safeguards arrangements for the
nuclear submarine cooperation in question should be discussed and agreed upon
by all interested IAEA member states through an intergovernmental process,
taking into account the Agency’s previous practice of strengthening the safeguards
system, instead of making any deal privately between the IAEA Secretariat and a
few member states.

China believes that Japan’s disposal of contaminated water of the Fukushima
nuclear plant bears on the global marine environment and the health of people
around the world. It is not Japan’s private business. In April 2021, the Japanese
government unilaterally announced its decision to release Fukushima’s nuclear
waste water into the ocean. This has triggered grave concern and strong
opposition among coastal countries in the Pacific Ocean. Japan should earnestly
respond to the concern of neighbouring countries and the wider international
community. It should dispose of nuclear-contaminated water in a safe way that is
consistent with its international obligations, international safety standards and
international good practices, including fully studying alternatives to ocean
discharge and receiving strict international supervision so as to minimize possible
unpredictable risks to the international community. Japan must not start the
discharge before reaching consensus through full consultation with neighbouring
countries and other stakeholders.

China has consistently advocated for the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), including
biological and chemical weapons, and supports continuous efforts to enhance the
validity, authority and universality of international legal instruments on nonproliferation, including the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) and the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). China values and actively engages in
international communication and cooperation under these two conventions, with

130

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
a view to sharing implementation experience and assisting other parties in
enhancing their capacity for implementation.

China strictly fulfils its international obligations to non-proliferation, firmly upholds
multilateralism, and supports the UN in leading international non-proliferation
efforts. China is deeply engaged in the implementation of and comprehensive
review under UN Security Council Resolution 1540. China supports international
and regional cooperation on non-proliferation export controls. In December 2020,
the Export Control Law of the People’s Republic of China formally entered into
force, and competent Chinese authorities are now actively pushing forward the
revision and update of relevant regulations and control lists under the framework
of this law. China will continue to improve its relevant legal framework and
management regime, and continuously modernize its non-proliferation export
control system. China is committed to promoting the sound and long-term
development of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), and safeguarding the
international non-proliferation regime. In the spirit of equality and mutual benefit,
China stands ready to have dialogue and develop relations with other nonproliferation export control mechanisms including the Wassenaar Arrangement,
the Missile Technology Control Regime and the Australia Group. China urges
relevant mechanisms to abide by their founding purpose of ensuring nonproliferation and avoid becoming a political tool used by certain countries to
pursue technological decoupling.

In December 2022, at its 77th session, the UN General Assembly once again
adopted the resolution of Promoting International Cooperation on Peaceful Uses
in the Context of International Security submitted by China. The resolution stresses
the importance of the peaceful uses of science and technology for sustainable
development and the inalienable right of all countries under international law to
the peaceful uses of science and technology. It urges relevant countries to
eliminate excessive regulation on developing countries, and share the progress in
science and technology through dialogue and cooperation. It reflects the common
position of the international community, the vast majority of developing countries
in particular. China will continue to push for the full and effective implementation

131

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
of the resolution and safeguard the common interests of the international
community.

China actively promotes regional cooperation on disarmament and nonproliferation. In April 2022, China participated in the 13TH ARF Inter-Sessional
Meeting on Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, and elaborated on its policies and
propositions on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In March 2023, China
attended the second ARF Nuclear Risk Reduction Workshop and took a
constructive part in the discussions, contributing to greater understanding and
mutual trust among regional countries on nuclear risk reduction.

vii. Outer space cooperation. China stands for peaceful uses of outer space, upholds
the international order in outer space underpinned by the 1967 Outer Space
Treaty, opposes weaponisation of and arms race in outer space, and supports
conclusion of international legal instruments on arms control in outer space
through negotiation to fundamentally resolve outer space security issues. China
calls on the international community to uphold the vision of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, strive to prevent arms race
in outer space, safeguard outer space security and stability, and make activities in
outer space sustainable, in a bid to build a community with a shared future for
mankind in the field of outer space.

Both China and ASEAN countries support peaceful uses of outer space and oppose
arms race in and weaponisation of outer space. The two sides have maintained
sound cooperation on outer space security. China is ready to further strengthen
coordination and cooperation with ASEAN and other parties in the Asia-Pacific, so
as to jointly contribute to promoting security and sustainable development in
outer space.

viii. Cooperation on combating illicit small arms and light weapons. The Chinese
government attaches great importance to combating illicit transfer of small arms
and light weapons (SALW). China has introduced and implemented laws including
the Law on Firearms Control and the Regulations Governing Export Control of
Military Goods, put in place a Firearms Control Information System, and

132

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
continuously improved its inter-agency cooperation mechanisms. China has
enforced whole-process control over SALW and adopted a prudent and responsible
attitude toward the export of military items including SALW.

The Chinese government actively supports the implementation of the UN
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons and the International
Tracing Instrument, and has actively participated in activities of combating illicit
transfer of SALW launched by the World Customs Organization and the
International Criminal Police Organization. On July 6, 2020, China officially joined
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). On September 24, 2022, China announced the launch
of its domestic procedure to ratify the UN Firearms Protocol, which will make new
contributions to strengthening global cooperation on firearms control and security
deficit elimination.

China takes seriously ASEAN countries’ concerns over illicit transfer of SALW and
actively supports relevant efforts within the region. China stands ready to
strengthen dialogue and cooperation with ASEAN countries on this matter.

ix. Assistance in mine clearance. China attaches great importance to humanitarian
issues caused by landmines, and has actively carried out international assistance
and cooperation on mine clearance. To date, through donation, equipment aid,
training, on-site guidance and other ways, China has provided over 40 countries in
Asia, Africa and Latin America with more than RMB 100 million worth of assistance,
and trained over 1,000 mine clearance professionals. ASEAN countries have been
key recipients and partners of China’s mine clearance assistance, and demining is
an important part of China-ASEAN comprehensive strategic partnership. In recent
years, China has increased its assistance to ASEAN and its member states to help
relevant countries remove risks posed by mines.

In 2022, China continued to carry out assistance and cooperation on mine
clearance. China sponsored the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Center (ARMAC) in
hosting a technical expert working group meeting and a high-level regional
meeting. China also provided financial support to the Cambodian Mine Action and
Victim Assistance Authority, as well as RMB 6.6 million worth of mine detection

133

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and clearance equipment, protective gears and humanitarian supplies to countries
including Cambodia and Laos.

IV.

China’s Views on the Future Direction of the ASEAN Regional Forum
The Global Security Initiative Concept Paper issued by China has identified 20 priorities of
cooperation, which are highly compatible with ARF’s six main cooperation fields. The
Concept Paper stresses the need to support and improve the ASEAN-centred regional
security cooperation mechanism and architecture, and adhere to the ASEAN way to
further strengthen security dialogue and cooperation among regional countries. China
stands ready to increase dialogue and communication with all parties, carry out
cooperation in areas of shared interests, and take concrete steps to inject more vitality
and impetus into confidence-building measures and activities and preventive diplomacy
in various fields.

i. Uphold Multilateralism and Maintain an Open and Inclusive Regional Architecture

China calls on ARF members to abide by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter
and practice true multilateralism. ARF members need to firmly uphold the UN-centred
international system, the international order underpinned by international law, the basic
norms of international relations based on the purposes and principles of the UN Charter,
and the authority of the UN and its role as an important platform in global security
governance. It is important to firmly uphold an open and inclusive regional security
architecture, firmly uphold ASEAN centrality in regional cooperation, and firmly resist and
oppose Cold War mentality, unilateralism, bloc confrontation, hegemonism and other
acts that run counter to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter.

ii. Deepen Practical Cooperation and Tackle Traditional and Non-Traditional Security
Threats in a Coordinated Way
China encourages ARF members to follow the principles of extensive consultation, joint
contribution and shared benefits in global governance, and jointly address regional
disputes and common challenges such as terrorism, climate change, cybersecurity and
biosecurity. Under the guidance of the Hanoi Plan of Action (2021-2025) and the
understandings reached at the Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, ARF members need to actively
put forward practical cooperation projects, build more platforms and mechanisms for

134

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
exchanges and cooperation, adopt multi-pronged and comprehensive approaches, and
work together to find long-term solutions and advance global security governance.

iii. Properly Handle Hotspot Issues to Safeguard Regional Peace and Stability
China is committed to exploring solutions with Chinese characteristics to hotspot issues
and upholds peaceful settlement of differences and disputes among countries through
dialogue and consultation. ARF members need to increase strategic communication,
enhance security mutual trust, resolve conflicts, manage differences and eliminate the
root causes of crises. All efforts that are conducive to the peaceful settlement of a crisis
should be supported, and all parties to conflict should be encouraged to build mutual
trust, resolve disputes and promote security through dialogue.

135

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

EUROPEAN UNION (EU)
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
1. Over the course of the past year, the security landscape of both Europe and Asia has
faced stark changes, becoming more strained. The return of war in Europe, with
Russia’s illegal, unjustified and unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine, as
well as the deteriorating security situation in Myanmar after the February 2021
military coup, and the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan in August 2021, present
challenges to regional and global peace and security.
2. Military aggressions, conflicts, weaponization of energy and food, and other sources
of instability, including hybrid and cyber threats, are increasing in our
neighbourhood and beyond, leading to severe humanitarian suffering and
displacement.
3. In addition to Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, other evolving threats such
as climate change, political instability, illicit activities (arms, drugs trafficking), armed
robberies, piracy, as well as supply chain disruptions have severe consequences for
livelihoods, and regional and global energy and food security. These developments
highlight the importance of a rules-based international order, the adherence to the
UN Charter and international law and the need to further foster multilateral dialogue
in and with the region. The EU remains committed to ASEAN centrality and it will
continue to engage with the ASEAN-led regional architecture to promote an
effective rules-based international order.
4. The EU’s engagement in Asia is comprehensive and reached a critical milestone with
ASEAN in 2020 when we raised our level of partnership to that of a Strategic
Partnership. In 2022, the EU and ASEAN celebrated 45 years of dialogue partnership.
In this context, an EU-ASEAN Commemorative Summit was held in Brussels in
December 2022. As well as with ASEAN, the EU continues to engage closely with
other Asian partners and seeks to build further on existing and future partnerships
by providing tailor-made security cooperation solutions.
5. This engagement is set out in the EU’s Strategy for Cooperation in the Indo-Pacific,
which recognises ASEAN Centrality and promotes an inclusive approach to the
challenges affecting the region, acknowledging that the prosperity and security of
both Europe and the Indo-Pacific are interconnected. Under this Strategy, the EU is
deepening its engagement with partners in the Indo-Pacific on a broad range of
traditional and non-traditional security and defence-related issues, such as maritime

136

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
security, cybersecurity, counter-terrorism, crisis management, hybrid threats, and
trans-national crime.
6. The EU attaches importance to the stability and peace in the South and East China
Seas and the Taiwan Strait that are key for the regional and global security and
economy. The display of force and increasing tensions in such regional hotspots can
have a direct impact on European security and prosperity. The EU opposes unilateral
changes to the status quo by force or coercion and encourages the peaceful
resolution of cross-Strait issues. The EU also urges for the peaceful settlement of
disputes over maritime claims in the South China Sea in accordance with UNCLOS.
7. The EU’s “Strategic Compass”, adopted in March 2022, will guide the development
of the EU’s security and defence agenda for the next five to ten years. The Strategic
Compass will support the EU to act more quickly and robustly, enhance our ability
to anticipate threats and protect its citizens, invest more and better in capabilities
and innovative technologies, fill strategic gaps and reduce technological and
industrial dependencies, and to strengthen our cooperation with partners to address
common threats and challenges.
8. Existing and future security dialogues will be complemented by concrete activities,
such as training, targeted capacity building, confidence building, technical
assistance, peer-to-peer cooperation, table-top exercises, practitioner exchanges
and development of networks.
9. The COVID-19 pandemic has further exposed the interdependence of the European
and Asian continents while also highlighting that both gain resilience from open,
diversified and undistorted access to world markets.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
1. Overview of National Security and Defence Policy
1. Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine brought war to the EU’s borders and
gave renewed impetus to the EU’s security policies. Russia’s war is a threat to all
countries and to the rules-based international order, not just to Europe, and is
causing food and energy insecurity with dramatic effects around the world,
particularly for the most vulnerable. The EU is leading efforts and supporting its
partners to mitigate the global consequences of Russia’s war. Globalisation, free
movement and the digital transformation continue to bring prosperity, make our

137

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
lives easier, and spur innovation and growth but also carry risks. We have seen
the effects of the health crisis on our interconnected international system. We
witnessed that high levels of interdependence may be manipulated by terrorism,
organised crime and nation states. Malicious cyber activities, disinformation
campaigns, interference in elections and political processes as well as economic
coercion, are direct threats to our citizens and our European way of life. These
security threats are also becoming more complex, increasingly intertwined with
energy policy, climate policy, social policy and migration policy. More than ever,
security threats do not limit themselves to national borders, but also reach
beyond the border between the physical and digital world.
2. The EU’s approach to external security is based on the Common Foreign and
Security Policy (CFSP) and the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). In
March 2022, the EU adopted the Strategic Compass to set out a common
strategic vision for EU security and defence policy over the next five to ten years.
The objective of the Strategic Compass is to make the EU a stronger and more
capable security provider, to be able to better protect its interests and citizens
and to contribute to international peace and security. Additionally, it will
enhance the EU’s ability to act autonomously and its ability to work with partners
to safeguard its values and interests. To do so, the Strategic Compass provides a
shared assessment of the strategic environment in which the EU is operating and
of the threats and challenges the Union faces. The document makes concrete and
actionable proposals, with a very precise timetable for implementation, in order
to improve the EU's ability to act decisively in crises and to defend its security
and its citizens. It covers all the aspects of the security and defence policy and is
structured around four pillars: act, invest, partner and secure.
3. The EU and the Indo-Pacific have a direct stake in each other’s stability and
prosperity. Europe and the Indo-Pacific are highly interconnected. Therefore, the
potential consequences of ongoing conflicts and instability, as well as possible
supply chain disruptions, go beyond any one country or region. Through its IndoPacific Strategy, adopted in September 2021, the EU shows its commitment to
supporting the region’s stability, security, and sustainable prosperity, based on
the rule of law, the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
international law.

138

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
4. The EU’s strategic engagement with the Indo-Pacific region is designed to
promote effective rules-based multilateralism, an open and fair environment for
trade and investment, while enhancing connectivity. The EU’s approach is
inclusive of all partners wishing to cooperate.
5. In addition, the Global Gateway is the new European strategy to boost smart,
clean and secure links in digital, energy and transport sectors and to strengthen
health, education and research systems across the world. Global Gateway stands
for sustainable and trusted connections that work for people and the planet. It
will help to tackle the most pressing global challenges, from fighting climate
change, to improving health systems, and boosting competitiveness and security
of global supply chains.
6. To deal with the threats to the EU’s energy security, the EU adopted various
measures under its REPowerEU package to diversify away from Russian fossil
fuels while accelerating its just and clean energy transition. This included securing
coal, oil, gas and nuclear fuel supply from different sources and measures for a
90% gas storage obligation, energy efficiency (as well as emergency measures to
save gas for a safe winter) and faster deployment of renewable energy. The EU is
addressing cyber security risks of critical energy infrastructure as a key
requirement to the accelerated digitalisation of the energy system.
7. In an era of strategic competition and complex security threats, the European
Peace Facility (EPF) expands the EU’s ability to provide security for its citizens and
its partners. With a total budget of EUR 7.979 billion for the period 2021-2027, it
enables the EU to provide all types of military equipment to the armed forces of
EU partners, in compliance with the highest human rights standards, while also
funding the common costs of military CSDP missions and operations.
8. In 2022, the EU continued to carry out civilian and military CSDP missions and
operations throughout its near periphery and in Africa. As of March 2023, the EU
conducted nine military missions and operations, and 12 civilian missions. In
addition, the EU devised the Coordinated Maritime Presences (CMP) concept to
boost its collective engagement by enhancing coordination of the existing
Member States air and naval assets present in defined maritime areas of interest
to increase the EU’s capacity to collaborate, interoperate and position itself as a
reliable partner and maritime security provider, including in the North Western
Indian Ocean.

139

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
9. The EU currently supports 60 projects under the Permanent Structured
Cooperation (PESCO), focusing on different operational domains, such as Cyber,
Land, Maritime, Air, Space, and Training.
10. Further progress has been made on the European Defence fund, which has a
dedicated allocation of close to EUR 8 billion in the 2021-2027 multi-annual
financial framework to finance collaborative defence research and collaborative
capability development projects complementing national contributions.
11. Threats to global security require continuous cooperation with multilateral
partners. Through ‘Framework Participation Agreements’ (FPAs), the EU aims to
promote the participation of partners around the world in EU CSDP missions and
operations. FPAs have been established with ARF members such as Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, the United States and Vietnam

12. The EU remains convinced that only a political solution, grounded on the full
implementation of UNSC Resolution (UNSCR) 2254 and the Geneva
Communiqué, will enable lasting stability and peace in Syria. In order to continue
its efforts the EU and UN, on 10 May 2022 co-chaired the sixth Brussels
Conference on “Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region”, which succeeded
in mobilising aid to Syrians inside the country and in neighbouring countries
through pledges totalling close to EUR 6.4 billion for 2022 and beyond. The
European Union and its Member States remain the largest provider of
international aid and deliver humanitarian, stabilisation and resilience assistance
inside Syria and in neighbouring countries.
13. In Libya, the EU has continued to support the UN-led Berlin process that aims at
restoring peace and stability across Libya. As part of the strategy on Libya and
broader security within the Mediterranean, the extended mandate of EUNAVFOR
MED IRINI until 31 March 2023, will allow to further enforce the UN arms
embargo by inspecting vessels on the high seas off the coast of Libya suspected
to be carrying arms or related material in accordance with UNSCR 2292.
EUNAVFOR MED IRINI will also monitor illicit exports of petroleum from Libya,
contribute to capacity building and training to the Libyan Coast Guard and Navy
and tackle the disruption of human smuggling and trafficking in human beings
networks.

140

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
14. While the dire humanitarian, economic and human rights crisis in Afghanistan
continues, the EU remains committed to support the Afghan people and promote
peace and stability for the country. According to UN data, over 28.3 million
people remain in need of humanitarian assistance and protection (an increase
from 18.4 million in 2021 prior to the Taliban takeover), of which 20 million are
facing acute hunger and 6 million of those at emergency level. In response, and
despite the overall worsening of the situation, the EU continued to provide
humanitarian aid and basic needs assistance with a pragmatic yet principled
approach. The systematic decisions by the de-facto authorities to curb civil rights
of individuals, notably the rights of women and girls to participate in public life –
notably to acquire education and work for local and international organisations
– have severely impacted the capacity of the international community to deliver
assistance. The European Union agreed, at the Foreign Affairs Council of March
2023 to continue providing humanitarian aid and basic needs assistance in
accordance with the ‘Guiding principles and donor expectations’ adopted by the
international community; namely to remain active in sectors and geographic
areas where there is no discrimination, with women allowed to work and benefit
from aid. A monitoring mechanism has been put in place by the implementing
partners to ensure the implementation of these expectations. The EU constantly
calls on the de-facto Taliban authorities to reverse all bans undermining
fundamental rights of Afghan people - among others via direct contacts of the EU
Delegation in Kabul or through contacts of the EU Special Envoy for Afghanistan,
while it remains committed to support Afghan women and girls and make their
voice heard, also via the Afghan Women Leaders Forum platform supported by
the EU. In line with the benchmarks outlined in the 2021 Council Conclusions,
the EU has also continued calls on the Taliban to respect, protect and fulfil all
human rights, to address human rights violations and abuses, to establish an
inclusive and representative government, to prevent Afghanistan from serving as
a base for hosting, financing or exporting terrorism, to provide unhindered and
non-discriminatory humanitarian access and to continue allowing safe, secure
and orderly travel to and from Afghanistan.

141

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
III.

National Contributions to Regional Security
The EU has continued to pursue an ambitious international security agenda that reflects
our broad cooperation with our international partners. The fight against terrorism,
pursuit of disarmament, maritime security and disaster management are key areas of EU
engagement. The work is directly relevant to the most pressing issues in the Asia-Pacific
region.
1. Counter-Terrorism
i. The EU manages a network of Counter-Terrorism/Security Experts in 20 EU
Delegations across the globe. In 2023, the EU co-chairs the Global Counter
Terrorism Forum together with Morocco and Egypt.
ii. With ASEAN, the EU continues to actively engage on Counter-Terrorism
through capacity building efforts and political dialogues and holds regular
bilateral security dialogues and consultations with ASEAN and its Member
States on these issues. The 22nd ASEAN Senior Officials’ Meeting on
Transnational Crime (SOMTC) with the EU in July 2022 took stock of the
ASEAN-EU Work Plan to Combat Terrorism and Transnational Crime 20222024.
iii. In the context of the ARF, the EU continues its work as co-chair, together with
New Zealand and Malaysia of the ASEAN Regional Forum work stream on
Counter-Terrorism and Transnational crime until July 2023, including as cochair of the 19th ARF ISM on CTTC in May 2023.
iv. The EU has also led, together with Indonesia and Lao PDR, an ARF workshop
to understand better and exchange experiences on how to prevent the abuse
of non-governmental organisations for terrorism financing as well as the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(BCBS) and other important platforms.
v. Furthermore, following a 2021 regional workshop on Non-Profit
Organisations and the risk that that can be abused for the financing of
terrorism (Recommendation 8 FATF), future activities in South-East Asia are
being discussed in the framework of the EU Global anti-money laundering
(AML)/ combatting the financing of terrorism (CFT) facilities.
vi. The EU will continue its efforts in supporting the criminal justice sector of
Central Asia countries against terrorism, radicalization and financing of
terrorism from drugs trafficking.

142

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

2. Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
i. The EU continues to reaffirm its commitment to preserve the South-East
Asian region free of nuclear weapons, and all other weapons of mass
destruction (Bangkok Treaty), and to promote relevant international
instruments, including UN Security Council Resolution 1540.
ii. The EU believes in a multilateral approach and continues to support universal
accession to, and the full and effective implementation of, all relevant
international Treaties and instruments. The EU remains a strong supporter of
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty (CTBT), the Chemical Weapon Convention (CWC), the Biological
and Toxin Weapon Convention (BTWC), the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), the AntiPersonnel Mine Ban Convention (the Ottawa Convention) and the Convention
on certain Conventional Weapons (CCW). The EU is actively supporting the
universalisation and implementation of these Treaties and Conventions by
means of dedicated outreach projects.
iii. The EU welcomed the ratification of the CTBT by Tuvalu and The Gambia in
2022. The EU promotes consistently the benefits and the contribution of the
Treaty to peace, security, disarmament and non-proliferation, including in its
civil applications. The EU looks forward to continuing its cooperation with
Malaysia at the Tenth NPT Review Conference in August 2022, as the chair of
the Main Committee I on Nuclear Disarmament. The NPT Review Conference
is also appropriately focusing attention (of both the non-proliferation and the
broader security community) on the importance of nuclear security, as an end
itself and as an enabler of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
iv. The EU notes a growing interest in the use of nuclear energy for peaceful uses,
such as power generation, in certain ASEAN Member States. Nuclear safety,
security, and safeguards are key priorities for the EU in this regard. The EU
promotes the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism (ICSANT) and to the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and its Amendment (A/CPPNM) as fundamental
elements of the global nuclear security and anti-terrorism architecture.

143

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
v. The EU offers long-term cooperation for mitigating risks associated with
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) materials building on
the achievements of the EU CBRN Risk Mitigation Centre of Excellence (EU
CBRN CoE) Initiative and collaborating with the Network of ASEAN CBR
Defence Experts. The EU CBRN CoE supports CBRN National Action Plans
(NAPs) and the initiative’s network of national focal points. The NAPs have
proven to be useful coordination instruments at the country level and
efficient tools to channel stakeholder support for national and regional
priorities. Likewise, the EU P2P Export Control Programme for Dual-use Goods
has cooperated with ASEAN Member States in order to contribute to the
establishment, consolidation or update of effective strategic trade control
systems. Further coordination on CBRN related issues with other key regional
actors (i.e. the US, Canada, Australia, Japan) is essential.
vi. The EU has also supported ASEANTOM through the EU-ASEAN Regional
Project on Enhancing Emergency Preparedness and Response in ASEAN and
the ASEAN Early Warning Radiation Monitoring Network. These technical
projects form part of a broader effort to exchange technical expertise to
ensure the security of dangerous materials and ensure the consistent
application of protective measures in the Southeast Asian region.
vii. The EU will maintain its policies aiming at strengthening the global
disarmament architecture and multilateral non-proliferation regimes. This
includes continued diplomatic efforts towards the goal of achieving a ‘Zone
Free of Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Middle East’. Moreover, the EU
is a global top assistance donor in addressing the threats posed by mines and
explosive remnants of war. The threat from illicit small arms and light
weapons (SALW) will continue to be addressed through international
cooperation and supported by the EU through projects in third countries. The
EU will also support international efforts to enhance outer space security.

3. Transnational Crimes
i. The EU Drugs Strategy (2021-2025) sets out the political framework and
priorities for the EU's drug policy. The strategy aims to ensure a high level of
health protection, social stability and security and contribute to awareness
raising. Under drug supply reduction/enhanced security the strategy targets

144

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
all aspects of the illicit drug market, and includes the prevention of, dissuasion
from and disruption of drug related crime, in particular organised crime,
through judicial and law enforcement cooperation, intelligence, interdiction,
confiscation of criminal assets, investigations and border management. In
Asia, drugs trafficking and organised crime originating from Afghanistan will
be a major priority in the next years.

ii. The EU Drugs Strategy makes it a strategic priority to strengthen international
cooperation: enhancing the role of the EU as a global broker for a peoplecentred and human rights-oriented drug policy through cooperation with
third countries, regions and international and regional organisations, while
strengthening the commitment to development-orientated drug policies and
alternative development measures.

iii. The EU Strategy on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings (2021-2025) lays
down priorities to reduce the demand that fosters trafficking, break the
criminal business model of traffickers both offline and online, and protect,
support and empower the victims, especially women and children, while
promoting partnerships and cooperation with non-EU countries and
international organisations. The EU is currently funding an ISF programme
with multi-disciplinary international cooperation to identify and tackle
Vietnamese Trafficking in Human Beings in the EU. In connection with this
programme there are also operational actions taking place within the
framework of European Multidisciplinary Platform Against Criminal Threats
(EMPACT).

iv. Building on the EU Strategy on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings, in May
2022 the EU adopted the Common Anti-Trafficking Plan to protect people
fleeing the war in Ukraine. The key actions, which have been quickly
implemented, focus on awareness raising; prevention; law enforcement and
judicial response; early identification, support and protection of victims; and
cooperation with non-EU countries, especially Ukraine and Moldova.

145

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
v. The EU Action Plan against Migrant Smuggling (2021-2025) aims at
strengthening the EU’s cooperation with partner countries and international
organisations, especially through the development of tailor-made AntiSmuggling Operational Partnerships; sanctioning migrant smugglers and
preventing the exploitation of migrants; reinforcing cooperation and
supporting the work of law enforcement and judiciary; and strengthening
knowledge base.

vi. In addition, the EU is committed to tackling illegal wildlife trade and forestry
crimes as part of the EU’s biodiversity strategy.

4. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
i. The EU stands ready to provide humanitarian assistance to populations
affected by humanitarian crises in ASEAN Member states when disasters
strike and national or additional support is required. To strengthen regional
capacities, the EU also supports the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management (AHA Centre) through the
EU-SAHA Programme from 2019 to 2024.
ii. In February 2023, the European Commission announced a new allocation of
EUR 43 million in humanitarian assistance to address the humanitarian needs
of people in Myanmar, as well as those of Rohingya refugees and their host
communities in Bangladesh. Part of this allocation will also help addressing
the needs of Rohingya and other refugees in neighbouring countries, such as
Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and India. Since the Rohingya major
displacement to Bangladesh in 2017, the EU has provided over EUR 370
million in humanitarian and development funding to respond to the Rohingya
crisis in Bangladesh, Myanmar, and South-East Asia.
iii. Additional specific support has been provided to address the frequent natural
disasters in the Philippines and, in particular, in Mindanao. Overall, the EU has
been a staunch partner to the Philippines and has provided over EUR 154
million since 1996, of which more than EUR 14 million in 2022. The European
Union has also brought the Philippines into the Copernicus Programme, which
will augment the country’s environment data and monitoring initiatives and
disaster response capabilities.

146

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
iv. The EU systematically mainstreams disaster preparedness into its
humanitarian assistance, as appropriate in each context. The EU’s Disaster
Preparedness Strategy contributes to the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030, and to the priorities established by the ASEAN
Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency Response (AADMER)
and its work programmes for 2021-2025.
v. EU support in Southeast Asia aims to improve regional systems and capacities,
ensure these are responsive and inclusive to community priorities, and fill
gaps when local systems are overwhelmed. The EU has been working on
Disaster Preparedness (DP) in ASEAN countries since 1995 and it is now
particularly committed to scale up the Anticipatory Action approach to take
early actions when a predictable disaster is imminent, before a crisis occurs
and to mitigate its humanitarian impact.

5. Maritime Security
i. The EU is strongly committed to a rules-based international maritime order
and to the principles of international law as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The EU is committed to maritime
security cooperation, freedom of navigation and overflight, and the peaceful
and sustainable use of the seas in the interest of all states.
ii. The EU remains active in the context of the ARF. For instance, in April 2022 it
co-chaired with Vietnam and Australia the 4th ARF Workshop on Maritime Law
Enforcement Cooperation. Subsequently, together with Vietnam and
Australia, the EU co-chaired a workshop on Implementing UNCLOS and other
International Instruments to address Emerging Maritime Issues together with
Vietnam, Australia and New Zealand in November 2022.
iii. In the context of the Indo-Pacific Strategy, the EU seeks to encourage the EU
Member States’ naval presence in the Indo-Pacific, while also conducting
more joint exercises, including multilateral ones, and port calls with partners
in the region, to fight piracy, deter illicit activities and contribute to the
protection of freedom of navigation and overflight in the region.
iv. The EU will continue to enhance regional maritime security, in particular
through the project CRIMARIO II (Critical Maritime Routes in the Indo-Pacific).
The project’s focus on maritime domain awareness is complemented by a

147

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
broad portfolio of capacity building activities with a view to contribute to
safer sea lanes of communication with the EU, via increased information
sharing (through the IORIS platform), while also improving inter-agency
cooperation at national and regional level.
v. Incidents at sea have seen an overall decrease from 2021 to 2022. Despite
this, in South-East Asia and other regions like the Indian and Pacific oceans
slightly more incidents were registered (MICA Centre Annual Report 2022).
This shows the need for continued joint efforts and vigilance at sea and in
ports. The EU has contributed to increasing maritime security and safety,
particularly through its CSDP mission Operation ATALANTA. This operation –
in combination with the wider international response, implementation of
best practices, and the provision of private armed guards on-board ships –
has reduced almost entirely the number of attacks at sea in the WesternIndian Ocean region. Operation Atalanta was prolonged by two years until the
end of 2024, given an expanded area of operations and a broader mandate to
also deter illicit activities (e.g. drugs and arms smuggling). Operation
ATALANTA has also stepped up its naval cooperation including through
exercises with India, Japan, Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Djibouti, Oman and
others.
vi. In addition, the newly devised Coordinated Maritime Presence (CMP) concept
and its implementation in the North Western Indian Ocean as a Maritime Area
of Interest allow the EU Member States to better coordinate the presence of
air and naval assets in this essential area for the EU’s interests. CMP
strengthens the EU’s maritime security engagement by increasing the EU’s
efficiency and visibility as a maritime security provider; raising maritime
situational awareness for decision making in the security domain; facilitating
a continued EU maritime presence in designated Maritime Areas of Interest
and promoting international and regional maritime security cooperation,
including with likeminded partners from third countries.

IV.

Role of ARF
1. The EU’s contribution to the ARF is a tangible demonstration of its willingness to
support the ASEAN-led security architecture in Southeast Asia. It is also evidence of

148

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the EU’s commitment to regional peace and stability, and to the development of a
more robust, rules-based regional security order.
2. The ARF continues to be the most comprehensive multilateral security forum in the
ASEAN region and beyond. The ARF offers a valuable platform for partners to engage
on a broad range of issues. Building on the ARF’s comprehensive approach to security
issues, the EU has engaged actively with ARF partners at various levels and on a range
of critical issues.
3. In line with ARF Ministerial Guidance, the EU is keen to make the ARF more “action
oriented”. The EU acknowledges the importance of strengthening the organisational
and institutional structures of the ARF, including the ARF Unit in the ASEAN
Secretariat. The EU respects and promotes the central role of ASEAN in the emerging
regional architecture and believes in the need to ensure transparency and synergy
between ARF and other regional fora, such as the ADMM+ and the East Asia Summit.

149

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

INDIA
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment.
●

India’s security is linked to the wider Indo-Pacific region, which is a seamless maritime
space from the western coast of North America to the eastern shores of Africa. The
Indo-Pacific Ocean system carries an estimated 65% of world trade, 90% of world’s
energy and contributes 60% of global GDP. A significant part of India’s foreign trade,
including its energy supplies is carried across these waters. The evolving security
challenges across the entire region are therefore key for India. Traditional security
threats emanating from maritime disputes, territorial claims and claims over natural
resources are a matter of particular concern. There are also some global challenges
that merit regional considerations. Chief among them are climate action and counterterrorism.

●

The concepts of “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam”– ‘the whole world is one family’ and
“sarve bhavantu sukhinah” – ‘all be at peace’ are at the core of our values and
traditions. The principles on which these concepts are based: inclusivity, equality and
openness guide India’s Indo-Pacific vision.

●

At the East Asia Summit (EAS) held in Bangkok in 2019, PM Narendra Modi announced
the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI) as practical implementation of India’s vision
of Indo-Pacific. As an open, non-treaty based global initiative, the IPOI draws on the
existing regional cooperation architecture and mechanisms to focus on central pillars
conceived around Maritime Security; Maritime Ecology; Maritime Resources;
Capacity Building and Resource Sharing; Disaster Risk Reduction and Management;
Science, Technology and Academic Cooperation; and Trade Connectivity and
Maritime Transport. These seven pillars are being progressed in cooperation with
respective partners for each of these areas.

●

India’s engagement with the South East Asian region and Association of South East
Asian Nations (ASEAN) is based on its ‘Act-East’ Policy (AEP). Key elements of India’s
Act East Policy are to promote economic cooperation, cultural ties and develop
strategic relationships with countries in Indo-Pacific region through engagement at
bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. India shares a deep connect with ASEAN and
views it as a central factor for the security architecture in the region. India continues

150

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
to attach importance to ASEAN centrality and unity in ensuring peace and stability in
the region.

●

In 2022, India and ASEAN celebrated 30 years of dialogue relations and elevated
ASEAN-India Partnership to Comprehensive Strategic Partnership at the 19th ASEANIndia Summit held in Cambodia, with focus on enhancing cooperation in Maritime
domain, public health & traditional medicine, cyber security, fintech, disaster
management, blue economy, connectivity, agriculture, renewable energy, people-topeople cooperation and economic engagement.

●

A Plan of Action (2021-2025) to further strengthen the ASEAN-India Strategic
Partnership in the next five years, was adopted in 2020. As part of its implementation,
planned activities seek to enhance India-ASEAN connectivity, support ASEAN
community building objectives and expand cooperation in maritime domain. India has
reiterated its support to ASEAN’s Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC)-2025,
the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) Work Plan IV and agriculture development
strategy.

●

India is actively engaged with various Indo-Pacific frameworks including, inter alia,
Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), East Asia Summit (EAS), Indian
Ocean Rim Association (IORA), Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) and Mekong Ganga
Cooperation (MGC). India also joined the Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong Economic
Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS) as a Development Partner in July 2019 and has
become an Observer at Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) in March 2020. India is also a
part of various other multilateral institutions, which deal with maritime security issues
in the region including ADMM Plus, Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating
Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ship in Asia (ReCAAP) and Expanded ASEAN
Maritime Forum (EAMF). India also jointed the Djibouti Code of Conduct- Jeddah
Agreement (DCOC-JA) as an ‘observer’ and the G7++ Friends of Gulf of Guinea
(G7++FOGG) as a ‘friend’ in 2020.

●

The International Sea Lanes passing through the South China Sea are critical for peace,
stability, prosperity and development of the Indo-Pacific region. It is natural for the
international community to have vital stakes in ensuring freedom of navigation and

151

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
over flight, and unimpeded commerce in these international waterways. This
commitment was also reflected in the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in
the South China Sea. India hopes that all parties to that Declaration would strictly
abide by it, in letter and spirit, and will not take any actions that would jeopardize
peace and security in this region. India hopes that the Code of Conduct negotiations
will lead to an outcome that is in keeping with all relevant international laws, including
UNCLOS.

II.

National Contributions to Regional Security
a. Counterterrorism
●

India believes that terrorism is the gravest global threat to international peace
and security and it is important to isolate those countries, which harbour
terrorists, provide them safe havens and use cross-border terrorism as a foreign
policy tool. It is also in common interest that all the States must take credible,
verifiable, irreversible and sustained action against terrorism and terror financing
which are emanating from the territories under their control.

●

India has been actively participating in ARF activities related to Counter-terrorism
and transnational crime pillar including participation in the recently held 19th ARF
Inter-Sessional Meeting on Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime (ARF ISM
on CTTC), in May 2023.

●

During its UNSC membership in 2022, India, as the Chair of the UNSC Counter
Terrorism Committee (CTC), hosted a special session of CTC on 28th October, 2022
in Mumbai and on 29th October, 2022 in New Delhi on the theme of countering
the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes. After the
meeting, ‘The Delhi Declaration on countering the use of new and emerging
technologies for terrorist purposes’ was adopted unanimously by the CTC.

●

The Delhi Declaration, inter alia, has emphasized the need for UN Member States
to act cooperatively to prevent and counter the use of new information and
communications technologies, and other emerging technologies, for terrorist
purposes, including recruitment and incitement to commit terrorist acts, as well
as the financing, planning and preparation of their activities and stressed the

152

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
importance of cooperation with civil society and the private sector in this
endeavour.

●

India conducts various Joint Military Exercises with Friendly Foreign Countries to
share best practices in training and promote inter-operability in SubConventional Military/ Counter Terrorism Operations under the UN Mandate of
Chapter VII.

●

India will be participating in the Joint Exercise ; Table Top Exercise (TTX) & Field
Training Exercise (FTX) under ADMM Plus Expert Working Group (EWG) on theme
of Counter Terrorism scheduled this year.

b. Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms control and Disarmament
●

India accords great importance to the implementation of UN Security Council
Resolution (UNSCR) 1540. With its longstanding commitment to global nonproliferation, India has established a strong law-based, national system to
implement the provisions of Resolution 1540.

●

As a part of the latest comprehensive review of resolution 1540, UNSCR 1540
Committee reviewed India’s matrix to the 1540 Committee that assesses national
level implementation of UNSCR 1540 provisions; and it has been assessed that
India fulfils the requirements of UNSC Resolution 1540 in terms of prohibitions,
measures and controls in the relevant areas. Further, India participated actively
in the consultations on the Comprehensive Review report related to status of
UNSCR 1540 implementation and the UNSC Resolution 2663 that extended the
1540 Committee’s mandate for another 10 years (till 30 November 2032).

●

India has also supported 1540 Committee’s mandate and its work, wherever
possible, by offering to share its knowledge and technical expertise in various
areas as part of the Committee’s assistance framework. Recognizing the role of
the industry, academia and other key stakeholders in facilitating the States’
implementation of resolution 1540, India has been organising outreach events
involving these stakeholders at the national level, and in the region.

153

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

With the pronounced threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials, equipment and technology to the
terrorist groups and other non-State actors, India is of the view that full
implementation of Resolution 1540 assumes far greater importance now than
when it was adopted in 2004.

●

India recognizes the important role of multilateral export control regimes in nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems and related
materials, equipment and technologies, including to terrorists and other nonState actors.

●

India has been engaging actively in the multilateral export control regimes of WA,
AG and MTCR, including by sharing of our best practices or implementation
experiences in the area of export controls, participation in the development of
guidelines for export controls and lists of materials, equipment and technologies
regulated under these regimes. India has assumed the Plenary Chairmanship of
WA for a period of one year (from 1 January 2023). This further establishes India’s
recognized credentials on export controls and non-proliferation matters.

●

As a responsible nuclear weapon State, India has a policy of maintaining a
credible minimum deterrence based on a No First Use posture and non-use of
nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States.

●

India remains committed to universal, verifiable and non-discriminatory nuclear
disarmament. India believes that nuclear disarmament can be achieved in a time
bound manner through a step-by-step process underwritten by a universal
commitment and an agreed global and non-discriminatory multilateral
framework. India’s Working Paper (CD/1816) presented to the Conference on
Disarmament in 2007 encapsulates this approach.

●

In line with its vision, India supports the commencement of negotiations on a
Comprehensive Nuclear Weapons Convention at the Conference on
Disarmament.

154

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

India’s annual resolutions at the UNGA on the ‘Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use of Nuclear Weapons’ and on ‘Reducing Nuclear Danger’ are adopted with
widespread support. Without prejudice to the priority attached to disarmament,
India looks forward to commence negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-Off
Treaty based on CD/1299 and the mandate contained therein.

●

India has participated in the meetings of the 25-member Group of Governmental
Experts (GGE) on Nuclear Disarmament Verification (NDV) established by the UN
Secretary General, and participates in the ‘Creating an Environment for Nuclear
Disarmament’ (CEND) initiative, and the ARF ISMs on Non Proliferation and
Disarmament and related workshops and seminars.

●

India is mindful of the rapid pace of developments in science and technology
which, while offering tremendous benefits, also pose potential challenges to
international peace and security. India’s annual Resolution at the UNGA on the
“Role of science and technology in the context of international security and
disarmament”, adopted by consensus, mandates the UNSG to submit a report on
current developments in science and technology and their potential impact on
international security and disarmament efforts.

●

India values the role played by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
facilitating adoption of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and at the national level
strengthening nuclear security and safety. India participated in the Joint Eighth
and Ninth Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on
Nuclear Safety (CNS) held in Vienna from 20-31 March 2023.

●

India believes that it is imperative to strengthen collective commitment to
disarmament instruments including the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW), which is a unique instrument within the UN framework for
progressive controls over certain categories of conventional weapons.

●

India is fully committed to the CCW and the humanitarian principles enshrined in
the Convention and is a party to all the five protocols of the CCW. The Convention
while stipulating measures to mitigate humanitarian concerns arising from the

155

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
use of specific weapons, strives to strike a balance with the military necessity of
such weapons. India has also been participating actively in the deliberations of
the Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on Lethal Autonomous Weapons
Systems (LAWS) within the framework of the CCW and recognizes the progress
made in the discussions at the GGE on LAWS in recent years and reiterates its
support to the eleven guiding principles adopted.

●

India is deeply concerned about the challenges posed by illicit transfers of
conventional weapons as well as ammunition management, including small arms
and light weapons (SALW), to unauthorized recipients such as criminals, terrorists
and non-State actors, which pose a major threat to international peace and
security. India accords high importance to the UN Programme of Action as the
cornerstone of multilateral efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate illicit trade
in SALW. The full and effective implementation of the UN Progress of Action and
the International Tracing Instrument (ITI) is a priority for India, especially as a
means for combating terrorism and transnational crime.

●

Towards this, India is also committed to refine the International ammunition
Technical Guidelines (IATG), wherein India has been recently added as the 11th
member of the TRB (Technical Review Board) of IATG. Towards safer and secure
ammunition management, India is an active participant in the OEWG on
Conventional Ammunition (under the UN auspices) which is working to create a
Global framework on Ammunition Management to prevent diversion to
unauthorized recipients, including criminals and terrorists. The fourth
substantive session of the OEWG was held in June 2023 and the global framework
has been recommended to UNGA for adoption.

c. Transnational Crime
●

India is fully supportive of all possible efforts to combat transnational crime. The
access to and misuse of technology by terrorist organizations is a major concern
for all. Cyberspace, encrypted chat applications and social media platforms are
being used extensively for radicalization, misinformation, propaganda, terror
funding, training, recruitment and execution of terrorist attacks.

156

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

The threat of ‘lone wolf’ radicalized attacks over the cyberspace has increased
manifold in the recent times. Another threat vector is the use of drones to carry
our terrorist attacks. Rapid emergence of encrypted chat applications, access to
Dark Web and crypto-financing and emergence of newer technologies will
continue to have significant implications for counter terrorism efforts.

●

Data is increasingly becoming an important source of economic growth, and
cooperation should be enhanced for trusted sources, respecting privacy and
ensuring data protection. Growing cyber threats have the potential to disrupt
national, regional and international security environment. Securing critical
information infrastructure and tackling growing incidents of cyber crime and
cyber terrorism are paramount.

●

Cooperation on countering terrorism and extremism propaganda on the internet,
in removing such content, in alerting each other of such activities and in
investigating terrorist attacks mounted through the use of ICTs could be an
essential part of confidence building measures among countries. Ransomware
attacks have become sophisticated and pervasive over the last decade. They now
have the potential of disrupting critical cyber infrastructure and government
organizations. The ongoing Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate a comprehensive
international convention against use of ICTs for criminal purposes is an important
process under the aegis of the United Nations and India has been actively
participating in it.

●

India has successfully concluded the 3rd edition of ‘No Money for Terror (NMFT)’
Ministerial Conference on November 18-19, 2022 in New Delhi in which 78
countries and 16 multilateral organisations participated. India was happy to note
that some ARF members participated in the Conference.

●

Participants in the NMFT Conference, discussed the issues like Countering
Terrorist Financing using crypto-currencies, Virtual Assets, Crowd funding
platforms, payment intermediaries, Dark Web etc. India has offered to set up a
permanent secretariat for the ‘No Money for Terror’ Ministerial Conference.

157

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
d. Humanitarian and Disaster Relief
●

In keeping with its tradition of ‘Vasudaiva Kutumbakam’, India has traditionally
been the first responder to natural disasters in the region, especially in the
immediate and extended neighbourhood with increasing frequency and a
credible regional partner with demonstrated capabilities to provide humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief (HADR) materials for affected people. Indian Naval
ships and aircrafts were regularly deployed to facilitate security to Indian and
international maritime community, provide HADR assistance and respond to any
maritime incident in the region.

●

Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) is a Maritime Security initiative launched
by India to address regional vulnerabilities. The IONS initiative is the largest in the
region in terms of membership of countries, with 25 ‘full time’ members and 08
‘observers’. Last edition of IONS Maritime Exercise (IMEX), co-hosted by the
Indian Navy and French Navy (FN), was conducted in the Arabian Sea (off Goa)
from 20-28 March 2022. The next edition of the exercise is being planned in
November 2023 with all members of IONS.

●

OP Karuna (Cyclone Mocha in Myanmar) : The cyclone storm ‘Mocha’ made
landfall close to Sitwe (Myanmar) in May 2023 and India was the first responder
post crisis. India extended HADR assistance to Myanmar in the form of Medical
aid and HADR material (emergency food items, tents, essential medicines, water
pumps, portable generators, cloths, sanitary and hygiene items, etc.).

●

In February 2023, a series of earthquakes hit various cities of Turkiye and Syria.
Under Operation Dost, Indian Armed Forces set up a 30 bedded hospital at the
Vocational and Technical High School at Iskenderun, Hatay Province and 251
personnel were deployed.

●

Annual Joint HADR Exercise ‘Samannvay-22’ was held at Agra from 28-30
November 2022 on Flood and Earthquake with ASEAN countries.

158

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

India and Indonesia are the co-chairs of the 4th Cycle of the ASEAN Defence
Ministers Meeting Plus Experts Working Group (ADMM-Plus EWG) from 20212023.

e. Maritime Security
●

Maritime security is an important dimension of India’s international engagement
in the Indo-Pacific region and beyond. During India’s Presidency of the UN
Security Council in August 2021, maritime security was the theme for high level
discussion, chaired by the Prime Minister of India. This meeting concluded with a
UN Security Council’s Presidential Statement on maritime security, which
suggests a broader approach to address common concerns of maritime safety and
security.

●

India supports free, open and inclusive Indo-Pacific region and believes that the
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) sets out the legal framework for
activities in the oceans and seas. Maritime Security is also one of the seven pillars
of India’s Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI) on which India and UK have taken
co-lead to work with all the interested partners in the region to ensure peace and
prosperity.

●

India engaged bilaterally with countries around the world as well as regional
bodies ranging from EAS, ARF, ADMM Plus, IORA, IONS, Expanded ASEAN
Maritime Forum (EAMF), Indian Ocean Commission (IOC), Djibouti Code of
Conduct-Jeddah Amendment (DCoC-JA), Contact Group on Illicit Maritime
Activities (CGIMA), G7 plus Friends of Gulf of Guinea (G7++FoGG), Combined
Maritime Forces (CMF), Head of Asian Coast Guard Agencies Meetings
(HACGAM), and the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP) etc. In the ARF Inter-Sessional Year
2022-23, India along with the USA, Phillipines and Papua New Guinea co-chaired
and hosted second part of “ASEAN Regional Forum Training Series and Best
Practice Manual on International Ship and Port Facility Security Code in Mumbai
from 10-14 April, 2023.

159

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

India’s Information Fusion Centre - Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR) near New Delhi,
launched in December 2018, has contributed greatly towards enhancing maritime
domain awareness through collaboration with partner countries and
organizations. With white shipping information exchange agreements with
around 25 countries and regional organizations, as well as international liaison
officers from various countries. The IFC-IOR in addition to alerting all the partners
on maritime incidents also publishes monthly, half yearly and yearly reports on
its website.

●

India has been actively involved in capacity building, capability enhancement and
training of the maritime entities of various countries in the region; providing Lines
of Credit, patrol aircraft and helicopters, patrol vessels and boats for patrolling of
their vast EEZs, training of personnel, deploying training teams for enhancing
maritime security capacities, and providing hydrographic assistance to countries
in the region.

●

Anti Piracy Patrol in Gulf of Aden: 103 Indian Naval ships have been deployed in
the Gulf of Aden since commencement of anti-piracy patrols in 2008. India has
been an active member of CGPCS (Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia) since its inception in 2009 and India is an active member of Contact
Group on Illicit Maritime Activities (CGIMA) which is the re-envisioned CGPCS. At
the first plenary of CGIMA, held in Kenya in May 2023, India put forth various
proposals and offers to enhance the Maritime Security of the region.

●

The maiden ASEAN-India Maritime Exercise (AIME) was conducted from 02-08
May 2023. The exercise was co-hosted by the Indian Navy and Republic of
Singapore Navy and witnessed participation of 9 ships and 6 aircraft from Indian
and ASEAN Navies.

●

MILAN is one of the largest multilateral exercises in the IOR, hosted by Indian
Navy biennially. MILAN 22 was conducted at Visakhapatnam from 25 February-04
March 2022 with participation from 39 countries. The next edition of MILAN is
planned to be conducted from 19-27 Feb 2024 at/off Visakhapatnam.

160

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

India participated in 18th ADMM Plus EWG on Maritime Security Table Top
Exercise (TTX) in Bangkok, Thailand from 22-24 February 2023, that focused on
measures to prevent and suppress unlawful activities like drug/ human trafficking,
piracy and armed robbery and included discussions on collaborative efforts
towards conduct of Search and Rescue operations in Maritime domain.

III.

Role of ARF
●

India views ARF as an inclusive forum supporting dialogue and cooperation towards
stability and security in the region. ASEAN is the driving force of the ARF, and ASEAN’s
unity and solidarity will further the objectives of ARF. India believes that the ASEAN
way of “dialogue and consensus” have served the grouping well and should remain
ARF’s guiding principles. ARF provides a valuable platform in which practical
cooperation can be forged amongst the Member States in addressing various common
challenges.

●

India believes that ARF should continue to evolve into a balanced, open and inclusive
framework for partners to interact and cooperate in addressing traditional and nontraditional security challenges. Candid discussions on regional and international
security issues in ARF have led to greater interaction and understanding of different
perspectives and activities conducted under its framework, and have contributed to
confidence building, among the ARF countries and beyond. India will continue to
engage constructively in and contribute positively to the ARF processes.

161

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

INDONESIA
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
Indonesia highlights the importance of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) to uphold the ASEAN
Charter, the Charter of the United Nations, the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast
Asia, the Bali Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations, and universally recognized
international law thereby enhancing regional peace, security, stability, and prosperity as well
as promoting mutual confidence and trust.

Indonesia remains of the view that maritime security in the region is of top priority.
Indonesia’s perspective of the regional security outlook is consistent with its strategic
geographical location, its nature as the largest archipelago in the world, and its vision to be
the Global Maritime Fulcrum. Southeast Asian waters and the surrounding area are vital to
the region’s economy, trade, transportation, and communication.

Disputes generated from overlapping claims in the area underscores the necessity for peaceful
resolution of disputes, in accordance with international law, including the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). It is therefore crucial that all parties to
refrain from activities that may escalate tensions, and to fully and effectively implement the
2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC).

Indonesia attaches great importance to peace and stability in the South China Sea, even
though Indonesia is not a claimant state in the territorial dispute in the area. Indonesia
appreciates the start of negotiation of the Single Draft Negotiating text of COC since early
2019, and despite the negotiation is being put on hold due to pandemic, Indonesia remains of
the view that expediting the COC negotiation process is essential to achieving the main
objective to govern the behaviour of states in the region.

Indonesia reaffirms that the freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South China
Sea, and other lawful uses of the seas are one of the fundamental rights of all States protected
by international law, particularly UNCLOS 1982. It is of utmost importance for Indonesia to
consistently uphold 1982 UNCLOS as the legal basis for determining sovereign rights and
legitimate interests over maritime areas.

162

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Indonesia will play an active role in encouraging the completion of the COC through practical,
effective and actionable means in the shortest possible time, to serve as a governance guide
behaviour of ASEAN Member States and China in the South China Sea. Indonesia will continue
to show leadership to promote substantive progress, including offering avenues for various
controversial issues in the negotiations.

Indonesia stresses the importance of a constructive dialogue as the main component of a
peace process, which will ultimately be pivotal to the achievement of regional and
international peace and security. In the near future, involvement of an independent and
competent body (IAEA) in the verification process will certainly help to achieve the goal of a
permanent denuclearization of the Peninsula.

Indonesia reiterates that UNSC sanctions are not the end, but the means and need to be well
targeted and reviewed periodically to be effective. Indonesia reiterates its commitment to
implement the multilateral sanctions in accordance with its national laws and regulations.
Indonesia does not recognize the unilateral sanctions.

Based on UNGA Resolution A/RES/3284-B, the definition of Weapons of Mass Destruction
consists of atomic explosive weapons, radioactive material weapons, lethal chemical and
biological weapons, and many weapons developed in the future which might have
characteristics comparable in destructive effect to those of atomic bomb or other weapons
mentioned above. Indonesia believes that Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) threatens
the existence of every nation in the world, humanity, as well as peace, security and stability
of the world at large.

Indonesia has joined several multilateral related treaties including the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC), Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), and is currently in
the process of ratifying the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW). Indonesia
has also joined the Bangkok Treaty (Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone
Treaty/SEANWFZ) as Southeast Asia Region commits to delegitimize all forms of WMDs.

163

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
II.

National Security and Defence Policy
a.

Overview of national security and defence policy

Today’s global security and strategic environment influences national defence. National policy
should be dynamic and adaptive particularly to address the increasingly complex and
multidimensional challenges, considering that there are military and non-military threats, as
well as hybrid threats, which can be categorized as factual and non-factual. These threats
include terrorism, radicalism, separatism and armed rebellions, natural disasters, border
violations, sea piracy and natural resources theft, epidemics, cyber attacks and espionage,
trafficking and drug abuse as well conventional war and armed conflicts. Internal country
conditions cannot be separated from the influence of the strategic environment triggered by
ideology, political, economical, socio-cultural, and security factors. These developments
become challenges in managing national defence.

Indonesia pursues an independent and active foreign policy. Indonesia believes that
neighbouring countries are friends with a shared commitment to promoting security and
stability in the region. Establishing a common perspective is needed to minimize problems
faced in international relations, including in the bilateral and multilateral fora.

Indonesia relies on a total defence system in order to achieve national goals. The system
essentially involves all citizens and all other national resources, each with a role and function.
The involvement of every citizen is based on love for the homeland that is oriented towards a
common goal to serve national interests. Maritime defence is based on a concept of Indonesia
serving as the Global Maritime Fulcrum. This concept of national defence guides every citizen
in recognizing national goals, national interests, the nature of national defence, national
defence system, national defence functions and national defence basic principles.

Indonesia has been actively promoting peace and enhanced cooperation in the Asia Pacific
and the Indian Ocean through the ADMM and ADMM-Plus frameworks. Indonesia actively
participated and contributed to all meetings and activities under the framework of ADMM
and ADMM-Plus during 2022 under the chairmanship of Cambodia. As the co-chair of ADMMPlus Experts’ Working Group (EWG) on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR)
with India for the cycle of 2021-2024, Indonesia and India hosted the 18th ADMM-Plus EWG
on HADR meeting on 11-12 May 2022 aimed to build interoperability on HADR among ADMMPlus countries, empower ASEAN and other regional bodies to support HADR and evolve a

164

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
comprehensive method on awareness, planning, early warning and mitigation measures as
also physical and mental rehabilitation of victims. Indonesia also hosted the Middle Planning
Conference (MPC) and Site Survey on 30 October to 2 November 2022 in Yogyakarta. The MPC
discussed the operational and technical brief of the exercise, confirmation of the participation,
administration, and rules of engagement. Participants also visited the exercise venue. Both
co-chairs plan to conduct the Final Planning Conference in July 2023 and Table-Top-Exercise
and Field Training Exercise on HADR in October 2023 in Yogyakarta. The exercise is focused on
enhancing the ADMM-Plus countries’ capacity for humanitarian assistance during a pandemic.

Indonesia continues its contribution to the regional effort to counter terrorism by initiating
the ASEAN Our Eyes (AOE) framework. The 6th ASEAN Our Eyes Working Group (WG) meeting
was successfully hosted by Cambodia via video conference. Recently, Indonesia hosted the 7th
AOE WG on 31 January to 3 February 2023 in Jakarta, Indonesia.

As the Chair of ASEAN in 2023, Indonesia has the theme of “Peace, Prosperity and Security”
under the ADMM Chairmanship. Indonesia priorities are to maintain ASEAN unity and
centrality; keep ASEAN united and dignified and able to become a driver of regional interests;
make ASEAN remain an open and inclusive region that not only involves plus countries in
cooperation but also countries far outside the region so that ASEAN can become an anchor of
regional and world peace and prosperity; uphold international law and always prioritize
dialogue to find solutions to every problem both internal and external with a spirit of
brotherhood in order to realize the security of the ASEAN community.

Indonesia has hosted several meetings during its chairmanship in ADMM in 2023 such as the
7th AOE WG, the 7th Ad Hoc Meeting on ASEAN Direct Communication Infrastructure, ASEAN
Defence Senior Officials’ Working Group (ADSOM WG) and ADSOM-Plus WG, ASEAN Defence
Interaction Programme (ADIP), ARF Defence Officials’ Dialogue, and the 20th ARF Security
Policy Conference (ASPC).

Indonesia is committed to promote wider cooperation during its chairmanship as highlighted
in the deliverables, among others are the Concept Paper on the ASEAN Outlook on the IndoPacific from A Defence Perspective, the Jakarta Joint Declaration of ADMM for Peace,
Prosperity and Security, as well as the Joint Statement by the ADMM-Plus on Women, Peace

165

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and Prosperity which are currently being discussed by the ADMM and ADMM-Plus
mechanism.

In the maritime sector, Indonesia is well aware of how important it is to safeguard Indonesian
zone, and it is evident that the Indonesian government requires investigators with the
requisite skills to enforce the law, particularly in National jurisdictions. Through Government
Regulation Number 13 Year 2022 Regarding Implementation of Security, Safety, and Law
Enforcement in Indonesia Waters Territory and Indonesian Jurisdiction Area, investigate the
scheme to accommodate collaboration from all institution levels, which are The Sea and Coast
Guard (KPLP), the National Police (Polair), the Indonesian Navy (TNI-AL), and the Maritime
Security Agency (BAKAMLA). The synergy and cooperation between these institutions will
have an effect on the effectiveness and efficiency of preventive and efficiency law
enforcement.

Indonesia attaches great importance of multilateralism. It is reflected by Indonesia’s active
participation in the international organizations such as in the United Nations. Indonesia served
its role as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council from January 2019 to
December 2020. But Indonesia’s participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations dated back
since 1957, when the country dispatched its first deployment of military contingent to UN
Emergency Force (UNEF) in Egypt. Since then, Indonesia has been a proud contributor by
sending more of its military and police servicemen as peacekeepers.

The country’s involvement in UN Peacekeeping Operations has always reflected the mandate
emanating from the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution, to actively participate and contribute
in the maintenance of world order based on freedom, lasting peace, and social justice.
Indonesia’s commitment to UN Peacekeeping Operations has also transformed the latter into
one of the country’s flagships of diplomacy in the United Security Council membership.

As of January of 2022, Indonesia’s contribution to UN peacekeeping operations amounted to
2,697 peacekeepers. This number places Indonesia in the rank 8 out of 122 Troop/Police
Contributing Countries (TPCCs). They are deployed in 7 missions out of 23 UN missions,
namely UNIFIL (Lebanon), MONUSCO (Democratic Republic of the Congo), MINUSCA (Central
African Republic), MINUSMA (Mali), UNMISS (South Sudan), MINURSO (Western Sahara), and
UNISFA (Abyei-Sudan).

166

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Indonesian peacekeeping contingent has been supported with moderate numbers of women
personnel to help better implementation of the protection of civilian mandate in the field. As
of January 2022, 158 female personnel are in the missions and serve as troops, military staff,
Formed Police Unit, Individual Police Officers, and some as doctors and nurses.

Their presence has been a critical enabler to generate strong social interactions with the locals
by exercising community engagement activities under the Civil-Military Coordination/CIMIC,
notably protection to women, girls, and children. Indonesian women personnel are able to
further help the contingent in winning the hearts and minds of the local community as an
important component to support successful implementation of mandated tasks, as well as
useful to provide safety and security to the peacekeepers themselves.

Those postures of contribution thus far have placed Indonesia as one of the main enablers to
keep the UN well-resourced and well-oiled to run the machinery of peace operations.

Moving forward, Indonesia is keen to strengthen its contribution and support initiatives that
bolster UN Peacekeeping substantively for its ultimate aim that is to assist a nationally-owned
and -led endeavour by the host country to build sustaining peace and development. Among
others is by enhancing the capacity of the Indonesian Peacekeeping Centre in Sentul, as an
international hub for regional training, and marshalling the role of the country’s civilian
capacities, including women’s participation, into peacekeeping missions to help effective
implementation of the contemporary multi-dimensional peacekeeping mandates.

Indonesia encourages the importance of the contribution of civilian experts in peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding missions in order to face the dynamics of situations in conflict
areas that are increasingly becoming more multidimensional and require approaches from
various aspects. In this regard, Indonesia has played an active role in supporting the
development of civilian capacity (CivCap), both at the multilateral, regional and national
levels.

Indonesia has given intellectual contributions to the UN Peacekeeping namely:
●

One of the first countries formulating the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)

167

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

Initiated a Presidential Statement (PRST) at the UN Security Council on increasing
peacekeeping capacity to improve the safety and security of personnel (2019)

●

Advancing its interests regarding reimbursement, transportation, and equipment in
negotiations for the preparation of the Contingent Owned Equipment Manual 2020,

●

Initiating the UN Security Council Resolution 2538 (2020) on Women in Peacekeeping.

●

One of the members of the Group of Friends on the COVID-19 Vaccine for Uniformed
Personnel to ensure a COVID-19 vaccine for all peacekeepers in the UN Mission.

●

Co-Chairs of the Group of Friends on Safety and Security of UN Peacekeepers
launched in April 2021.

●

The main negotiator of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) on the issue of the safety
and security of the UN MPP troops at the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34).

●

One of the Co-Chairs of the UN Peacekeeping Ministerial (UNPM), and Preparatory
Meeting UNPM on 2021 with Japan and Ethiopia on training and capacity building of
UN PKO personnel.

●

Pledging on the UN Peacekeeping Ministerial of 1.000 peacekeepers in reserve and
capacity building cooperation.

●

One of the co-sponsors of UN Security Council Resolution 2518 (2020) and 2589
(2021) on Safety and Security of Peacekeepers.

●

The host of UN Triangular Partnership Programme, a joint peacekeepers training
program with UN and Japan scheduled in mid-2022.

b.

Data contribution to ARF Arms Register
i.

Total defence expenditure on annual basis
1)

Defence expenditure
Based on Book II of Work Plans and Budgets of State
Ministries/Institutions (RKA-K/L) issued by the Ministry of Finance of
the Republic of Indonesia, the budget of the Ministry of Defence in
2022 is Rp. 133,923.4 billion or Rp. 133.9 trilion.

2)

Defence expenditure as a %age of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Based on Indonesian Economic Development throughout
2021 issued by The Central Bureau of Statistics, Indonesia GDP is Rp.

168

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
16,970.8 trillion, resulting in the %age of the defence budget GDP is
around 8%.

3)

Defence expenditure per capita
Based on Indonesia's population data submitted by the
Director of General of Population and Civil Registry, Ministry of Home
Affairs, by the end of 2021 there were 273,879,750 registered
civilians, hence making the defence expenditure per capita to a total
of Rp. 488,986.

ii.

Total number of active personnel in national armed forces.
The National Armed Force aggregate to 450,548 (Not including reserves)
personnel consisting of 339,747 army personnel, 71,132 naval personnel, and
39,669 air force personnel.

iii.

Total number of reserve personnel in national armed forces
The reserve component consists of 2.499 personnel divided among different
Military Regional Command’s Main Regiment (Rindam) and institutions.
Rindam II/Sriwijaya hosts 450 personnel, Rindam VI/Mulawarman, Rindam
XIV/Hasanuddin and Pusdiklat Pasgat hosts 500 personnel each, Marine
Education Command (Kodikmar) hosts 499 personnel and Women Corps’
Education Center (Pusdikkowad) hosts 50 personnel.

III.

National Contributions to Regional Security
I.

NATIONAL LEVEL
i.

Counter-terrorism
Update on the National Action Plan on Preventing and Countering Violent
Extremism that Leads to Terrorism 2020-2024
On 16 June 2021, Indonesia adopted Presidential Regulation Number 7 of
2021 on the National Action Plan (NAP) to Prevent and Counter Violent
Extremism that Leads to Terrorism 2020 – 2024. The aim of the NAP is to
secure the protection of citizens from violent extremism that leads to
terrorism, by addressing the drivers of violent extremism, namely (1)
conditions conducive and structural context and (2) the radicalization

169

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
process, the so-called “push and pull factors”. The NAP consists of three
pillars, namely: (1) prevention, including national preparedness, counterradicalization, and deradicalisation; (2) law enforcement, protection of
witnesses and victims; strengthening national legislative framework; and (3)
international partnership and cooperation.

The NAP consists of 130 Action Lines, mostly related to prevention efforts.
The action plan is a systematic and coordinated program that is being and to
be implemented by various related Ministries/Agencies at the national level
and by regional/local governments at the subnational level in accordance
with their respective responsibilities along with the participation of CSOs to
ensure the whole of government and the whole society approach.

In order to monitor and evaluate the implementation of the National Action
Plans, the Joint Secretariat was established comprising six ministries/agencies
which have a portfolio of coordinating among relevant ministries and
agencies as outlined in the Presidential Regulation. The joint secretariat
carries out six monthly meetings to assess the progress of the implementation
and prepares for the report to the President on the outcome of the
implementation of the NAP by the end of the year. On top of that, the report
is also made available to the public as public accountability.

To ensure an effective reporting mechanism for the national action plan, the
Joint Secretariat has utilized I-Khub on CT/VE (Indonesian Knowledge Hub) as
a digital platform to provide data and information on the progress of the
implementation of the NAP.

Throughout 2022, 97 of 135 actions of the NAP have been successfully
implemented

and

still

counting.

Furthermore,

to

enhance

the

implementation of the NAP at the local level, Local Action Plans by the local
governments also have been adopted in 5 provinces and 2 cities, namely:
Aceh, Central Sulawesi, West Java, Central Java, East Java, Bandung City, and
Surakarta/Solo City. Meanwhile, Bogor, Malang, and Makassar are currently
initiating their local action plans.

170

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

The need to strengthen coordination between governments, CSOs, and
communities is fulfilled by establishing a thematic working group and national

partnership forum between the government and CSOs to facilitate the
involvement of society to enhance the implementation of the NAP.

In order to strengthen the implementation of NAP on P/CVE, at least there
are 4 (four) analytic documents and studies have been prepared to support
the sustainability and improvement of NAP on PCVE, among others:
1. Counter Terrorism and Violent Extremism Outlook, provided by
Indonesia Knowledge Hub (I-KHub) on P/CVE - BNPT, presents a trend
analysis of potential threats based on the development of violent
extremism over the past five years;

2. K-Hub PCVE Outlook, published by a Civil Society Organization and
member of the K-Hub Community, highlights the achievements of
various actions and programs undertaken by CSOs in preventing and
addressing violent extremism;

3. Mid-Term Evaluation of the NAP on PCVE, conducted by an
independent evaluator, delves into the evaluation and achievement
in implementing NAP on PCVE for the last 2 (two) years mandated by
Presidential Decree; and

4. The Analysis of the Local Government Readiness to Implement NAP
on PCVE, initiated by The Joint Secretary of the NAP, in cooperation
with USAID-HARMONI aims to measure the readiness of local
governments in implementing NAP on P/CVE.

II.

REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL LEVEL
a.

The Role of Indonesia in AMMTC and SOMTC
Indonesia as a voluntary lead shepherd on counter-terrorism issues in ASEAN
continues to emphasize its commitment to implementing the Work Plan of

171

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the ASEAN Plan of Acton to Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalisation
and Violent Extremism (Bali Work Plan) 2019-2025. The document serves as
a testament to ASEAN's commitment to synergize cross-sectoral and crosspillar collaboration in preventing and eradicating terrorism and violent
extremism, with the highest number of implementation participations from
various sectoral bodies to date.

To encourage the implementation of the Bali Work Plan 2019-2025, SOMTC
Indonesia, in cooperation with external parties and dialogue partners,
successfully implemented several Projects in late 2022 until the first quarter
of 2023. Those Projects are in line with various indicative activities in the Bali
Work Plan.

In first quarter of 2023, SOMTC Indonesia, in collaboration with several
ASEAN Dialogue Partners, has also initiated several Concept Notes of ASEAN
Projects under SOMTC mechanism, to support the implementation of various
activities of the Bali Work Plan. Some of the concept note was already
endorsed by SOMTC, while another draft still under discussion and
endorsement consideration.

As a follow-up to the convenience of international travel restrictions that
apply during the pandemic, Indonesia has successfully conducted “the 2nd Bali
Work Plan Multi-Sectoral Task Force (MTF) Meeting” and also “the 2nd ASEAN
Partners Meeting for the Implementation of Bali Work Plan 2019 – 2025”,
back-to-back in Bali, on 25 August 2022.

During the 2nd Bali Work Plan MTF, the meeting highlighted that the total

113 indicative activities that are planned on the Bali Work Plan 2019-2025, all
relevant sectoral bodies/organs/entities still can manage to addressed 30
indicative activities until 2022, despite the pandemic situation that
complicates the implementation effort of Bali Work Plan 2019-2025.

172

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Furthermore, in order to continue to monitor and support the
implementation of the Bali Work Plan, Indonesia also initiated the 3rd Bali
Work Plan Multi-Sectoral Task Force (MTF) Meeting, as well as the 3rd ASEAN
Partners Meeting, to further support and encourage the Implementation of
the Bali Work Plan in Bali, 8 June 2023.

During the 3rd Bali Work Plan MTF, the meeting also highlighted several
milestones, including an increase in the number of indicative activities from
113 recorded in the 2nd MTF, to 117 indicative activities. The 3rd MTF Meeting
also noted a total of 46 indicative activities (39.32%) addressed by relevant
ASEAN sectoral bodies/organs/entities. This number can still be increased,
considering that Indonesia is still waiting for input from several ASEAN
Sectoral Bodies/Organs/Entities that have indicated their interest in
submitting an update on implementing the Bali Work Plan under their
purview.

b.

The Role of Indonesia in ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
In a larger regional setting, through the ASEAN Regional Forum, Indonesia had
also advocated for the adoption of the ARF Statement on Preventing and
Countering Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism in 2019, and the ARF
Statement on the Treatment of Children Recruited by or Associated with
Terrorist Groups in 2020. These documents enable the Asia Pacific region and
beyond to advance the agenda for preventing and countering violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, including the treatment of children
associated with and recruited by terrorist groups

c.

International Context
At the international level, Indonesia's initiatives and leadership in the field of
counter-terrorism have been acknowledged by the international community.
In 2022, the Government of Indonesia invited to the Open Briefing of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on the Work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) with the Member States of South
and South-East Asia Pursuant to Security Council Resolution 2395 (2017). This
takes into account the achievements of the Government of Indonesia which

173

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
are noted significant progress in counter-terrorism since 2019, as well as
Indonesia’s commitment to implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions in accordance with international law and international standards.

On counter-terrorism legislation and judicial issues, as identified by CTED,
Indonesia has ratified 8 (eight) of the 19 international counter-terrorism
instruments. To this end, various inter-ministerial meetings, led by the BNPT
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, have adopted national measures of
acceding to the 1979 Taking of Hostages Convention and the 1973 Convention
on Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents. Until now, the President has granted
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the initiative permit to draft the Bill on the
accession to the IPP Convention prior to its submission to Parliament.

On the treatment of victims of terrorism, Indonesia invited to "The First
United Nations Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism" organized by the
United Office on Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) in 2022, to convey the efforts in
promoting the fulfilment of the rights and needs of victims of terrorism.

In terms of technical cooperation, Indonesia has partnered with relevant UN
Agencies, including UNODC, UNDP, UNOCT, CTED, UN Women, both at the
national and regional levels, through various programs preventing and
countering violent extremism (P/CVE) through four the scope of cooperation
includes: (i) Community-based approaches to PVE; (ii) Countering Financing
of Terrorism; (iii) Rehabilitation and reintegration for VE prisoners and
offenders; and (iv) safeguarding juveniles from terrorism.

Consistent with national and regional efforts, through the Global CounterTerrorism Forum (GCTF), since 2017 Indonesia and Australia co-chairs the
Working Group on CVE of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF), which
focuses its work on addressing the challenges of radicalization and
recruitment to violent extremism and terrorism.

174

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
As part of its leadership, Indonesia continues to work with GCTF Members
and Partners to share practical, action-oriented steps for CVE, including
identifying challenges, good practices and lessons learned – mainly in six
priority areas which consist of:
●

Gender and CVE;

●

National-Local Cooperation in Preventing and Countering Violent
Extremism;

●

Countering Online Violent Extremism;

●

Rehabilitating and Reintegrating Returnees and Families of Foreign
Terrorist Fighters;

●

CVE in Prisons; and

●

Racially and Ethnically Motivated Violent Extremism

On another issue, Indonesia is committed to promoting the adoption of
standard minimum rules pertaining to the treatment of children associated or
recruited by terrorist and violent extremist groups. Such rules will focus on
three important pillars, namely: prevention; treatment and rehabilitation;
and justice for children (protection). Thus, fulfilling one of the SDGs on Ending
Violence Against Children.

d.

Measures against Terrorist Financing
Indonesia remains committed to continuously strengthen its anti-money
laundering and anti-terrorism regime. The enactment of Law no. 9/2013
concerning the Prevention and Eradication of Criminal Acts of Terrorism
Financing has provided Indonesia with a strong legal basis to enhance the
capacity of authorities in identifying, preventing, and addressing terrorist
financing. The forms and means of terrorist financing continue to experience
change, adapting to to the development of global terrorism situation.

In countering the financing of terrorism, the Government of Indonesia
develops national and international cooperation, involving stakeholders such
as Interpol, counter terrorism institutions from various countries, Financial
Intelligence Unit and other relevant stakeholders. Despite, efforts to enhance

175

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
cooperation with various stakeholders, Indonesia continues to face
challenges to counter terrorist financing.

The efforts to counter the financing of terrorism in Indonesia is done based
on risk assessment. The Government of Indonesia routinely publishes
National Risk Assessment report on Terrorist Financing, with the latest issue
being published in 2021. For the year 2023, Indonesia will start to publish a
sectoral risk assessment on terrorist financing, which will focus on high-risk
industry.

Looking at the landscape of terrorist financing in Indonesia, the most common
method of collecting high-risk funds is through legal sponsorship that is
generated by individuals and through donations collected by civil society
organization or non-governmental organizations. In regards to transfer of
funds, fund transfer in the financial services is one of the methods that
possess a high risk and the scope of this sector includes Public Banks, Fund
Transfer Operators, and Non-Bank Foreign Exchange Business Activities.

Based onb the risk identification, analysis and evaluation, the current
emerging trends in terrorist financing include:
1. The utilization of crypto assets;
2. The utilization of goods/services in both legal or illegal ICT based financial
services;
3. Profit-oriented corporation entities that conducts the activity of
collecting money or goods with the intention of fundraising in a form that
is similar to the one conducted by non-profit organization;
4. Profit-oriented corporation entities that operates in a form of
foundation, association, or registered civil society organization to collect
and generate funds intended for social/humanitarian/religious causes,
donation, social welfare purposes or other acts of goodwill.
5. Other developments that have the potential of becoming a common
means of terrorist financing include:
i. The utilization of goods/services in the sector that operated e-Wallet
and/or e-Money; and

176

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ii. The use of Payment Services that are conducted by Minimarket/Retail
Business Entities for delivering remittance services.

Prevention methods carried out in the administrative sector is done through
the freezing of assets. Thus far, the Government of Indonesia implemented
efforts to freeze assets through the mechanism of listing Suspected Terrorists
and Terrorist Organizations, which statistic has been recorded for the period
of 2017 – 2023 with the data as follows:

No

Inclusion

National

Foreign

Total

National

Foreign

Total

Sources

Individuals

Individuals

Individuals

Entities

Entities

Entities

1

United

23

366

5

5

88

93

.

Nations

2

The

22

1

23

23

-

23

.

Government

45

367

412

27

88

116

of Indonesia

Total

The total fund raised through the freezing of assets through the mechanism
of listing Suspected Terrorists and Terrorist Organizations within the period
2017 – 2023 is approximately Rp. 790 million. The total insurance policy that
is raised is Rp. 98 million.

In the context of law enforcement, the number of investigations and
prosecutions for terrorist financing crimes in Indonesia within the period of
2017 – 2023 is as follows:

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

Total

Investigation

16

7

16

23

22

18

1

103

Prosecution

16

3

4

8

46

42

-

119

177

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

e.

Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
National Implementation of UNSC Resolution 1540
Indonesia remains committed to comply with Security Council Resolution
1540 and have taken necessary measures for its compliance. Indonesia has
been constructively participating in multilateral negotiations to strengthen its
non-proliferation efforts and to achieve disarmament of Weapon of Mass
Destruction (WMD) in all its aspects. In this regard, Indonesia is in favour of
the total and complete prohibition of the transfer of all equipment,
information, material and facilities and resources or devices related to WMD
and of the provision of assistance in the nuclear, biological and chemical
scientific and technological fields to non-State actors.

This spirit is reflected in Indonesia’s ratification to relevant international
treaties. Indonesia has ratified relevant international treaties which among
other, consist of Convention on the Prohibition of Biological Weapons 1972,
Chemicbal Weapons Convention in 1998, the Treaty on South East Asia
Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in 1997, The Codes of Conduct and Additional
Protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement of IAEA, and
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism in
2014. In addition, Indonesia has also declared South East Asia as the Zone of
Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in 1971 with other members of ASEAN.

Currently, Indonesia is finalizing the ratification of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. Indonesia has expressed its political
commitment to IAEA Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of
Radioactive Sources' Supplementary Guidance. This commitment shows
Indonesia’s shared interest in managing the risks posed by certain highactivity radioactive sources, especially given the present of widespread use of
radioactive materials throughout Indonesia, which indicates that the traffic of
radioactive materials is a common occurrence. Due to the strategic
geographical location, the trade of radioactive materials also poses a
challenge to Indonesia and the region. An illegal traffic of radioactive
materials could not only threaten national security, but also the region as well

178

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
as worldwide. Hence, synergic cooperation at the national, regional, and
international level is required to mitigate the potential of radioactive
materials smuggling or illicit trafficking.

Based on awareness of the serious threat to radioactive material illicit
trafficking and the need for cooperation to achieve the goal of securing all
radioactive materials, the President of Indonesia took measures to install
radiation portal monitors (RPM) at international ports and airports, as well as
cross-border posts as a form of supervision and prevention of radioactive
materials illicit trafficking. Currently there are five ports installed with RPM
equipment, they are: Tanjung Priok – Jakarta, Tanjung Emas – Semarang,
Tanjung Perak – Surabaya, Bitung – Manado, and Soekarno-Hatta – Makassar.

Indonesia continues to call for the non-proliferation of export control regime.
This commitment is reflected in the enactment of national laws among others
on export control (Law No.10/1995), eradication of criminal acts of terrorism
(Law No.15/2003 amended by Law No. 5/2018), and on the use of chemical
substance for chemical weapons (Law No.9/2008). National implementation
of international obligations is supported and enhanced by the Centre of
Excellence on Nuclear Security and Emergency Preparedness, established in
2014 and the National Authority on Chemical Weapons, established in 2017.

The Government is in the process of amending the Law No. 10 Year 1997 on
Nuclear Energy with the view to strengthen coordination on nuclear security
by synergizing the duties and functions of relevant Government authorities.
The amendment will stipulate three main issues under the National Policy and
Strategy of Nuclear Security as well as the penalty that has not been provided
by current national law. The three main issues are as follows:
1. Developing an integrated information system to support nuclear security;
2. Increasing coordination related to nuclear security by synergizing the
duties and functions of relevant Government authorities; and
3. Strengthening the infrastructure of nuclear security.

179

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Indonesia’s

enforcement

actions

are

carried

out

through

the

monitoring/control on the issuance of regulations and permits, inspections,
and implementation of the procedure of the nuclear material inventory
accounting system by the Indonesian Nuclear Energy Regulatory Agency and
relevant agencies conduct. The verification of inventory is managed by
routine inspection, which involves the monitoring of the quantity, location
and ownership; movement of materials from one installation to another; and
export and import of nuclear materials. Routine inspection also includes
monitoring waste management.

Indonesia as an archipelagic country faces an enormous operational challenge
in implementing nuclear security measures due to an exceptionally long
shoreline and numerous entry points, such as seaports, airports and land
crossings. Due to this, Indonesia remains strongly committed in improving its
nuclear security and emergency response and preparedness. A national coordination effort to establish a capacity building centre and technical and
scientific support for nuclear security and emergency response is necessary
and this has been operationalized through the Indonesian Nuclear Energy
Regulatory Agency launched an initiative called I-CoNSEP (Indonesia Centre
of Excellence on Nuclear Security and Emergency Preparedness) that was
established in 2014. The initiative ultimately aims to improve the national
capabilities in nuclear security and emergency preparedness, through a better
coordination among stakeholders, training and exercise, technical support,
and infrastructure development. I-CoNSEP is expected to fulfil the needs for
human resource development and the provision of support services for
nuclear security and emergency response implementation at national level.
Furthermore, I-CoNSEP is expected to take a bigger role in contributing the
development and sustenance of nuclear security and emergency
preparedness in the South East Asian Region.

In terms of nuclear security, The I-CoNSEP reflects the concepts of centres of
excellence currently those promoted by the IAEA and many other multilateral
organizations. The IAEA Office of Nuclear Security (IAEA/ONS) espouses the
concept of Nuclear Security Support Centre (NSSC). Similar concept is also

180

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
being promoted by the European Union through the Instrument for Stability
(IfS) via the establishment of Chemical-Biological-Radiological-Nuclear (CBRN)
Centre of Excellence (CoE).

With regards to measures taken to address financing activities under the
scope of Resolution 1540, Indonesia has issued two joint regulations on the
establishment of national list to combat terrorist and proliferation financing
of WMD. In addition, Indonesia is at the final stage of process to become a
member of FATF.

Indonesia has also been working closely with relevant competent
international institutions such as OPCW, IAEA, and WHO to enhance national
and regional capacity building programs on a regular basis. Indonesia will
continue to enhance its cooperation on these important issues through
bilateral, regional and multilateral forums, including through the ARF.

Non-Proliferation/NPT Regime

Indonesia views NPT as an indispensable instrument in one part to ensure the
inalienable rights to use of nuclear energy in strictly peaceful manner, while
in other part to ensure no proliferation of nuclear technology for nonpeaceful purposes. Indonesia also supports the notion that the objectives of
the NPT can only be achieved through a balanced, comprehensive and nondiscriminatory implementation of all its three pillars. The three main pillars
are disarmament of nuclear weapons, non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
and peaceful uses of nuclear technology.

Disarmament
Indonesia urges the nuclear deterrence doctrines as Nuclear disarmament’s
objective cannot be achieved if every major possessor state continues to
enhance its nuclear arsenals as a deterrence factor. Indonesia also stresses an
obligation under Article VI of the NPT to pursue in good faith, and to bring to
a conclusion, negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects
under transparent, strict and effective international control

181

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Indonesia concerns on the continuity of qualitative improvement of nuclear
weapons (upgrading, refurbishing or extending the service life of nuclear
weapons and related facilities) and related aspects. The modernization
measures could contribute to a new arms race and undermine the value of
reductions in nuclear weapons.

Indonesia calls on all NWS to fully implement the 13 practical steps in the
manner that was agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference and the action
plans adopted at the 2010 NPT Review Conference on nuclear disarmament.

Indonesia is also among the first countries to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) Treaty, having signed it on the same day it
was opened for signature, on 24 September 1996. Indonesia believes that the
CTBT is a key element in the international regime for nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation.

As an Annex II country, Indonesia has ratified the CTBT through Law No. 1 year
2012, a very timely initiative as it was taken soon after ASEAN Member States
concluded negotiations with Nuclear Weapon States (NWSs) on the latter’s
accession to the Protocol of the SEANWFZ Treaty at the 19th ASEAN Summit
in Bali in November 2011.

In terms of supporting the implementation of CTBT, the Indonesian Nuclear
Energy Regulatory Agency in cooperation with the Meteorology, Climatology,
and Geophysical Agency, has installed radiological monitoring station at the
Meteorology, Climatology, and Geophysical Agency Stations with CTBT
Stations. Their locations are:
●

Lembang, Bandung, Jawa Barat station (AS040)

●

Jayapura, Papua station (AS041)

●

Sorong, Papua station (AS042)

●

Kappang, South Sulawesi station (AS044)

●

Baumata, East Nusa Tenggara station (AS045)

182

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The installation of radiological monitoring station is to provide radiological
data to complement the seismic data from CTBT station installed at the
Meteorology, Climatology, and Geophysical Agency Stations above
mentioned in case of nuclear weapon testing.

Indonesia also actively participated in the series of meetings of the Nuclear
Security Summit (NSS), which was held in Washington DC in 2010, Seoul in
2012, The Hague in 2014 and Washington DC in 2016.

Since the inception of the NSS, Indonesia played constructive and have
presented a “gift basket” which serves as a reference for countries striving to
enhance safety and security in accordance with their respective national
processes and legal systems.

Non-proliferation
Indonesia believes that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
are mutually reinforcing and are essential for strengthening international
peace and security. Non- proliferation derives its legitimacy from the larger
objective of nuclear disarmament.

Pursuing non-proliferation alone while ignoring nuclear disarmament
obligations is both counterproductive and unsustainable. Indonesia
emphasizes that proliferation concerns are best addressed through
multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and non- discriminatory
agreements.

Indonesia continues to advocate that the universality of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) be made a priority and urges states, which are not yet parties,
to immediately accede to the NPT as non-nuclear states.

In line with the ASEAN Political-Security Blueprint 2025, Indonesia envisions a
Southeast Asia that is not only a nuclear weapons-free zone but also a region
that is free of all other weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, Indonesia
stands ready to intensify the ongoing efforts between ASEAN and NWSs to

183

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
resolve all outstanding issues in accordance with the objectives and principles
of the SEANWFZ Treaty with a view to the signing and ratifying of the Protocol
of SEANWFZ by the NWSs at the earliest.

Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy
On the other hand, Indonesia believes that non-proliferation policies should
not undermine the inalienable rights of States to acquire, have access to,
import or export nuclear material, equipment and technology for peaceful
purposes.

The inalienable right of each State to develop research, production and use
of nuclear energy, including the sovereign right to develop full national
nuclear fuel cycle, for peaceful purposes without discrimination, and to
participate in the fullest possible exchange of equipment, material and
scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.

During the working visit of the Director General of IAEA, Yukiya Amano on 57 February 2018, Indonesia and IAEA signed a practical arrangement on
enhancing technical cooperation among developing countries and
strengthening South-South cooperation which covered a three-year period
(2018-2021). In 2020, IAEA also requested Indonesia to be a pilot country for
its project in tackling plastic pollution.

Indonesia has been at the forefront of technical cooperation in such fields as
enhancing food security and plant breeding, where Indonesia has assisted
trainees from Asian and African countries. In this regard, help was extended
by the National Nuclear Energy Agency (or now National Research and
Innovation Agency/BRIN) which is a designated IAEA Collaborating Centre
engaged in developing new crop varieties to improve agricultural yields and
food security.

f.

Transnational Crimes
Illicit Drug Trafficking

184

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Indonesia faces the complex reality, trends and existing problems of drug
abuse and illicit trafficking. For Indonesia, comprehensive efforts being taken
to combat illicit drug trafficking must also include strict and proper law
enforcement measures against drug traffickers.

Indonesia has found some indications that the pandemic also plays a role in
intensifying the connection between drug trafficking and other organized
crimes, such as trafficking in person, corruption and arms smuggling. In facing
this challenge, Indonesia continues to implement our obligations as enshrined
in the convention as well as the 2009 Plan of Action, including through
effective use of law enforcement measures.

The prevalence of drug abuse from 2019 to 2021 has increased. According to
national prevalence data in 2021, there was an incline of around 0.15% from
3.41 million people (1.80%) to 3.66 million people (1.95%). Furthermore,
Indonesia has also become one

of the biggest targets for narcotics

distribution by international networks. These facts clearly show the complex
reality, trends and existing circumstances Indonesia is facing. For Indonesia,
comprehensive efforts being taken must also include strict and proper law
enforcement measures against drug traffickers.

There are 1212 types of NPS that have been reported worldwide until June
2023 (from EWA UNODC), but only 91 NPS were found in Indonesia. There are
85 types of NPS that are listed in the Ministry of Health Appendix Number 36
Year 2022, while 6 others have not been regulated.

Indonesia plays an active role in various multilateral meetings such as the 66th
Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna on 13 – 17 March 2023 and
Indonesia will host the Extraordinary Session of the Meeting of Heads of
National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies (HONLEA) Asia and the Pacific on
October 2023 in Bali.
In the war against drugs to achieve the drug-free Indonesia, BNN as the
leading sector, uses 4 approaches, there are:

185

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
▪

Soft Power approach by prevention, community empowering and
rehabilitation

▪

Hard Power approach through eradication approach

▪

Smart Power approach by IT development and analysis

▪

And the last one is Cooperation by national, regional and bilateral
cooperation

These approaches implemented synergically into the national action plan on
the Prevention and Eradication of the Abuse and Illicit Trafficking of Narcotics
and their precursors (P4GN) to achieve Indonesia BERSINAR (bersih narkoba)
- Drug Free Indonesia

In terms of rehabilitation, BNN carries out strategies such as improving the
accessibility and capability of narcotics rehabilitation institutions, increase
the capacity of the rehabilitation services workforce, and improving the
quality of narcotics rehabilitation services. These strategies aim to improve
the quality of life of people with substance use disorders so it can encourage
productivity and economic growth of people with substance use disorders

In carrying out the rehabilitation program, BNN has a Community Based
Intervention (CBI) method, CBI is a rehabilitation service that is easily
accessible and provided in the community, and is carried out by the
community, from the community, and for the community. CBI accommodates
clients with special needs. CBI is a feasible solution to cope with the treatment
gap in areas lacking in rehabilitation institutions.

In 2022, BNN rehabilitation recorded 9,783 outpatients, 1,570 inpatients and
a total of 2,357 patients treated with the CBI method.

To tackle this problem, Indonesia has established a national interdiction task
force that comprises of relevant national agencies to combat illicit drugs
coming in and out of Indonesia. Within the region, Indonesia initiated ASEAN
Seaport Interdiction Task Force in 2016 to combat transnational drug

186

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
trafficking via sea routes, and to prevent and deter drug syndicates from using
ASEAN countries’ seaports to distribute illicit drugs.

Bearing in mind the different capacities and circumstances of member states,
Indonesia is of the view that in addressing the world drug problem, several
factors should be taken into account, such as a zero-tolerance stand against
drugs, a comprehensive and balanced approach, and the sovereign rights of
each country. To this end, Indonesia adopted the ASEAN Work Plan on
Securing Communities Against Illicit Drugs 2016 – 2025 as a guideline to
address illicit drug activities and mitigate their consequences on society.
Indonesia also finished the Mid-term Review of the ASEAN Workplan on
Securing Communities Against Illicit Drugs 2016 – 2025 in 2021 to review and
analyse the work plan that has been implemented in 2016 – 2020.

Indonesia believes that international cooperation remains important to deter
criminal syndicates and drug traffickers. With the spirit of common and
shared responsibility, Indonesia has established agreements and cooperation
with other countries in the region. In light of this, the Indonesian government
also organizes judicial cooperation to arrest perpetrators of organized crime
involving narcotics, such as through extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance
(MLA).

Bearing in mind the different capacities and circumstances of member states,
Indonesia is of the view that in addressing the world drug problem, several
factors should be taken into account, such as a zero-tolerance stand against
drugs, a comprehensive and balanced approach, and the sovereign rights of
each country.

Trafficking in Persons and People Smuggling
Combatting and preventing trafficking in persons is of high importance to
Indonesia as it has recorded quite a high number of trafficking victims. The
majority of the victims of trafficking from Indonesia are Indonesian migrant
workers who were sent to work abroad through illegal channels, especially
domestic workers and workers in the fisheries sector.

187

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Against this background, the Indonesian government has undertaken reforms
and greater works to strengthen its efforts to combat trafficking in persons.
At the multilateral level, Indonesia is a party to United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC) and the Protocol to
Suppress, Prevent and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, Supplementing the UNTOC since 2009.

At the regional level, together with Australia, Indonesia has established and
co-chaired the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and
Related Transnational Crime to strengthen cooperation in preventing and
combating smuggling of migrants as a shared responsibility of countries of
origin, transit and destination. Bali Process was attended by 49 participants
consisting of 43 countries, 2 jurisdictions, and 4 international organizations)
and 28 observers.

Bali Process is unique as it is the only Regional Consultative Process (RCP)
involving countries of origin, transit, and destination – an added value for
efforts to build the 'confidence' of countries in the region to constructively
resolve irregular migration issues including people smuggling and trafficking
in persons. Under the framework of Bali Process, there are number of working
groups and expert groups which are also used by countries in the region to
carry out dialogue and information-sharing related to the development and
challenges of irregular migration issues in the region. In 2022, Bali Process will
celebrate its 20th Anniversary and will hold the 8th Bali Process Ministerial
Conference.

Along with other ASEAN countries, Indonesia has concluded ASEAN
Convention against Trafficking in Persons especially Women and Children
which entered into force since 8 March 2017.

On the national level, Indonesia has enacted a law on Anti-Trafficking in
Persons comprising four main pillars: prevention, prosecution, and victims’
protection, and the international cooperation in curbing this heinous crime.

188

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Indonesia has also established the Task Force for Preventing and Combating
Trafficking in Persons, comprised of relevant related government agencies.
The Task-Force main approaches are advocacy, public awareness, protection,
and joint training.

Indonesia also views that to effectively combat trafficking in persons, a global
and collective response, as well as a greater understanding of its root causes
are of importance. To that end, Indonesia is standing ready to work together
with other countries within the framework of ARF and beyond.

g.

Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
Indonesia continues to be committed to the DRR agenda and it is reflected in
the establishment of Indonesia’s 2020-2044 Master Plan for Disaster
Management (RIPB) and Indonesia’s 2020-2024 Mid-Term National
Development Plan, in which disaster management and risk reduction are
among priority development programs. These instruments are investments
to protect economic growth and human development.

At the global level, Indonesia’s remains firmly committed to the strengthening
of the implementation of international frameworks for disaster risk reduction.
This includes the commitment on the outcome of the 3rd United Nations
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) that is the Sendai
Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR) 2015 – 2030. Indonesia
stresses the importance of international cooperation to ensure the
implementation of SFDRR to strengthen the capacity of developing countries
to promote best practices, knowledge sharing and technology transfer.
Indonesia also emphasizes the strategic importance of monitoring
frameworks at the global and regional levels such as the Global Partnership
for Disaster Risk Reduction (GPDRR) and the Asian Ministerial Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction (AMCDRR) to ensure the implementation of SFDRR.

h.

Maritime Security
Indonesia puts great interest in the maritime sector and seeks to promote
maritime cooperation at the bilateral, regional, and multilateral, levels. The

189

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
White Book of Indonesian Maritime Ocean Policy remains to be the main
document of reference for Indonesia’s maritime priorities, which are: 1)
Management of Marine Resources and Development of Human Resources;
2) Defence, Security, Law Enforcement and Safety at Sea; 3) Ocean
Governance and Institutions; 4) Economic and Infrastructure of the Marine
Sector and Prosperity Enhancement; 5) Management of the Ocean Space and
Protection of Marine Environment; 6) Maritime Culture; and 7) Maritime
Diplomacy.

The Asia-Pacific region continues to face challenges to maritime security.
Indonesia regards regional and international cooperation as an important
component to address those challenges. As an example, the issue of Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IUU Fishing) is one of the most common
transnational crimes in the region. Hence, various efforts have been pursued
in the regional and multilateral levels.

At the regional level, ASEAN Maritime Forum has been instrumental in
providing a platform to discuss various maritime issues under the three pillars
of ASEAN (Political Security, Economic, and Socio-Cultural). In this regard,
Indonesia also plays an active role in pursuing norm-setting efforts in other
regional forums such as the ASEAN Regional Forum, East Asia Summit, Indian
Ocean Rim Association, and Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime (Bali Process).

At the multilateral level, Indonesia has been active in conducting norm-setting
and mainstreaming transnational crime issues at sea in various multilateral
forums such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and
the International Maritime Organization (IMO), Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice (CCPCJ), Conference of the Parties to United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (CoP UNTOC), and
Crime Congress.

As an archipelagic country with a vast ocean and sea coverage, Indonesia puts
great interest in protecting its territory and upholding its sovereignty over the

190

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
activities of IUU Fishing. Indonesia views that IUU Fishing is a problem related
to the management and conservation of fisheries resources, which at present
has not been regulated comprehensively under the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and Regional Fisheries Management
Organizations (RFMOs) mechanism. The scope of FAO and RFMOs regulations
has not yet included the possibility of transnational organized crime occurring
when conducting (TOC) fisheries governance, research, data collection as well
as determining fisheries quota. In this regard, Indonesia has also pursued
efforts to mainstream the issue of IUU fishing as a TOC in various multilateral
forums.

Indonesia is currently developing a security policy paper for port and
terrorism potency threat under United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) Cooperation which will provide the national legislations of maritime
security. This document will contribute to the Maritime Security module of
Global Integrated Shipping Information System (GISIS), which is also related
to the development of port facility security plans.

Indonesia continues to showcase its leadership in promoting regional
cooperation in tackling IUUF and mainstreaming it as a TOC. We continue to
maintain active participation in various international forums, which among
others include:
●

ARF Workshop on Maritime Law Enforcement Cooperation

●

Global Maritime Crime Programme of UNODC.

●

Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC), which recently convened in 8 – 12
May 2023.

i.

Information Communication Technology Security
The continuous development of cyberspace provides both opportunities and
challenges for Indonesia, the Asia-Pacific region, and the world at large. The
dynamic presented from the development of cyberspace comes with
challenges. Cyber threats and cyberattacks pose as a serious challenge that
can undermine regional security.

191

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Indonesia recognizes the need to enforce international law in cyber space and
pushes for international cooperation in facing multiple challenges and threats
in cyber space through dialogue, capacity building as well as confidence
building measures (CBMs). Cooperation in the form of sharing of information
and best practices through activities such as webinar, seminar, as well as
workshop, is a step that can be taken to create a safe, peaceful, and open
cyber space for all stakeholders.

Indonesia continues to strengthen its national legislation on the security of
information technology through the adoption of two regulations, namely Law
No.27 Year 2022 on Personal Data Protection and Presidential Regulation
No.82 on the Protection of Vital Infrastructure Information. Furthermore,
Indonesia is also constructing a National Security Strategy that will lay the
foundation for determining the direction of national policy. The national
policy that is formulated will become a common guideline for all stakeholders
to develop policies related to cyber security in their respective institutions.

The National Cyber and Crypto Agency (BSSN) plays a vital role in
strengthening Indonesia’s cyber security throughout 2022 – 2023. Initiatives
and engagements such as security testing of electronic systems, installation
of detection and monitoring devices on network devices at ISPs and site
events, early detection of cyber threats, implementation of incident response
efforts and digital forensic incident response have been carried out to
mitigate threats and enhance the protection against cyberattacks.

Indonesia, through BSSN, continues to develop Computer Emergency Incident
Response Team (CSIRT) as an effort to mitigate cyber security incident. The
development of CSIRT is part of the National Medium-Term Development
Plan for 2020 – 2024, as stipulated in Presidential Regulation No. 18 Year
2020. In the advent of addressing cyber threats and attacks in the ASEAN
region, Indonesia supports the formation of ASEAN-CSIRT that is hoped to be
able to conduct cooperation with National CSIRT of each ASEAN dialogue
partner countries. This is done to enhance the region’s cyber security, which
in turn will positively impact national cyber security.

192

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Furthermore, Indonesia has also been active in conducting cooperation and
collaboration with various stakeholders from the public and private sectors,
to strengthen the role and share information regarding cyber security as
efforts to create a conducive national cyber security environment. The
National Cyber and Crypto Agency (BSSN) has proactively participated and
contributed in ASEAN forums on cyber security. These forums and activities
include:

ASEAN Regional Forum
a)

ARF workshop on Norm Implementation in ICTs, 9 – 10 March 2023 via
video conference.

b) 10th ARF Open Ended Study Group (OESG), 2 March 2023 via video
conference.
c) 4th ARF Intersessional Meeting on ICT (ISM on ICTs), 3 March 2023 via
video conference.
d) 11th ARF OESG on ICTs Security, 27th April 2023 in Moscow, Russia.
e) 5th ARF ISM on ICTs, 28th April 2023, in Moscow, Russia.
f) ARF Workshop on Fostering Cybersecurity Professionals, 13th June 2023
in Hanoi, Vietnam.
g) ARF Workshop on Terminology in the Field of Security and in the Use of
ICTs in the Context of Confidence Building, 21st June 2023 via video
conference.
ASEAN-US Cyber Policy Dialogue
h) Indonesia co-chaired the 3rd ASEAN-US Cyber Policy Dialogue on the 1st
of February 2023 via video conference.
ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Working Group
i) 1st ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Working Group Meeting, 14 – 15 February
in Tagaytay, the Philippines.
j) 2nd ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Working Group Meeting, 23 – 24 May in
Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei.

193

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Active participation in ASEAN Cyber Coordinating Committee and ASEAN
Network Security Action Council (ANSAC) have been pursued by Indonesia as
means to strengthen its cyber security capacity. Indonesia’s participation
through ASEAN Cyber CC and ANSAC contributes to the documents adopted
in the ASEAN Digital Senior Officials Meeting (ADGSOM), which includes:

a) ASEAN Regional Action Plan on the Implementation of the UNGGE Norms
of Responsible State Behaviour in Cyber Space, a document initiated by
Malaysia.
b) ASEAN Cybersecurity Cooperation Strategy 2021 – 2025 and the
establishment of ASEAN CERT in ADGSOM/ADGMIN that was held in 24
– 28 January 2022.
c) Draft Operational Framework on ASEAN Computer Emergency Response
Team (OF ASEAN CERT).

Proposal to develop ASEAN Cyber Security Assessment Model (ACAM) that
was delivered during the 2nd ADGSOM-ATRC Leaders Retreat 2022. ACAM is
proposed to function as a general reference to compare, evaluate, and
identify the challenges and way forward to address the gaps in developing a
safe and robust cyberspace in the ASEAN region. ACAM is adopted voluntarily
and is not a binding. It consists of two key documents: ACAM Framework and
Implementation Plan 2023.

IV.

The Role of ARF
ARF remains important as an inclusive forum in the Asia-Pacific region for fostering
constructive dialogue and cooperation among the Participants on political and security issues
of common interest and concern.

Strengthening regional peace and security will provide a conducive environment that is
essential for the success of national development in each participating country. This will
ultimately encourage an increase of economy of the community in the region. The pursuit of
narrow national interests, at the expense of multilateralism, will only widen strategic distrusts
and major power rivalries in the region.

194

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

In the face of an evolving regional architecture, ARF must keep up its relevance by fully
leveraging its potential and demonstrating its uniqueness. One of the strong points of the ARF
is that it has built a foundation for political security dialogues that encompasses both civil and
military elements.

It is essential to understand that the ARF is not only an institution, but also a process through
which countries in the Asia Pacific region strive to maintain dialogue and carry out activities
to promote CBMs, preventive diplomacy, and conflict resolution mechanisms. A more robust,
substantive, proactive, and action-oriented ARF is therefore instrumental to the process.
Indonesia is strongly committed to contribute to this cause by continuously generating
initiatives and actively participating in the work of the ARF.

On the whole, Indonesia envisions a more robust, substantive, proactive and action-oriented
ARF. Indonesia will therefore continue and remain commit to contribute to the realization of
the ARF’s potential through active participation, initiatives and the development of innovative
ideas.

195

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

JAPAN
The region has developed a multi-layered framework of cooperation centred on ASEAN, including the
ASEAN+3, East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus) and ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF), each of which has its own mechanism to advance cooperation based on its
unique characteristics. Japan recognizes the importance of the ARF, which aims to improve the
regional security environment, and will continue to promote mutual confidence building through
dialogue and practical cooperation in the ARF and other ASEAN-led frameworks, while supporting
ASEAN centrality and unity.
I.

Japan’s Overview of the Regional Security Environment
Turning our eyes to the vicinity of Japan, Japan’s security environment is as severe and
complex as it has ever been since the end of WWII. Russia's aggression against Ukraine
has easily breached the very foundation of the international order. Japan condemns
Russia’s aggression in the strongest terms, and strongly urges Russia to cease its attack
and withdraw its forces from the internationally recognized territory of Ukraine
immediately and unconditionally. The possibility cannot be precluded that a similar
serious situation may arise in the future in the Indo-Pacific region, especially in East Asia.
Across the globe, historical changes in power balances, particularly in the Indo-Pacific
region, are occurring. In addition, in the vicinity of Japan, military buildups, including those
of nuclear weapons and missiles, are rapidly advancing, coupled with mounting pressures
by unilateral attempts to change the status quo by force or coercion. Moreover, grey zone
situations over territories, cross-border cyberattacks on critical civilian infrastructures,
and information warfare through spread of disinformation, are constantly taking place,
thereby further blurring the boundary between contingency and peacetime.
Furthermore, the scope of national security has expanded to include those fields
previously considered non-military such as economic, technological and others, and thus
the boundary between military and non-military fields is no longer clear-cut either.

Maritime issues including those surrounding the East and South China Seas are linked to
the peace and stability of the region and are legitimate concerns of the international
community. Attempts to unilaterally change the status quo by force or coercion in the
maritime and air domain including in the East and South China Seas have been intensified,
such as intrusions into the territorial waters around the Senkaku Islands. Such attempts
are totally unacceptable. Japan will continue to respond calmly and resolutely while

196

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
strengthening coordination with the relevant countries, along with strengthening
communication in order to make the East China Sea a “Sea of Peace, Cooperation and
Friendship.”

China has been intensifying its military activities in the sea and airspace surrounding
Taiwan, including the launch of ballistic missiles in August 4 2022, five of which landed
within Japan’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), followed by Chairman’s Statement of the
29th ARF expressing concerns over the recent cross-Strait development. Japan reiterates
the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait, and encourage the
peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues.

It is necessary for the international community to cooperate for the maintenance and
development of open and stable seas, including the South China Sea. Japan has advocated
the “Three Principles of the Rule of Law at Sea”: (i) making and clarifying their claims based
on international law; (ii) not using force or coercion in trying to drive their claims; and (iii)
seeking to settle disputes by peaceful means. Most recently, Prime Minister Kishida Fumio
called for these three principles in his speech to announce the new plan for a “Free and
Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP)” in March 2023. These three principles gained supports from
many countries, and Japan will consistently support relevant actions. In this context, Japan
calls for full implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South
China Sea (DOC) of 2002, and takes note of the progress of the negotiations towards an
effective and substantive Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC). COC should be
consistent with international law in particular the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS) and should not prejudice the legitimate rights and interest of all
stakeholders. Diplomatic efforts such as COC should lead to demilitarization and a free
and open South China Sea.

The international community, including Japan, has expressed serious concerns about the
situation in the South China Sea, including militarization of disputed features, dangerous
use of coast guard vessels and coercive activities. Japan has to date consistently supported
the full adherence to the rule of law in the South China Sea, and places importance on
freedom of navigation and overflight as well as assistance for safe sea lanes. In this
context, Japan has emphasized the importance for all the concerned parties related to the
South China Sea to work toward peaceful settlement of disputes based on international

197

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
law, in particular UNCLOS. In this regard, the award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal
under UNCLOS on July 12, 2016 is final and legally binding on both parties to the dispute.
It is also of critical importance for each state to clarify grounds of maritime claims, through
invoking the relevant provisions of UNCLOS on which the claims are based. Japan strongly
hopes that the parties’ compliance with the award will eventually lead to the peaceful
settlement of disputes in the South China Sea.

North Korea has not dismantled its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles of
all ranges in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner in accordance with relevant
United Nations Security Council resolutions (UNSCRs). In2022, North Korea launched a
record number of at least 59 ballistic missiles with unprecedented frequency and in new
ways in violation of relevant UNSC resolutions. This year North Korea has continued its
provocations and launched multiple ICBM-class ballistic missiles including the April 13
launch of a new-type solid-fuel ballistic missile. As the launch of ballistic missiles have
made the situation even more tense, such series of North Korea’s actions threaten the
peace and security of Japan, the region and the international community, and are totally
unacceptable.

To this end, it is imperative for each country to fully implement the relevant UNSCRs. From
this perspective, Japan will continue to steadily take measures for their implementation.
The Japan Maritime Self-Defence Force (JMSDF) and the Japan Coast Guard are
conducting information gathering activities for vessels suspected to be in violation of
UNSCRs including ship-to-ship transfers with North Korean-flagged vessels. JMSDF has
found several activities strongly suspected to be ship-to-ship transfers in the East China
Sea, and Japan shared information with Partner countries such as the US, the UK,
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, France, Germany, and the Republic of Korea (ROK),
notified the UNSC 1718 Committee and the Panel of Experts and published the
information. Partner countries have also engaged in monitoring and surveillance activities
against illicit maritime activities including ship-to-ship transfers. Japan will continue to
cooperate with the US, and trilaterally with the US and the Republic of Korea (ROK), and
coordinate closely with the international community, aiming for the complete
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

198

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
With regard to Japan-North Korea relations, Japan’s basic policy remains unchanged that
it seeks to normalize its relations with North Korea, through comprehensively resolving
outstanding issues of concern such as the abductions, nuclear and missile issues, and
settling the unfortunate past in accordance with the Japan-DPRK Pyongyang Declaration.

Japan expresses serious concern about the deteriorating security, humanitarian, human
rights, and political situation in Myanmar, further extension of the state of emergency
without taking positive steps towards achieving political progress, and deregistration of
the National League for Democracy (NLD) under the Political Parties Registration Law
which will further exclude the NLD from the political process, while the expansion of
martial law orders for additional townships has intensified violence in some regions
causing a large number of civilian casualties including children. Japan has consistently
urged the Myanmar military to take concrete actions to immediately stop the violence,
release those who are arbitrary detained, and swiftly restore Myanmar’s democratic
political system. To improve the situation, Japan will continue to work closely with the
international community and support ASEAN’s efforts to the maximum extent, so as to
ensure the steady implementation of ASEAN’s “Five-Point Consensus”.

Amid the ongoing difficult conditions, humanitarian assistance for the people of Myanmar
is an urgent challenge. Since the coup, the Government of Japan has provided over
US$108 million in humanitarian assistance through international organizations, NGOs etc.
Japan will continue to actively provide humanitarian assistance and pay close attention to
the needs of the people of Myanmar, who are facing difficult circumstances, while urging
the Myanmar military to allow safe and unhindered humanitarian access.

Regarding terrorism, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates
remain a threat to international peace and security, and the return to home countries or
relocation to third countries of foreign terrorist fighters (FTF) who had been under its
influence has spread the threat of terrorism and violent extremism around the world
including Asia. In April 2019, simultaneous terrorist attacks, one of the largest cases in
Asia in recent years, took place in Sri Lanka, which resulted in deaths of more than 250
people including a Japanese. Later in December 2019, a Japanese doctor was killed by a
gun attack in Afghanistan. Furthermore, the form and background of terrorism has been

199

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
diversified, as can be seen from cases in which the perpetrators’ videos were
disseminated via social media at once.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
a. Japan’s Security Policy
The free and open international order based on the rule of law is facing serious
challenges amidst historic changes in balance of power and intensifying geopolitical
competition. With mounting pressures by unilaterally changing the status quo by
force around Japan, Japan’s security environment is the most severe and complex it
has been since the end of WWII. In response to this situation, Japan formulated the
National Security Strategy and other documents in December 2022.

The following points describe the fundamental principles of Japan’s national security,
and are prerequisites for the execution of the associated policies that strive to protect
of our national interests.
⮚ Japan will maintain the policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on
international cooperation. In order to further embody this principle in the
international community and to protect our own national interests in the time
ahead, and based on the recognition that the primary responsibility for
defending Japan lies with itself, Japan will squarely face the ever-changing
security environment by decisively taking on necessary reforms and
reinforcing our national security capabilities and roles.
⮚ Japan will execute its security policy in a manner that maintains and upholds
universal values such as freedom, democracy, respect for fundamental
human rights, and the rule of law. As one of the most mature and stable
advanced democratic countries in the world, even amidst a complex and
severe security environment, Japan will strive to maintain and uphold
universal values and principles in cooperation with other countries, and lead
the international community by example.
⮚ As a peace-loving nation, Japan will adhere to the basic policy of maintaining
an exclusively national defence-oriented policy, not becoming a military
power that poses a threat to other countries, and observing the Three NonNuclear Principles.

200

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
⮚ The Japan-US Alliance, including the provision of extended deterrence, will
remain the cornerstone of Japan's national security policy.
⮚ Japan will attach importance to coexistence and co-prosperity alongside
other countries, cooperation with like-minded countries, and multilateral
cooperation.
Japan, as a major global actor, will join together with its ally, like-minded countries
and others to achieve a new balance in international relations, especially in the
Indo-Pacific region. In doing so, Japan will prevent the emergence of situations in
which any one state can unilaterally change the status quo easily, and redouble
efforts to uphold the free and open international order based on the rule of law.
To this end, the National Security Strategy first identifies diplomatic capabilities
as one of the main elements of Japan's comprehensive national power for
security. Backed by Japan's long record of diplomatic and economic activities for
peace, stability, and prosperity of the international community, Japan will prevent
crises, strengthen efforts to resolve various concerns, including, territorial issues
with neighbouring countries and regions. Japan will proactively conduct strong
diplomacy for creating a peaceful and stable international environment.
Japan's post-war stance as a peaceful nation remains entirely unchanged. Our
basic policy remains the same: to maintain an exclusively national defenceoriented policy; not to become a military power that poses a threat to other
countries; and observe the Three Non-Nuclear Principles. Japan's foreign policy of
pursuing prosperity together with other nations will also remain unchanged.
b. Japan’s Defence Policy
i. The National Defence Strategy
On December 16, 2022, the Government of Japan approved the National
Defence Strategy, and the Defence Buildup Program as replacements to the
National Defence Program Guidelines (NDPG), and the Medium Term Defence
Program (MTDP).

The Strategy states Japan’s three defence objectives and three approaches to
achieve those objectives. Japan’s defence objectives are as follows;

201

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
1) Shape a security environment that does not tolerate unilateral changes
to the status quo by force.
2) Deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts
that concern Japan’s peace and security, and should such an eventuality
occur, swiftly respond as required to bring the situation under control at
an early stage so that it does not lead to an invasion of Japan.
3) Should deterrence fail and an invasion of Japan occur, rapidly respond to
the aggression in a tailored and seamless manner to disrupt and defeat
the invasion, taking primary responsibility to deal with the situation
while receiving support from the ally and others.
The three approaches to realize Japan’s defence objectives are stated as
follows:
1) Fundamentally reinforce Japan’s defence capabilities, which constitute
the core of national defence in an effort of strengthening of Japan’s own
architecture for national defence.
2) Further reinforce joint deterrence and response capability of the JapanUS Alliance by further strengthening cooperation with the United States,
our ally.
3) Reinforce collaboration with like-minded countries and others with
whom Japan cooperate to uphold and reinforce a free and open
international order.
In the complex security situation, Japan needs to squarely face the grim reality
and fundamentally reinforce Japan’s defence capabilities, with a focus on
opponent capabilities and new ways of warfare, to protect the lives and
peaceful livelihood of our people. Japan also needs to strengthen Japan’s
architecture for national defence that integrates various elements of national
power. It is this undertaking that provides the way forward to bolster Japan’s
deterrence capabilities and further strengthen the Japan-US Alliance, and
which forms the foundation of security cooperation with like-minded
countries and others.

ii. The Defence Buildup Program and Defence-Related Expenditures
202

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The Defence Buildup Program is the first five-year defence buildup plan
developed to achieve the targeted levels of defence capabilities as set forth
in the National Defence Strategy. The expenditure earmarked from FY2023 to
FY2027 amount to approximately 43 trillion.

In addition to the cost of maintaining and operating the JSDF, defence-related
expenditures in Japan also include the cost of improving the living
environment in the vicinity of defence facilities and support for US forces
stationed in Japan. As the FY2023 defence-related expenditures budget is
based on the National Defence Strategy and the Defence Buildup Program, it
includes an array of projects aimed at the establishment of a Multi-Domain
Defence Force.

Excluding the costs related to the Special Action Committee on Okinawa or
SACO (the cost of implementing the SACO Final Report to mitigate the impacts
on people in Okinawa), the US forces realignment-related expenses (the
portion allocated for mitigating the impact on local communities), and
expenses for the introduction of new government aircraft, the expenditure
budget for FY2023 has been increased by 1,421.3 billion yen (or 27.4 %
growth) from the previous fiscal year to 6,600.1 billion yen, marking the
eleventh consecutive year of growth.
Including these expenses, the total expenditure budget for FY2023 amounts
to 6,821.9 billion yen, an increase of 1,421.4 billion yen, or growth rate of
26.3% from the preceding fiscal year. The FY2023 defence-related
expenditure is 1.15% of gross domestic product increasing to 1.19% with the
inclusion of SACO related expenses, US forces realignment related expenses,
and expenses for the introduction of new government aircraft and new
government aircraft. The FY2023 defence-related expenditure includes
expenditure which will be transferred to and Digital Agency (33.9 billion yen).

c. Japan-US Security Arrangements
Given an increasingly severe security environment in the Indo-Pacific region, securing
the forward deployment of US forces based on the Japan-US Security Treaty and
strengthening Alliance deterrence and response capabilities are essential not only for

203

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the security of Japan, but also for peace and stability in the region. Japanese
government formulated its new strategic documents in December, 2022. Japan’s
decision to fundamentally reinforce its defence capabilities under the strategic
documents will lead to more effective employment of US capabilities and will further
strengthen Alliance deterrence and response capabilities. In concrete manner, the
two countries will expand and strengthen cooperation in a wide range of areas, such
as ballistic missile defence, cyberspace, outer space, and information security.

In light of the recent security environment, the US will strengthen its presence in the
Indo-Pacific region, and Japan will assume larger roles and responsibilities in the
Alliance with its fundamentally reinforced defence capabilities. Japan and the US will
further enhance cooperation with allies and partners in the region.

III.

Japan’s Contributions to Regional Security
a. Maritime Security
Japan is a maritime nation that has achieved economic growth through maritime
trade and development of marine resources, and has pursued “Free, Open and Stable
Seas.” For Japan, maritime rights and interests, which are the basis for economic
survival, including the freedom of navigation and overflight, and development of
marine resources, are of great importance toward securing peace and security. To
ensure these maritime rights and interests in the long-term and in a stable manner, it
is indispensable to maintain a maritime order and ensure safe maritime transport.
Furthermore, “Free, Open and Stable Seas,” which are upheld by a maritime order
governed by law and rules and not by force, are essential for peace and prosperity not
only of Japan, but also of the international community as a whole. To maintain and
develop “Free, Open and Stable Seas,” Japan contributes actively to maintaining and
strengthening maritime order and ensuring safe maritime transport through various
initiatives such as counter-piracy measures in Asia and Africa as well as close
coordination and cooperation with other countries.

As part of its efforts to secure the safety of navigation in Asia, Japan had advocated
the establishment of a forum to provide EAS participating countries with the
opportunity to discuss maritime cooperation and maritime issues in the region, which
born fruit in the form of the Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum (EAMF) as a Track 1.5

204

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
forum. At the 10th EAMF, which was chaired by the Philippines in December 2022,
Japan introduced its activities to realize a rules-based maritime order and emphasized
the importance of the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance
with international law, in particular UNCLOS.

In addition, Japan took the initiative in establishing the Regional Cooperation
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP).
Japan has been actively contributing to the implementation of the ReCAAP by sending
Executive Director until March 2022 and Assistant Director to the ReCAAP Information
Sharing Centre (ISC) from its inception and supporting ReCAAP ISC’s efforts in the area
of information sharing and capacity building assistance through making financial
contributions among others. For instance, at the fifth Capacity Building Executive
Programme(CBEP) , held virtually on September 2022, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Japan Coast Guard explained its vision on ‘Free and Open Indo Pacific (FOIP)’ and
shared its experience of cooperation with Asian littoral states.

ARF plays an important role in ensuring the rule of law at sea, the freedom and safety
of navigation and overflight, and peaceful settlement of disputes based on
international law. In this context, Japan welcomes a number of initiatives that have
been taken within the framework of ARF such as official events to discuss maritime
security issues in the region. Japan co-chaired the ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on
Maritime Security (ARF ISM on MS) with the Philippines and the United States from
August 2014 to August 2017. Together with the co-chairs, Japan worked on revising
the ARF Work Plan on Maritime Security. Furthermore, Japan serves with Malaysia as
the lead countries for "confidence-building measures based on international and
regional legal frameworks, arrangements, and cooperation," which is one of the
priority areas for the ARF Work Plan on Maritime Security. In this context, Japan
hosted the ARF Seminar on Counter Piracy and Armed Robbery in Asia, in Tokyo in
March 2015 (co-chairing with the US, Malaysia, and India), ARF Seminar on Regional
Confidence Building and Law of the Sea, in Tokyo in December 2015 (co-chairing with
Vietnam and India), the First ARF Workshop on International Cooperation on MDA in
Tokyo in March 2018 (co-chairing with Malaysia), and the Second ARF Workshop on
International Cooperation on MDA in Tokyo in February 2020 (co-chairing with Viet
Nam).

205

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

b. Disaster Relief
Japan has provided active support in response to large-scale natural disasters in the
Indo-Pacific region. About the disaster including the volcanic eruption and tsunami
disaster in Tonga 2021, Japan dispatched the Self-Defence Force Units as Japan
Disaster Relief (JDR) Team for transporting relief goods and providing desalinated
water. During FY 2022, Japan provided emergency relief goods in ten cases to assist
the people damaged by major natural disasters in addition to the oil spill disaster off
the Coast of Mindoro Island, Philippines for which the Expert Team was deployed as
Japan Disaster Relief (JDR) Team for providing advisory on oil removal and control.
Japan will continue to work with other ARF participants and contribute to ARF
activities in order to make regional disaster relief cooperation more practical and
effective.

In addition, Japan is an active player in other regional frameworks as well. Within the
framework of Japan-ASEAN cooperation, Japan provides mainly three types of
assistance through the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
Disaster Management (AHA Centre). The first type of assistance concerns the Disaster
Emergency Logistic System for ASEAN (DELSA). DELSA has been developing a
framework for stockpiling emergency relief supplies at specific locations and
transporting these items to disaster-hit areas. Under the DELSA, the AHA Centre also
has enhanced the supply chain management for emergency response of ASEAN
through innovation, utilization of technology and capacity development. The second
type of assistance concerns the capacity building of the Regional ASEAN Emergency
Response and Assessment Team (ASEAN-ERAT). This has helped further enhance a
coordinated response to disaster emergencies by the ASEAN-ERAT. The Third type of
Japan's assistance through the AHA Centre concerns a human resources development
project (ACE Programme) in DRR (Disaster Risk Reduction). This project involves
training programs for officials at the DRR organization in ASEAN Member States.

c. Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime

206

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
In the field of counter-terrorism, Japan continues to make efforts against international
terrorism and violent extremism in cooperation with the countries and the regional
and international organizations concerned. In this regard, at the Japan-ASEAN Summit
Meeting held in Vientiane, Laos in September 2016, then Prime Minister Shinzo Abe
announced that Japan would provide approximately 45 billion yen over the next three
years for Asia as comprehensive counter-terrorism measures consisted of (i)
improvement of counter-terrorism capacity, (ii) measures to counter violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, and (iii) social and economic development
assistance for creating a foundation for a moderate society. He also stated that Japan
would help develop 2,000 personnel for counter-terrorism over the next three years.
In September 2018, Japan had already achieved this goal one year ahead of its goal.
Japan has continuously held multilateral and bilateral counter-terrorism consultations
with nations in the Indo-Pacific region and elsewhere, primarily with Southeast Asian
countries, to enhance international counter-terrorism cooperation. Japan held the
consultations with ASEAN and U.K. in 2019 and with Australia and US in 2022.
Furthermore, in June 2021, Japan and Indonesia held the 1st Counter-Terrorism
Dialogue. To help build counter-terrorism capacity, Japan supports projects in such
areas in the field of border control, aviation security, maritime security, and law
enforcement under dialogue frameworks such as, the ASEAN-Japan CounterTerrorism Dialogue (AJCTD), the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime
plus Japan (AMMTC+Japan), and the Senior Official Meeting on Transnational Crime
plus Japan (SOMTC+Japan). The center of ASEAN-Japan cooperation in this area is the
ASEAN-Japan Joint Declaration for Cooperation to Combat Terrorism and
Transnational Crime, which was adopted by the 17th Japan-ASEAN Summit Meeting in
Myanmar in November 2014 and expanded its scope to include international
organized crime. In order to implement this declaration, SOMTC+Japan adopted its
updated “SOMTC-Japan Work Plan for Cooperation to Combat Terrorism and
Transnational Crime (2018-2022)” in October 2018, based on which SOMTC+Japan
has further strengthened cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism and
transnational crime. Currently, SOMTC+Japan is working to develop the updated
Work Plan for 2023 and beyond.

Japan has also been stepping up its efforts to combat transnational crimes in the IndoPacific region in three major aspects. The first aspect is strengthening transnational

207

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
legal frameworks. For example, Japan has been tackling drug problems in alliance with
ARF members through measures such as the exchange of information on synthetic
drugs, including new psychoactive substances (NPS), and investigative cooperation in
accordance with the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and other drug-related treaties. The second
aspect is supporting capacity building to combat illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in
persons and cybercrime in Southeast Asia through financial contributions to the
projects of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Japan-ASEAN Integration
Fund (JAIF) 2.0 and INTERPOL. The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
continued to strengthen mutual learning and networking for anti-trafficking in
persons under the COVID-19 pandemic including by inviting relevant personnel
engaging in measures against trafficking in persons in ASEAN countries to onlineseminar to share challenges and measures of trafficking in persons in ASEAN
countries.

JICA also started a “Project for Strengthening Regional Network for Combating
Trafficking in Persons (TIP) in Mekong Region” including support for the Mekong
Region Workshop, which is scheduled from January 2022 to January 2025, and
implemented the “Project for Strengthening the Operation of the Hotline for
Counselling and Supporting Trafficked Survivors” in Viet Nam from November 2018 to
March 2022.

Japan also continued to contribute to the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund
(CPCJF) managed by UNODC for implementation of a project to enhance the criminal
justice capacity such as responses to increasing threats faced by vulnerable groups,
including protection of such groups, during and after the COVID-19 pandemic in
Southeast Asia. Furthermore, Japan has been providing support for maritime law
enforcement capacity building in the Indo-Pacific region through its contribution to
the Global Maritime Crime Programme of the UNODC.

The third aspect is promoting policy coordination with various countries and
international organizations. Japan actively participates in multilateral frameworks
such as the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering (APG), and the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime

208

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
(AMMTC). In addition, Japan makes financial contributions to the website
maintenance for the Bali Process, a forum for policy dialogue, information sharing and
practical cooperation on irregular migration and trafficking in persons. Japan also
hosted the 14th UN Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in March 2021
in Kyoto to advance crime prevention and criminal justice in furtherance of our effort
to promote the rule of law and achieve the SDGs.

d. Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
As the only country to have suffered atomic bombings during war, Japan has the
responsibility to lead international efforts to achieve a world without nuclear
weapons. Last year, Prime Minister KISHIDA Fumio participated in the 10th NPT Review
Conference for the first time as a Japanese Prime Minister. At the Conference, he
presented the "Hiroshima Action Plan" rooted in five actions which would take us
from the "reality" of the harsh security environment to the "ideal" of a world without
nuclear weapons. Japan will continue to advance realistic and practical efforts
including the "Hiroshima Action Plan".

The global security environment has become even more severe in recent years. There
exists an apparent divergence of views on how best to advance nuclear disarmament,
a divergence that exists not only between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclearweapon States but also among non-nuclear-weapon States that are exposed to the
threat of nuclear weapons and those that are not. Considering these circumstances,
it is necessary to persistently advance realistic and practical efforts with the
involvement of nuclear-weapon States in order to promote nuclear disarmament.

It has become increasingly important under the current severe security environment
that the international community maintains and strengthens the NPT. Japan has made
a series of efforts to this end, such as the submission of the United Nations General
Assembly resolutions on the elimination of nuclear weapons, as well as close
cooperation through the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) and the
Stockholm Initiative for nuclear disarmament and the NPT.

Furthermore, Japan will continue to work on promoting effective nuclear
disarmament measures such as the universalization and early entry into force of the

209

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
CTBT, the immediate commencement of negotiations on an FMCT, and building a
reliable international verification mechanism.

Taking into consideration serious challenges to the international non-proliferation
regime, Japan is engaged in outreach activities in the Indo-Pacific region with the aim
of achieving three key objectives: (i) promoting the universalization of disarmament
and non-proliferation treaties and reinforcing their implementation at the national
level, inter alia IAEA Safeguards are the fundamental component of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and it remains our key objective to increase the
number of States with the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement (CSA) and the
Additional Protocol (AP); (ii) establishing and strengthening export control systems
and promote the implementation of UNSCR 1540. As one of these activities, Japan
supported a regional workshop for the implementation of UNSCR 1540, hosted by the
Kingdom of Cambodia; and (iii) raising awareness of the Proliferation Security
Initiative (PSI) and enhancing related efforts. As part of these activities, Japan has
been hosting a range of meetings each year, including the Asia Senior-Level Talks on
Non-Proliferation (ASTOP) and Asian Export Control Seminar. Japan has also actively
participated in PSI exercises and related conferences including PSI rotation exercise in
the Asia-Pacific region. In addition, Japan has actively contributed to the capacity
building in safeguards implementation to share its experience and knowledge,
including through the Asia-Pacific Safeguards Network (APSN).

e.

Cyberspace and Outer Space
Cyberattacks are becoming increasingly diversified and sophisticated. How to develop
systems and capabilities to protect states, and the lives and property of the citizens
from such cyberattacks constitutes a major challenge from both national security and
economic perspectives. To this end, Japan is working with other countries concerned
to promote a mutual understanding of these issues in a number of areas.

Countries in Indo-Pacific Region are discussing cyberspace issues under frameworks
such as ARF and ASEAN+3 meetings. The ARF Work Plan on Security of and in the Use
of Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs), which was endorsed at the
22nd ARF Ministerial Meeting in 2015, calls for confidence-building measures,
awareness-raising, capacity building support, regarding cybersecurity. Japan is

210

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
proactively participating in international meetings on these issues to boost
cybersecurity in the region. From the viewpoint of the increasing importance of the
situation surrounding cyberspace, ARF recognizes the value of continuing to exchange
views from a comprehensive standpoint with the aim of promoting a peaceful, secure
, open, and cooperative ICT environment, and preventing conflicts and crises through
capacity-building trust and assistance while building confidence among nations.

In addition to these efforts, Japan has continued to provide capacity building support
mainly to ASEAN countries. For example, since 2017, Japan has established the
ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Capacity Building Centre (AJCCBC) and conducted
cybersecurity exercises, among other initiatives. Japan also contributes to the World
Bank's Cybersecurity Multi-Donor Trust Fund, which is dedicated to capacity building
support in the field of cybersecurity in developing countries. Japan will continue to
promote human resource development and other relevant efforts. Based on the
experience Japan have cultivated to date through support for ASEAN member states
and interstate relations with the region, Japan will enhance support in area other than
ASEAN, with a focus on the Indo-Pacific region according to the “Basic Policy on
Cybersecurity Capacity Building Support for Developing Countries”.

In order to maintain space security, Japan is proactively engaged in rule-making
efforts in multilateral fora, in close cooperation with partners including ARF members.
Especially, Japan is committed to reducing space threats through norms, rules and
principles of responsible behaviours. In this regard, it is important to mention that the
resolution entitled “Reducing Space Threats through Norms, Rules and Principles of
Responsible Behaviours”, co-sponsored by various countries including Japan and the
United Kingdom, was adopted in 2021 at the UN General Assembly with widespread
support of 150 countries. Japan also decided not to conduct destructive, direct-ascent
anti-satellite (ASAT) missile testing in order to actively promote discussions in the
international fora concerning the development of norms of responsible behaviour in
outer space in September 2022. As one of the leading space-faring nations, Japan has
promoted bilateral dialogues on space with such as ARF members as European Union,
India and the United States.

f.

Confidence building Measures and Preventive Diplomacy

211

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Japan believes it is important for ARF to make steady progress from the first stage of
the “promotion of confidence-building measure” to the second stage of
“development of preventive diplomacy” and further to the third stage of “approaches
to dispute settlement.” However, despite the cumulative efforts of the ARF members
have so far succeeded in facilitating confidence-building measures to a certain extent,
progress toward the development of preventive diplomacy has only just begun. Japan
has long been committed to conflict prevention and peace building through human
resources development and other modalities means. Japan will take advantage of its
expertise in these areas to further contribute to the ARF’s efforts to promote
preventive diplomacy.

g. ADMM-Plus Initiatives
The ADMM-Plus provides a framework for addressing a wide range of security issues
common to the region. Japan is committed to this framework with the aim of
developing the forum into a key pillar of regional security cooperation. Within the
ADMM-Plus, seven Experts’ Working Groups (EWGs) have been established to
increase concrete military-to-military cooperation in handling security issues common
to the region. Japan is taking part in each ADMM-Plus EWG to further enhance
regional security cooperation by actively exchanging views with other countries and
making proposals as follows;
⮚ In the first cycle, from 2011 to 2013, Japan acted as a Co-Chair of the EWG on
Military Medicine with Singapore, and conducted field training exercises on
HA/DR and military medicine in Brunei in June 2013.
⮚ In the second cycle, from 2014 to 2017, Japan was a Co-Chair of the EWG on
HA/DR together with Lao PDR. During this period, efforts were made to
formulate a standard operating procedure (SOP) for the establishment and
management of a Multinational Coordination Centre (MNCC) so as to amplify
the activities of assisting foreign forces that are accepted by disaster-affected
countries in the event of natural or other disasters. In August 2015, for
example, a table top exercise (TTX) was conducted in Lao PDR. In September
2016, exercises on HA/DR and military medicine, AM-Hex 2016, were
conducted in Thailand in order to test the final draft of the SOP. At the 9 th
EWG meeting on HA/DR in December 2016, the SOP was adopted and it has

212

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
been on the track of discussion in the framework of ASEAN Defence Ministers’
Meeting (ADMM) since then.
⮚ In the third cycle, from 2017 to 2020, Japan actively participated in and
contributed to each EWG.
⮚ In the fourth cycle, from 2021 to 2024, Japan assumed with Vietnam the role
of Co-Chair of the EWG on PKO, and successfully convened the first EWG
meeting under the new cycle in April 2021 by taking up Women, Peace and
Security (WPS) as the main discussion topic. This led to the establishment of
the WPS Platform under the fourth cycle of the EWG on PKO. Japan will
continue its active contribution to international peace and stability by
enhancing the capabilities of ASEAN member states in PKO through its strong
initiatives as a Co-Chair of the EWG on PKO.
The ADMM-Plus is a vital framework that provides the member countries with
opportunities to conduct multilateral talks on a wide range of regional security issues
in an open manner. Japan believes it is important to keep this framework open
without putting any restriction on the issues to be addressed in the forum, while
allowing the participating countries to discuss a wide range of issues in a candid
manner.
IV.

Future of the ARF
As a framework for candid discussion on the political and security issues of the entire IndoPacific region, ARF has steadily contributed to confidence-building in the region. In recent
years, various initiatives have been put forward in a wide range of areas, including
maritime security, disaster relief, counter terrorism and transnational crime, nonproliferation and disarmament, preventive diplomacy, cyberspace, and outer space.

To further develop ARF as an action-oriented framework instead of making it serve merely
as a forum for dialogue, ARF members that co-organize each initiative need to establish
practical agenda items and programs with the cooperation with stakeholders, including
relevant international organizations and experts. Also, member states need to work more
closely with one another to avoid duplications among initiatives and produce favourable
outputs. In addition to these efforts to improve ARF functions, it is also important to
strengthen cooperation with other regional security frameworks in pursuing effective
synergy. The edge of the wedge is the area of disaster relief. In this particular area, similar

213

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
activities are increasingly conducted under different regional frameworks such as ADMMPlus. Member states need to streamline such activities from the viewpoint of reducing
personnel and financial costs for participating countries and pursing practical initiatives.

The ARF should also address issues of the international community and members should
not shy away from voicing their strong opposition to actions that undermine principles of
the international community and the ASEAN charter, such as unilateral attempts to
change the status quo by force.

Japan will proactively contribute to ARF while continue to exercise initiatives in various
areas, and believe that this contribution improve the regional security environment.

V.

50th year of ASEAN-Japan Friendship and Cooperation
Japan was the first country in the world to become a partner of ASEAN. In the half century
since then, Japan and ASEAN have been working together not only as close business
partners, but also as true friends with “heart to heart relations,” and cooperated hand in
hand for peace, stability, and prosperity of the region, even in times of difficulty.

Encouraged by the dramatic development of the ASEAN countries, our region has now
become the centre of the ever-expanding global economy. It is important that Japan and
ASEAN continue to grow together based on mutual trust and respect, upholding diversity
and inclusiveness, and to lead the way in this new era.

Japan promotes the vision of Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) and ASEAN promotes the
ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP). The shared principles such as openness,
transparency, inclusiveness, and respect for international law, are essential in this new
era, and close cooperation between Japan and ASEAN based on these principles is
becoming increasingly important.

Japan will take the opportunity of the 50th commemorative year to robustly support
ASEAN to mainstream AOIP in close dialogue with ASEAN and its member states.

214

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

MYANMAR
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
1. The challenges posed by geopolitical shifts in the Asia-Pacific region involve traditional
and non- traditional security challenges, social and economic ramifications of the
COVID-19 pandemic and other trans-boundary issues. We need to deepen defence
collaboration in contribution towards tackling the challenges. And then, we need to
uphold the principles of ASEAN Centrality and respect for ASEAN principles of noninterference, sovereignty and territorial integrity, consensus-based decision making.

2. ASEAN member states are working together for the lasting peace, security and
stability, sustained economic growth, shared prosperity and social progress by
adhering to the ASEAN Charter, goals and consensus. ASEAN is a geographically
important region as it connects the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. Nowadays,
some countries perceive ASEAN as a crucial part of the Indo-Pacific region and are
endeavouring to gain influence in the region. Hence, some countries have been
persuading ASEAN countries in various means, focusing on their own interests and
goals. As a consequence, it is likely to occur deviations from original ASEAN’s goals and
stance. Particularly, the formation of blocs in the Indo-Pacific region brings about the
different responses and disagreements among ASEAN members. Similarly, some
external countries could initiate issues that can deviate from the ASEAN consensus,
provisions and could lead to the disunity among member countries.

3. After the Asia-Pacific rebalancing strategy that intends to influence in the region
through close ties within military, trade, and people-to-people sectors, the Asia-Pacific
strategy was developed and adopted. In other words, it is the expansion of military,
political, and socio-economic issues into the Indian Ocean. With the development of
Indo-Pacific strategy, the way of finding solutions among countries that are involving
in the South China Sea disputes have been changed. Thus, the Indo-Pacific strategy,
with the strong multifaceted rivalry has led to the confrontation rather than the
peaceful negotiation in the settlement of disputes. For this reason, it is necessary to
consider the potential impact on the peaceful settlement of disputes and noninterference in the internal affairs of member states that are included in the principles
of ASEAN.

215

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
4. The Indian Ocean is a critical place of global trade and navigation, especially the
important place between the North Atlantic and the Asia-Pacific region. As a result,
some countries are increasingly interested in the Andaman Sea and the Bay of Bengal,
including the Indian Ocean and the attitudes towards security issues have also
changed in these regions. After the emergence of Indo-Pacific strategy, as economic,
trade, defence and security, especially maritime security have been focused, various
stances of the region have been shifted.

5. The superpowers later sought to influence and control political and military matters
through the increasing competitions for economic projects in the Indo-Pacific region.
In addition, maritime operations are conducted in the region by giving reasons to
become free and open Indo-Pacific region. The ASEAN region has become a major hub
for competition for power which could have a significant impact on the unity and
security of ASEAN countries. ASEAN member states should consider first to focus on
security, stability and interests of the ASEAN region in accordance with the ASEAN
Charter, ASEAN Vision, ASEAN Consensus at a time of increasing competition from
external powers in the ASEAN region. Interference of external powers can only be
avoided, especially if there is a united stance on security in the ASEAN region. In order
not to change our stances on ASEAN Charter, goals and common agreements, all
ASEAN member states shall adhere to them together. At the same time, ASEAN should
constantly monitor the differences be-tween member countries and should steer the
changes in stance, the decreases in compliance with common agreements and other
commitments. In these matters, Myanmar, as a member of ASEAN, has been actively
cooperating with ASEAN member states in order to stand with ASEAN unwaveringly
and strongly.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
1. Myanmar Tatmadaw upholds the three main national causes as the national policy
and always takes the responsibility of national security and defence. Regarding the
defence of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, the article 42 of State Constitution
(2008) has clearly promulgated that:
i. The Union shall not commence aggression against any nation.
ii. No foreign troops shall be permitted to be deployed in the territory of the
Union.

216

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

2. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar lays down the following National Defence
Policies to safeguard the national interests of the Union as well as the citizens:
i. To prevent all acts detrimental to the three main national causes which are
non-disintegration of the Union, non-disintegration of the national solidarity
and perpetuation of sovereignty.
ii. To formulate the National Defence with the People’s War Strategy centred
at Tatmadaw as pillar depending on the synergy of entire people.
iii. To valiantly and effectively prevent foreign aggression and interference in
the internal affairs of the Union, deploying various ways and means while
avoiding interference in the internal affairs of other nations.
iv. To employ a defence system that has oriented towards friendly relations
with other nations in accord with the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
v. Not to permit forming military alliance with other nations and the
deployment of any foreign troops in the territory of the Union.
vi. To cooperate with international community in non-traditional security issues
and anti-terrorist affairs and to render assistance when calamities occur in
the Union.
III.

Defence Budget (Military Expenditure)
The Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar allocated De-fence Budget
about US$1.7 billion for 2022-2023 fiscal year.

IV.

National Contributions to Regional Security
1. For the security of the region in multiple aspects, Myanmar is actively participating in
and contributing her efforts to the international/regional organizations and
institutions. Myanmar became a member of ASEAN in 1997 and in the same year it
also joined the Bay of Bengal Initiative of Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic
Cooperation – BIMSTEC. In 2014, Myanmar successfully served its ASEAN
chairmanship for the first time since her membership. As a member of ASEAN,
Myanmar has been participating in the dialogues and workshops organized by the
ASEAN Regional Forum – ARF since the establishment of the institution in 1994 which
hosts the countries inside and outside the region.

217

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
2. Myanmar perceived that any act of terror is still remaining a big challenge for the
security in the region especially within the ASEAN. Myanmar has decisively op-posed
the terrorist groups designated by some ASEAN countries and will continue to oppose
it. For anti-terrorism measure, Myanmar was a member of the team of formulating
the bill but also a signatory nation of the Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters
Among Like-Minded ASEAN member countries, and the ASEAN Convention on
Counter Terrorism-ACCT. Tatmadaw is now preparing to co-chair the ADMM Plus
Expert Working Groups – EWGs with Russia on Counter Terrorism for 2020-2023
period. Myanmar is very concerned about the potentiality of making the sovereign
land of a country as a safe haven of any terrorist group, and al-ways cooperating with
the like-minded countries to make sure that no terrorist group can station in the
region.
3. For eradication of narcotic drug production and trafficking, as an observer, Myanmar
has been attending the annual Meetings of ASEAN Senior Officials on Drug Matter ASOD even before the member of the ASEAN, and has been implementing its
resolutions after becoming a member of the regional organization. For narcotic drugs
control, Myanmar has signed an MOU with China, Laos, Thai-land, Vietnam and
Cambodia in 1993, and MOU for Centre of Information Sharing in Asia-Pacific with
ASEAN member states and the Republic of Korea in 2014. Myanmar is closely
cooperating with countries within the Greater Mekong Sub Region as well as with
ASEAN member states in striving to combat narcotic drugs.
4. Additionally, there are joint endeavours with Yangon based US Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB) Thailand,
Australian Federal Police (AFP) and with National Narcotics Control Commission
(NNCC) of China and have set up Border Liaison Offices (BLOs) along Myanmar-China,
Laos and Thailand borders. These serve as main centres for ex-changing information
relevant to combat narcotic drugs. Myanmar has also signed Bilateral Agreements
with India, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Russia, Lao PDR, China, and Thailand and the United
States of America to jointly combat narcotic drugs. To enforce the anti- narcotic
measure of the country, the Department of Narcotic Drugs Elimination was
transformed into Myanmar Police Force Narcotic Drug Suppression Division in 2013.

5. Myanmar had successfully hosted the meeting of ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group
on Counter Terrorism-EWG CT Middle Planning Conference of Table Top Exercise and

218

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Field Training Exercise on 6 to 7 December 2022 by video conferencing. Myanmar and
Thai Air Force held The Exchange visit in Squadron Level exercise with ATR 72-500
aircraft from 7 to 8 February 2023 in Mingaladon Air Force Base Command.
6. Regarding non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, Myanmar has signed the additional
protocol of the Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty – SEANWFZ, and
actively following the Plan Action to Strengthen the Implementation of the Treaty on
the SEANWFZ (2023-2027).
7. There are no ASEAN militaries’ meetings and exchanges hosted by Myanmar from
June 2020 to April 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As for Myanmar, the Union
is actively participating in matters relating to counter terrorism regional forums,
workshops, and conferences in cooperation with other ASEAN member states and
international cbommunities. ASEAN member states have to enhance the bilateral and
multilateral relations and deepen military and security co-operation to respond to the
challenges relating to acts of terror which we are now confronting and to support us
building our future nations to be peaceful, tranquil and developed. Coordination
among countries will surely support for dissolving the problems and enable to
confront the challenges. Moreover, the betterment of the relationship among the
ASEAN member states will ensure the successful implementation processes of counter
terrorism.

V.

Role of ASEAN Regional Forum
1. The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) plays a vital role in promoting stability and security
in the region by providing an important forum to discuss current security issues and
ways of cooperation. To address regional security challenges, ASEAN member states
should continue to emphasize joint actions towards a more secure and stable region.
2. With regards to the role of ARF, the contributions of the ASEAN member states based
on the principles of coordination and cooperation to the stability and peace of the
region are critically required. In responding to the region-al security challenges by the
cooperation and principles of joint actions, the role of the ASEAN member states
should continue emphasizing on a more stable and secure region. Moreover, the nontraditional security threats such as natural disasters, terrorism, maritime security and
transnational crimes, epidemics, food and energy security, human security,
cybercrimes, climate changes and global warming are still regional concerns and the

219

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ASEAN member states should continue conducting the information sharing, capacity
building, joint exercises and trainings.
3. ASEAN member states should continue enhancing peace and stability of the region in
cooperative manner, encourage the nuclear weapon states to sign the additional
protocol of the Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (SEANWFZ),
cooperate more in areas of traditional security challenges and non-traditional security
challenges that will impact regional peace and stability, such as the risk of extremists
and terrorists, disaster management and information security, drug trafficking, human
and arms smuggling, transnational crimes, illegal migration, money laundering, sea
piracy and maritime security, climate change and epidemics like Zika, Ebola and
COVID-19 Coronavirus etc..

220

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

NEW ZEALAND
I.

Overview of the regional security environment
a. The Indo-Pacific region is central to Aotearoa New Zealand’s security and economic
well-being. The region faces a number of serious challenges. New Zealand
meaningfully engages with the regional security architecture on the key strategic
and security issues and risks facing the region, and supports regional economic
integration and resilience, including the reinstatement of regional connectivity.

b. New Zealand values our participation in ASEAN-led architecture, including the East
Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum
(EAMF) and ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus). These channels
provide us with the means to coordinate our efforts with ASEAN and regional actors
and work collectively to secure a more stable, prosperous and resilient Indo-Pacific
region. ASEAN centrality is a core tenet of Aotearoa New Zealand’s approach to the
Indo-Pacific region, in line with New Zealand’s overarching objective of regional
peace, prosperity and stability. Effective regional architecture plays an important
role in shoring up such centrality.

c. Regional bodies such as the ARF, EAS, and ADMM-Plus have an important role to
play in promoting the principles, rules and norms that New Zealand values in the
Indo-Pacific region, such as openness and inclusivity, ASEAN centrality,
transparency, freedom of navigation and overflight, adherence to international law,
open markets, and respect for sovereignty.

d. In addition to promoting a strong rules-based system, close regional cooperation on
security threats is increasingly important as the nature of threats continues to
evolve. New Zealand is working to ensure that we – as a country and as a region –
are equipped to deal with the emerging risks posed by the increased use of
technology, security impacts of climate change and actors seeking to challenge the
existing regional and international rules and norms.

e. Challenges to the rules and norms that underpin our shared security and prosperity
in the region have the potential to undermine all our efforts to date. We must
continue to use the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) for dialogue and cooperation to

221

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
build confidence and capacity, to manage differences, and to ensure there are no
misunderstandings that might lead to conflict.

f.

Key security issues occupying the ARF membership include the illegal and
unprovoked invasion by an ARF member, Russia, of its neighbour Ukraine. This attack
has serious implications for global peace, security and economic stability, including
in our Indo-Pacific region. We call on President Putin’s regime to act in a manner
consistent with all its international obligations and responsibilities and end this war
immediately. New Zealand will continue to stand with Ukraine, and work to uphold
the rules-based international system that is critical to ongoing peace and security in
our region.

g. Similarly, New Zealand strongly condemns the military coup in Myanmar. We
continue to call for immediate cession of violence and a return to civilian rule. New
Zealand supports the ASEAN’s efforts of working to fully implement the Five-Point
Consensus.

h. We remain seriously concerned about developments in the South China Sea. We
have consistently called on all claimant states to cease actions that escalate tensions
and to settle disputes peacefully and in accordance with international law, in
particular the UN Convention on the Law of Sea (UNCLOS) as the constitution for the
oceans. Prosperity and stability in the Indo-Pacific region depends on a secure
maritime environment and the peaceful resolution of maritime disputes. All ARF
members have an interest in avoiding miscalculations and the maintenance of the
regime of maritime zones and the freedoms of navigation and overflight in the South
China Sea, in accordance with international law, in particular UNCLOS.

i.

New Zealand has a strong interest in peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait. We
are concerned by increased tensions and encourage the peaceful resolution of crossStrait issues.

j.

The Korean Peninsula remains one of the greatest long-term threats to regional
security. We are concerned at the increased intensity of DPRK’s ballistic missile tests,
in contravention of multiple UN Security Council (UNSC) Resolutions and are deeply

222

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
troubled by reports that the DPRK may be preparing for a seventh nuclear test. It is
critical that there is a strong, unified international response condemning the DPRK’s
actions if it conducts a nuclear test. New Zealand continues to engage actively with
international efforts to achieve the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearisation of North Korea, including through the full and effective
implementation of sanctions in accordance with all relevant UNSC Resolutions.

k. In addition to responding to these specific geographical challenges, New Zealand
remains committed to the work of the ASEAN Regional Forum in building cybersecurity resilience in and against the spread of misinformation and disinformation,
and prioritising functional cooperation and preventive diplomacy in areas of
counter-terrorism and trans-national crime, non-proliferation and disarmament,
maritime security, and disaster relief. We are concerned at the increased attempts
to disrupt and destabilise the international rules based order through the spread of
mis- and disinformation.

l.

The ongoing economic recovery from the pandemic provides us opportunities to
shape and build resilient, inclusive, and sustainable economies. New Zealand is
strongly committed to an open, rules-based trading regime and considers that
enhanced economic integration is one of the most effective means of ensuring
longer-term regional security and prosperity. New Zealand is committed to pursuing
multilateral, plurilateral and bilateral trade agreements that support this goal. New
Zealand also aims to strengthen the broader regional trade architecture to ensure it
is resilient to future shocks. As the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Chair in 2021,
New Zealand led and delivered on a progressive agenda to facilitate an inclusive and
resilient economic recovery in the region.

m. New Zealand attaches considerable importance to the ASEAN-Australia-New
Zealand Free Trade Agreement (FTA), which entered into force in 2010. Upgrade
negotiations launched in late 2020 to ensure it remains relevant and fit-for-purpose
in an evolving global environment. Text negotiations concluded in March 2023, and
signing is planned for August 2023. The Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership (RCEP), signed by the ten ASEAN members plus Australia, China, Japan,
Korea and New Zealand, covering 30% of global GDP, is the biggest trade agreement

223

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
in the world. With its entry into force in January 2022, the rules and norms set by
the RCEP will make trade simpler to navigate and provide greater confidence to
businesses.

n. Several ASEAN members are also part of the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), which is in force for New Zealand,
Mexico, Singapore, Japan, Canada, Australia, Viet Nam, Peru, Malaysia and Chile.
Brunei has ratified the agreement. In addition to regional agreements, New Zealand
has other bilateral FTAs or Closer Economic Partnerships with many other ARF
members, including China, the Republic of Korea, Australia, Malaysia, Thailand,
Singapore, Hong Kong and Chinese Taipei.

o. In addition to the traditional security threats, the impacts of climate change on
human security, on secure supply chains, on access and servicing of critical
infrastructure cannot be underestimated. Climate change is one of the greatest
threats to the livelihoods, security, and well-being of peoples in the Indo-Pacific. The
ARF membership does have a role to play in considering climate change issues in the
Confidence-Building Measures and Preventative Diplomacy work plan of the ARF.

II.

New Zealand’s security and defence policy
Overview of national security and defence policy
1. As a founding member of the United Nations, respect for international norms and law
is fundamental to New Zealand’s approach to promoting security, stability and peace.
While geographically isolated, New Zealand is not distanced from the accelerating and
intensifying impacts of geostrategic competition and transnational threats such as
climate change, terrorism, arms proliferation, organised crime, and cyber-attacks.
Recognising this, New Zealand is highly committed to multilateral solutions to security
threats and the promotion of effective international rules. New Zealand takes a multi‑
layered approach to security that includes strong bilateral relationships, multilateral
avenues, regional partnerships, and support for regional architecture and institutions.
ASEAN-centred regional security architecture has an increasingly important role in
bringing countries together and providing a forum for discussions. Our view is that
these forums fulfil an important role promoting understanding, imbedding habits of
dialogue and facilitating practical military-to-military cooperation.

224

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

2. New Zealand has a strong interest in fostering and maintaining a network of robust
international relationships, which include:
●

New Zealand’s alliance with Australia;

●

the Five Power Defence Arrangements (New Zealand, Australia, Malaysia,
Singapore and the United Kingdom);

●

the Five Eyes partnership (New Zealand, Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom
and the United States);

●

close bilateral ties with Pacific Island neighbours, including those for which New
Zealand has constitutional responsibilities;

●

close and growing bilateral ties with a number of Indo-Pacific partners from North
Asia to South and Southeast Asia; and

●

Pacific and Indo‑Pacific regional security architecture such as the Pacific Islands
Forum (PIF), South Pacific Defence Ministers' Meeting (SPDMM), the ARF and the
ADMM Plus, in addition to the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime (the Bali Process).

3. New Zealand defence policy settings are articulated in the Strategic Defence Policy
Statement 2018. This statement describes Defence’s value to New Zealand in terms
of its contributions to the community, the nation and the world, with emphasis on
community and environmental resilience. It also provides perspective on the evolving
strategic environment; specifying the priority for the Defence Force being able to
operate in the South Pacific (to the same level as that for New Zealand’s territory, the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica); featuring a set of principles for Defence; and
underscoring the importance of contributing to New Zealand’s key security
partnerships. The statement reaffirmed that the ADMM-Plus remains New Zealand’s
principal forum for multilateral defence engagement in Asia. The Statement has been
supplemented by standalone assessments such as The Climate Crisis: Defence
Readiness and Responsibilities. With a worsening geostrategic environment, Defence
has reviewed its policy settings. The Defence Assessment 2021 concluded that the
two principal challenges to New Zealand’s defence interests are strategic competition
and climate change.

225

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
III.

New Zealand’s contribution to regional security
1. New Zealand remains firmly committed to countering and preventing terrorism and
violent extremism in all forms, and to combatting transnational organised crime.
Under the NZ Transnational Organised Crime Strategy 2020-2025, New Zealand aims
to unify through a system-wide governance model to prevent, detect, and dismantle
TNOC threats. A strong focus of the Strategy is partnerships and New Zealand engages
to prevent, detect, and respond to these threats. New Zealand is engaged at the
multilateral, regional, sub-regional and bilateral levels, with a particular focus on the
Indo-Pacific region.

2. To support achievement of New Zealand’s global security priorities, including assisting
with capacity building in neighbouring states, New Zealand has a number of
specialised security funds, including dedicated Global and Pacific Security Funds. The
specialised security funds assist New Zealand's achievement of its Plan of Action with
ASEAN, particularly in areas of border control; legislation; law enforcement; policy;
irregular migration; and prevention/counter radicalisation and countering the threat
posed by foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs). Ongoing collective effort is required to
prevent FTFs from relocating to other conflict zones or to effectively manage their
return home through targeted rehabilitation and reintegration support.

3. In line with our commitment to reduce the risk of South East Asia being a target or
source of terrorism we are sharpening our strategic focus, and plan to strengthen
efforts to support partners to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks, to counter the
root causes of violent extremism by building resilient communities, and help
invigorate mechanisms that promote coherence and coordination of counterterrorism policy and practice within governments and across the region.

4. Breaking down the silos that impede cooperation within governments and the barriers
that hinder cooperation between governments is necessary to tackle these significant
and complex transnational security threats. New Zealand seeks to work closely with
our partners in the region to help achieve coherence in policy and practice, including
ASEAN-centred initiatives such as those under the umbrella of the ASEAN Regional
Forum.

226

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
5. New Zealand’s co-chairing of the ARF work stream on Counter-Terrorism and
Transnational Crime along with Malaysia and the EU is indicative of the importance
that we place on this regional mechanism, especially as a forum for advancing broader
regional efforts to counter violent extremism online.

6. On a bilateral basis, capacity building in South East Asia is a significant focus of New
Zealand’s global counter-terrorism engagement. We have long-standing relationships
with institutions in the region such as the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation and the South East Asia Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism
(Malaysia). New Zealand also contributes Defence personnel to the Counter Terrorism
Information Facility located in Singapore.

7. Courses scheduled for delivery by New Zealand Police continue to be delivered, largely
via in-person training, including:

●

Countering Violent Extremism (CVE) through Community Policing Course –
delivered in person in March 2023 and focused on community engagement as a
tool to prevent violent extremism. This New Zealand Police led course was
delivered by two trainers through the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation (JCLEC).

●

Cyber Crime Investigation Skills course – This is a course delivered alongside the
Australian Federal Police (AFP) and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP)
to participants from across Southeast Asia, focused on addressing knowledge and
skills gaps among those working in Cyber and Technology Enabled Crime (TEC)
Investigations. The next course is currently expected to be delivered in June 2023.

●

New Zealand Police also contributed towards the virtual Victoria University of
Wellington STIK (Indonesian National Police Higher Education) Masters Course,
delivered in December 2022 to students from Indonesia National Police.

●

Transnational Organised Crime Skills course - in February 2022 the New Zealand
Police along with Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and
New Zealand Customs delivered the Transnational Organised Crime course to the

227

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Indonesian National Police through the JCLEC with a view to expanding this to
other ASEAN countries. This course will again be delivered in the 2022/23
financial year.

●

Transnational Organised Crime Regional Cooperation Course – between 20 June
and 1 July 2022 the New Zealand Police along with Ministry of Business,
Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and New Zealand Customs delivered the
inaugural TNOC Regional Cooperation course for ASEAN Countries at JCLEC (8
Countries, 15 organisations). The International TNOC Course focused on
vulnerabilities in the maritime domain and was delivered at the
strategic/management level. Another Transnational Organised Crime Regional
Cooperation Course is scheduled for delivery in May/June 2023.

●

Building Police Leadership Capacity – Women In Leadership – between 20 – 24
June 2022 the New Zealand Police along with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police
(RCMP) and the UK Government delivered the inaugural in-person Building Police
Leadership Capacity – Women In Leadership Course to female leaders from
across Asia through the JCLEC.

●

New Zealand Police has provided trainers to assist with a People Smuggling
course delivered at JCLEC, including three courses delivered with AFP and RCMP,
with a course delivered in Jan/Feb 2023 and a further course expected to be
delivered in June 2023.

●

Additionally, the New Zealand Police Senior Liaison Officer (SLO) in Bangkok, the
two New Zealand Police Liaison Officers (PLO’s) in Jakarta and Kuala Lumpur, and
the four Irregular Migration Liaison Officers based in the region have continued
to participate in localised training and presentations, to maintain and strengthen
partnerships.

8. New Zealand remains concerned about irregular migration and its regional impact. As
part of our contribution to managing the security and humanitarian challenges posed
by irregular migration, New Zealand is an active member of the Bali Process on People
Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime (the Bali Process).

228

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
This includes co-chairing the Working Group on Disruption of Criminal Networks
Involved in People Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons, alongside Viet Nam, which
focuses on concrete, action-oriented activities for enhancing law enforcement and
border security coordination. New Zealand provides support for regional capacity
building, including targeted capacity building assistance to ASEAN members on people
smuggling, and transnational organised crime.

9. New Zealand also works closely with the Asia-Pacific Group (APG) on Money
Laundering to support the coordination of technical assistance and training in the
Pacific to combat transnational organised criminal and terrorist groups, by targeting
their financial systems and processes. Since 2017, New Zealand has funded APG’s
“Pacific Cell” to improve implementation of Anti-Money Laundering/Countering
Financing of Terrorism (‘AML/CFT’) standards across 11 Pacific jurisdictions.

10. Additionally, New Zealand has funded and organised a number of regional capacity
building workshops for ASEAN countries on key issues, including anti-money
laundering/counter-terrorist

financing

standards,

cyber

security,

terrorist

prosecutions, chemical and nuclear security, major event security, and maritime and
aviation security. These efforts are complemented by significant bilateral work to
build individual national capability, especially within law enforcement agencies.

11. New Zealand participates in multilateral initiatives which engage on counter-terrorism
projects in the region, including the Global Counter Terrorism Forum (GCTF) and the
Global Community Engagement and Resilience Fund (GCERF), for which we are
pleased to support CVE initiatives in the Philippines and Sri Lanka.

12. In addition to its work in South East Asia, New Zealand also works with Pacific Island
Countries (PICs) to help strengthen resilience and build capacity to respond to a range
of shared security challenges. In 2018, Pacific Islands Forum Leaders endorsed the Boe
Declaration on Regional Security, which affirms an expanded concept of security,
recognising climate change as the preeminent security threat to the region. This
expanded concept of security encompasses traditional and non-traditional challenges
encountered by the region, prioritising human security, environmental security,
transnational crime, and cyber security. New Zealand strongly supports the

229

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
implementation of the Boe Declaration, and channels this through existing
programmes related to climate change, information sharing, leadership training,
cyber security, transnational crime, and national security policy development. These
programmes are in addition to the number of initiatives New Zealand supports
through the Pacific Islands Forum, including regional discussions and consensus
building on disaster response, Transnational Organised Crime and climate security.

13. In 2022, PIF Leaders adopted the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, which
sets out the region’s plan over the next 30 years to secure our people, place and
prospects. This includes setting the ambition for a resilient region of peace, harmony,
security, social inclusion and prosperity.

14. New Zealand works closely with and funds Pacific regional law enforcement agencies
such as the Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police Secretariat, Oceania Customs Organisation
and the Pacific Immigration Development Community, and contributes to their
consideration and responses to regional security issues. New Zealand also provides
technical assistance, capacity building, and mentoring for law enforcement and
border agency officials in the region.

15. One growing challenge the region faces is the unprecedented use of social media by
terrorist groups. This has forced states to adapt, with many adopting sophisticated
counter-messaging protocols and systems to enable them to convey another view to
would-be terrorists. In response to the use of social media as part of the 15 March
2019 terrorist attack in Christchurch, New Zealand developed (with France) the
Christchurch Call to Eliminate Terrorist and Violent Extremist Content Online. The Call
represents a unique effort to have technology companies and countries work
together, with civil society, to tackle the shared problem of this content and its
harmful effects, while protecting a free and open internet and human rights online.
Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
16. New Zealand has a long-standing commitment to nuclear disarmament and non
proliferation. New Zealand is a strong supporter of the Nuclear Non Proliferation
Treaty.

230

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
17. New Zealand is a key proponent of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
(TPNW). New Zealand ratified the TPNW in 2018 and, as one of its Core Group
members, works to encourage non-signatory states to sign, and signatories to ratify
the Treaty. New Zealand has continued its active promotion of nuclear disarmament
more generally, including through its membership of the New Agenda Coalition.

18. New Zealand is a strong proponent of nuclear weapon-free zones in view of their role
in reinforcing nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation commitments. New Zealand
is party to the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone (Treaty of Rarotonga) and has had
legislation in place since 1987 creating a New Zealand Nuclear-Free Zone. New
Zealand strongly encourages all Nuclear Weapons States to ratify the Protocols to
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zones, including the South East Asia Nuclear Weapons Free
Zone (SEANWFZ) and the Treaty of Rarotonga, without any reservations or
interpretative declarations.

19. New Zealand supports the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) as an
important contribution to regional and global security. New Zealand has welcomed
ratification of the CTBT by Annex 1 and 2 states in the region and encourages
ratifications by all ARF participants.

20. New Zealand is a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which
provides the global focal point for nuclear cooperation and safeguards. New Zealand
recently served as a member of the IAEA Board of Governors (2020-22), the Agency’s
primary policymaking organisation. New Zealand is in full compliance with its
safeguards obligations and supports international projects involving the peaceful use
of nuclear energy. We routinely urge all states to sign Additional Protocol agreements
with the IAEA.

21. New Zealand joined the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) in 2007,
and, alongside over 80 GICNT partners, is committed to preventing nuclear or
radiological material falling into the hands of terrorists. New Zealand has contributed
to the GICNT in the Indo‑Pacific region by: developing a table-top exercise kit for use
by other GICNT partners in testing their own national response systems; supporting
radioactive source security projects in Southeast Asia; providing funding support to

231

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
GICNT workshops in the Indo-Pacific region; and helping its Pacific island neighbours
address the risk of nuclear/radiological security.

22. New Zealand is a strong proponent of enhancing nuclear security. In 2016, New
Zealand ratified two key nuclear security treaties: the Amendment to the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. In 2016, New Zealand also enacted a
new Radiation Safety Act to ensure its legislative framework for the safety and security
of nuclear and radioactive material meets current international best practice. New
Zealand has provided financial support for nuclear security capacity-building projects
in the Indo-Pacific region. Additionally, we make annual voluntary contributions to
the IAEA’s Nuclear Security Fund.

23. New Zealand is a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention. We have provided financial assistance to the Organisation for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to strengthen the Organisation’s physical and
cyber security infrastructure and support its assistance and protection programmes,
and have spoken out strongly against the use of chemical weapons in Malaysia, Syria,
Russia and the UK.

24. New Zealand has in place a comprehensive national export control regime. This is
informed by our active membership of the Wassenaar Arrangement, the Missile
Technology Control Regime, the Australia Group, the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the
Zangger Committee. New Zealand was the chair of the Missile Technology Control
Regime 2019-2020.

25. New Zealand’s involvement in the Proliferation Security Initiative, including our
membership of the Operational Experts Group (the PSI steering committee) and
participation in exercises and capacity building initiatives has enhanced New Zealand’s
capabilities to prevent proliferation activity both nationally and in collaboration with
partners. New Zealand has developed (and shared with PSI partners) a Model
National Response Plan which provides easy-to-follow guidance on the range of issues
that need to be considered in developing a framework for responding to proliferation
situations. As part of the PSI Asia-Pacific exercise rotation, New Zealand hosted a PSI

232

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
table-top exercise in Wellington in 2015 and is currently scheduled to host an exercise
in 2023. New Zealand would welcome further adherence to the PSI throughout the
Indo‑Pacific as part of a coordinated effort to reduce the threat of WMD proliferation.

26. Given the role played by the unregulated global arms trade in fuelling conflict, New
Zealand is a strong supporter of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which we ratified in
2014. The ATT is an important contributor to international and regional peace,
security and stability. New Zealand has been engaged in a breadth of initiatives that
support broader membership, and greater implementation, of the Treaty, including as
current Chair of the Treaty’s Voluntary Trust Fund which has as its core objective the
assistance of States Party to implement the Treaty. In our national capacity New
Zealand has sponsored the development of ATT model legislation and a model control
list, both of which can assist countries to implement their domestic obligations under
the ATT. New Zealand hosted a conference in Auckland in 2018 to promote greater
adherence to the ATT and other conventional arms treaties among Pacific Island
countries, and co-sponsored – with significant support from Australia – a follow-up
conference in Brisbane in 2019. New Zealand looks forward to continuing to work
closely with its ARF partners on reinforcing the ATT.

27. New Zealand strongly supports the Convention on Cluster Munitions (CCM) and the
Anti-Personnel Landmine Ban Convention (APLMBC). Landmines and cluster
munitions are indiscriminate weapons that – in New Zealand’s view – breach
International Humanitarian Law. As such, New Zealand is pleased to have worked with
many ARF States on practical mine clearance operations, including in Cambodia and
Lao PDR – some of the most mine-contaminated States on the planet, but which are
making large and promising steps to meet their clearance obligations. New Zealand is
the coordinator for national implementation measures in the CCM, and we have
produced model legislation for possible use by small states with no history of use or
contamination. New Zealand continues to work closely with ARF participants that
have not yet done so to ratify or accede to both Conventions. In 2019, New Zealand
sponsored and co-hosted alongside the governments of the Philippines and Sri Lanka,
a regional workshop on CCM universalisation and implementation hosted in Manila,
which included the participation of eight South Asia and Pacific States who are not yet
signatories of the Convention.

233

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

28. New Zealand has a strong legacy of supporting Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) clearance
in the Indo-Pacific region for nearly 20 years. New Zealand also provides technical
assistance for the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Centre, and has previously funded
mine action work in Myanmar. New Zealand is supporting a package of work in Lao
PDR and Cambodia that aims to reduce the social, economic and environmental
impact of mines and explosive remnants of war.
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
29. The Indo-Pacific region continues to be afflicted by natural disasters that underline
the need to continue deepening practical and effective cooperation in relation to
disaster reduction, response and recovery. New Zealand has been an active
participant in ARF and EAS discussions about preparing for and responding to regional
disasters. New Zealand has also provided targeted humanitarian assistance for natural
disasters in the South East Asia region, including Timor-Leste floods in 2021 and
Typhoon Rai in the Philippines in 2022.

30. New Zealand is continuing to play its part in deepening regional capacity to prepare
and respond to disasters, including drawing on lessons learned from the Christchurch
earthquakes and Cyclone Gabrielle in early 2023. New Zealand is committed to further
cooperation and implementation of work plans in ARF, ADMM-Plus and EAS contexts.
Disaster Risk Management is a priority study area for our knowledge and skills
investments in the Indo-Pacific region. New Zealand and Singapore will be co-chairing
the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group on HADR for the 2024-2027 cycle.

31. New Zealand has been a solid proponent of the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance (AHA)
Centre since its inception, and has trained ASEAN officials in disaster response
leadership at the University of Canterbury and contributed technical expertise to the
Centre. We currently support work strengthening the AHA Centre’s professional
development programmes to reduce the impact of disasters through design and
implementation of e-learning solutions.

234

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Maritime Security
32. Maritime Security, including the preservation of secure and sustainable oceans, is fundamental
to New Zealand’s security. Accordingly, New Zealand released a Maritime Security Strategy in
2021 to combat increasingly complex challenges to our maritime domain and borders and
deliver guardianship over our maritime domain for future generations. New Zealand is not
alone in facing these complex challenges. We value our maritime cooperation with ARF
partners and have been actively involved in the implementation of the ARF’s maritime security
work plan, and in sharing our experiences on various maritime security-related issues,
including upholding the rules-based system relating to the oceans, illegal, unreported and
unregulated (IUU) fishing, transnational crime, and marine environment issues.

33. In May 2018, New Zealand co-hosted with Singapore the ARF Defence Officials’ Dialogue. The
dialogue included thematic sessions on maritime counter-terrorism, counter-terrorism
interagency cooperation, and chemical, biological and radiological defence. More recently,
New Zealand participated in the virtual 4th ARF Workshop on Enhancing Regional Maritime Law
Enforcement Cooperation, and co-hosted the 4th ARF Workshop on Implementing UNCLOS and
other International Instruments to address Emerging Maritime Issues alongside Viet Nam,
Australia and the EU in November 2022. New Zealand continues its active involvement in the
ADMM-Plus Experts Working Group on Maritime Security and the ARF Maritime Security
workstream.

ICTs Security
34. Connectivity is a crucial driver of our region’s growth. However, with increased
connectivity comes increased exposure to cyber threats. New Zealand remains
concerned by the growing number of cyber incidents globally, including activity
undertaken by both state and non-state actors. These incidents underscore the
importance of adherence to and implementation of the framework of responsible
state behaviour online, comprised of international law, norms of responsible state
behaviour, confidence-building measures, and capacity-building.

35. New Zealand sees the ARF as an important forum to support implementation of the
framework of responsible state behaviour online, and to improve transparency,
understanding and confidence among regional partners in cyber space. To this end,
we were pleased to participate in the Inter-Sessional Meeting on Security of and in
the use of ICTS in April 2022, and the associated Study Group on Confidence-Building

235

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Measures. We welcome Indonesia and Australia’s confidence building proposal to
host an ARF Workshop on Implementing Norms of Responsible States’ Behaviours in
Cyberspace, and look forward to further cooperation in this area.

36. New Zealand remains committed to building regional cyber security capacity,
including through membership of the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, with a
particular focus on our Pacific and South-East Asian neighbours. We continue to
deliver initiatives under New Zealand’s NZ$10 million Cyber Security Support to the
Pacific programme, and support the ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity Centre of
Excellence.

37. Former New Zealand Prime Minister Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern signed the Europol
Agreement on 1 July 2022, which symbolises our shared strong commitment to
privacy and seeing justice for victims of crime. The Agreement reinforces New
Zealand’s strong data projection framework and means New Zealand will have access
to more information to disrupt and respond to the victims of serious crime and
terrorism. This information will help disrupt and respond to transnational organised
crime, drug trafficking, money laundering, child sexual exploitation, cybercrime,
violent extremism, and terrorism.

IV.

Role of ARF
a. New Zealand’s contributions to enhancing the ARF and regional security

i. For New Zealand, the ARF is a key mechanism for security engagement in the IndoPacific region and part of our broader relationship with the ASEAN region. It
contributes to building an environment of dialogue and cooperation on a wide
range of regional security issues. The ARF is also contributing in an important way
to the development of international norms and principles on security that are
directly relevant to this region. The number and diversity of practical ARF projects
under implementation during the current intersessional year reflects the ARF’s
ability to respond to contemporary security challenges facing this part of the
world.

236

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ii. New Zealand also attaches considerable importance to working with its ARF
partners to advance the ARF’s preventive diplomacy agenda, in line with the ARF’s
three-stage evolution. In the 2023-24 ARF intersessional year, New Zealand will be
co-chairing the Intersessional Group Meeting on Confidence Building Measures
and Preventative Diplomacy (ISG on CBMs and PD) and the Defence Officials’
Dialogue alongside Lao PDR. We value the opportunity to contribute to dialogue
and consultation on political and security issues of common interest, and to
contribute to efforts towards confidence-building and preventive diplomacy in the
Indo-Pacific region.

iii. New Zealand is committed to working with its ASEAN partners to ensure
coherence between the ARF and other pieces of the regional architecture, in
particular the EAS and ADMM-Plus. We recognise this is a particular priority during
Indonesia’s term as ASEAN Chair in 2023. While the ARF and ADMM-Plus have
their distinct mandates and different memberships, greater functional
coordination between them on issues that straddle multiple fora, such as disaster
relief/management, cyber security and maritime security, would help to achieve
streamlining and eliminate unnecessary duplication of activities. New Zealand
also actively supports efforts to strengthen the EAS, to ensure it can fulfil its role
as the region’s premier forum for leaders to address strategic issues and risks.

b. Future of ARF

i. The ARF is a forum that was established with the aim of fostering habits of
constructive dialogue on issues of concern. At the ARF’s outset it was envisaged
that the Forum would move as part of its evolution from a confidence building
phase to preventive diplomacy, and finally to conflict resolution. The ARF has
constructed a solid base of confidence building measures and made progress in
the field of preventive diplomacy. It has the potential to do more.

ii. New Zealand supports the ARF in increasing its capacity and effectiveness in the
preventive diplomacy space, and encourages all participants to keep an eye to the
future to ensure we are well-equipped when we move into the conflict resolution
phase.

237

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

iii. New Zealand remains committed to the principles of peace and security
underpinning the ARF. We encourage dialogue and capacity building among
members to achieve our collective aims in strengthening regional security. At a
time of heightened geopolitical tensions, our ability to come together, engage in
dialogue and share experiences to resolve tensions is more important than ever.

238

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

PAKISTAN
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
Today, entire world is in flux due to indomitable threats including climate change, poverty,
starvation, pandemics, terrorism, Islamophobia, Xenophobia, migration from conflict
zones, civil strife, transnational organized crime, security of trade routes, cybercrimes and
abuse of social media. Our region is no exception. The situation has further aggravated
with the failure of international comity and actors, in resolving long standing disputes,
such as the Indian Illegally Occupied Jammu & Kashmir (IIOJK).

As Existing conflicts exacerbate, new threats have emerged. Competing interests of
regional and extra regional powers are deepening long standing gaps, and widening the
fault lines, even as the tragedy of Palestine and Kashmir continues to fester. In these
uncertain times, the global community appears to be in desperate quest for sustainable
future.

Pakistan considers peaceful coexistence with neighbours critical for its long-term
prosperity and regional peace. However, strategic stability in South Asia is increasingly
under threat due to inherently escalatory nature of Pakistan-India ties, growing doctrinal
imbalances and development of provocative limited war strategies.

Situation in South Asia
Home to nearly a quarter of the world population, South Asia has a complex historical
context, immense regional diversity and unresolved territorial disputes. This region faces
some of the toughest, conventional and non-conventional, security challenges in the
world today. For the last several decades, the region has faced instability and challenges
to peace & security due to the situation in Afghanistan and the Indian Illegally Occupied
Jammu and Kashmir (IIOJK).

Pakistan has time and again reiterated its desire for peaceful and cordial ties with all its
neighbours, including India. It believes that durable peace and stability in the region
cannot be achieved without the resolution of unresolved disputes, including the Jammu
and Kashmir dispute, in line with the relevant United Nations Security Council Resolutions
and aspirations of the Kashmiri people. The illegal and unilateral actions of changing the
demography of the Indian Illegally Occupied Jammu & Kashmir region and the gross

239

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
human rights violations by the Indian occupation forces have endangered the regional
security environment.

Heavy military deployment in the Indian Illegally Occupied Jammu and Kashmir has only
exacerbated the security risk. Jammu and Kashmir has been rightly described as a “nuclear
flashpoint”. A slight miscalculation can take the region to the brink of a war.

In the broader regional context, increasing acquisition of modern weaponry by some
countries has the potential to destabilize the strategic balance in South Asia. The
imprudent Indian launch of supersonic missile into Pakistani territory on 9 March 2022
had jeopardized the peace and security environment of the entire region. Pakistan
rejected the untenable explanation provided by India and sought joint-probe of the
matter while simultaneously apprising the international community of India’s
irresponsible conduct in maintaining strategic weapons.

Pakistan has maintained that the resolution of the core issue of the Jammu and Kashmir
dispute can open new vistas of regional cooperation and bring about peace in the region.
Peace between the two nuclear armed neighbours is critical for us to focus our attention
and resources on economic development.

Similarly, Peace and stability in Afghanistan are essential for the long-term stability and
prosperity of our region. It is important for the international community to come together
to arrest the impending humanitarian catastrophe unfolding there. Pakistan has
consistently called for de-linking humanitarian assistance from political considerations.
Promoting sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan would require uninterrupted
humanitarian aid, trade facilitation, continuous practical engagement and capacitybuilding programmes in various sectors. Until there are viable banking channels in
Afghanistan, the Afghan economy would not be able to sustain itself.

Pakistan continues to underline the importance of Afghan inclusivity, human rights
including women rights, and re-opening of girls’ schools. Pakistan believes that diplomatic
and political engagement of the international community with Afghanistan is essential for
achieving lasting peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan. It has provided essential
humanitarian aid to Afghanistan, including wheat, medicines and relief goods. Pakistan

240

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
has also facilitated the United Nations and third countries in providing assistance to
Afghanistan.

Pakistan continues to play an active role in Afghanistan-centred forums, such as Troika
Plus, Moscow Format and Regional Countries forum (which was Pakistan’s own initiative)
for the shared objective of regional peace and security. Since August 2021, Pakistan has
played an active part in addressing economic and humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan.
It initiated an important regional forum at Foreign Ministers’ level to forge regional
consensus for addressing the situation in Afghanistan. Pakistan hosted 17th Extraordinary
Session of OIC-CFM and 48th Session of OIC-CFM in Islamabad on 19 December 2021 and
21 March 2022 respectively to explore avenues for humanitarian support to the people of
Afghanistan.

Emergence of new alliances and closed bloc structures in Asia-Pacific pose serious risks to
regional and global security and undermine the stability of the world order. Pakistan
supports building of an equitable, open and inclusive security system in the Asia-Pacific
region which promotes peace, stability and prosperity.

Pakistan categorically rejects India’s self-assumed role as a ‘net security provider’ in the
Indian Ocean Region. Pakistan believes that a recently-formulated geopolitical construct
will only incite divisions and confrontations, exacerbate arms race and lead to instability
in the region and beyond. In addition, the militarization of Indian Ocean Region and
acquisition of new defence technologies are adding to the risks faced by the region.

The Russia-Ukraine Conflict
Pakistan is deeply concerned at the onset of military conflict between Russia and Ukraine
which reflects the failure of diplomacy. The developing countries are the worst affected
because of this conflict with rising oil and food prices in the international market. Pakistan
remains committed to the universal and consistent application of the purposes and
principles of the UN Charter, sovereign equality of states, the right of self-determination
of peoples, non-use or threat of use of force against territorial integrity or political
independence of States, and peaceful settlement of disputes to ensure durable peace.

241

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Pakistan believes that a diplomatic solution in accordance with relevant multilateral
agreements, international law, and the provisions of the UN Charter is critical in the
Ukrainian context. There is a need for immediate cessation of hostilities, establishment
and maintenance of humanitarian corridors, provision of humanitarian assistance,
sustained dialogue and continuous efforts for a diplomatic solution.

Pakistan has been in regular contact with the leadership of Ukraine and Russia and other
partner countries in urging continued dialogue and diplomacy for settlement of the
conflict. It believes that ARF has a role to play in bringing an end to this conflict through
diplomatic means.

Counterterrorism
For the last two decades, Pakistan has fought valiantly against the scourge of terrorism
and violent extremism. It has made enormous sacrifices in countering terrorism, both in
human and economic terms, with over 83,000 lives lost and US$126 billion cost to our
economy. Pakistan has thus partnered with countries in Asia Pacific and beyond to fight
against the forces of terror.

Pakistan has been a victim of terrorism planned, supported and sponsored from across
our borders. With sheer resolve and determination of our people, we have managed to
turn the situation around. This was made possible due to concerted efforts and sacrifices
of our security forces and an all-of-society response.

We believe that a sustainable effort to end the menace of terrorism entails a
comprehensive approach, that necessitates special attention to eliminate the root causes
and drivers of radicalization leading to extremism and violent conduct.

Pakistan strongly believes that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
race, religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. The rise of populist and supremacist
ideologies and fascist forces has emerged as a new threat to international peace and
internal harmony within societies. Pakistan is also deeply concerned about the rising
incidents of xenophobia and islamophobia and is partnering with likeminded countries to
counter this threat.

242

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Islamophobia
The growing global problem of religious intolerance, discrimination and violence has been
a cause of great concern to our region as well. While people of all faiths and religions have
been victims of heinous acts of this plague, Muslims and Islam particularly borne the
brunt, especially after 9/11.

Islamophobia has emerged as a new form of racism characterized by Xenophobia,
negative profiling and stereotyping of Muslims across the world. Today, the sounds of
“clash of civilizations” still reverberate.

Frequently, anti-Muslim acts are either an outcome of securitization of policies or in some
cases due to incendiary rhetoric deployed by public office holders for electoral gains.
Sections of mainstream and social media have willingly or unwittingly become amplifiers
of prejudice, extremist ideologies, disinformation and hatred. Deliberate defamation of
religious as well as revered religious personalities and symbols under garb of free speech
and press freedom is condemnable.

The condemnable actions of wilful denigration of our Holy Prophet (PBUH) and
desecration of Holy Quran in various parts of the world have hurt religious sentiments of
millions of Muslims, and promote hatred and unfounded hostility, resulting in real-time
discrimination, xenophobia and violence. Pakistan believes that therefore in our
enlightened interest to demonstrate mutual respect for and understanding of all religions,
faiths and cultures.

Nuclear Non-proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
As a responsible nuclear state, Pakistan subscribes to the mutually reinforcing objectives
of ensuring equal and undiminished security for all and preventing proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. It has put into place a robust
legislative, administrative and enforcement mechanism to regulate the transfer of
sensitive goods and technologies while ensuring their 360-degree safety and security.

The following measures have been undertaken by Pakistan in this context:

243

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
●

Enacted Exports Control Act 2004 - to guarantee the controls over export, reexport, trans-shipment and transit of goods, technologies, material and
equipment related to nuclear and biological weapons and missiles, prohibiting the
diversion of controlled goods and technologies etc. with stringent penal provision
to counter the violations.

●

Strategic Export Control Division (SECDIV), set up in 2007, leads inter-agency
consultation to take immediate effect to the decisions taken by the UNSC, and the
rules under the Export Control (Licensing and Enforcement) notified in 2009.
These rules set out complete procedures for licensing, enforcement,
investigation, prosecution and implementation of the Act.

●

In August 2018, Pakistan established Inter-Agency Committee for Coordination,
Review and Monitoring Committee (CRM Committee) to effectively implement,
supervise and monitor the enforcement of UNSC resolutions/decisions on
countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

●

Pakistan has also declared adherence to NSG Guidelines and shown keen interest
in joining the four export control regimes i.e., NSG, MTCR, AG and Wassenaar
Arrangement.

●

Pakistan has joined Nuclear Security Contact Group (NSCG) to contribute to
advancing implementation of nuclear security commitments and building a more
strengthened, sustainable

and

comprehensive

global

nuclear

security

architecture.
●

As a participant of Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) since
2007, Pakistan has been proactively participating in its various activities.

●

Nuclear security regime of Pakistan includes not only technological systems, but
the human resources needed to manage, operate, administer and maintain
equipment.

●

Pakistan Centre of Excellence for Nuclear Security (PCENS) has been established
for human resource development and technical support for effective nuclear
security. PCENS imparts trainings at the regional and global levels under IAEA
aegis.

●

Pakistan is also party to the international conventions and treaties on nuclear
safety and security such as Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS), Convention on
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency,
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, Convention on the

244

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and its Amendment and IAEA
code of conduct on the safety and security of radioactive sources.
●

Pakistan actively participates in the meeting of the UNSC 1540 Committee and
annually submits its reports. Pakistan has submitted 6 reports to the Committee
so far, regularly including one comprehensive matrix. Moreover, In-line with the
provisions of UNSCRs 1540 (2004), 1810 (2008), and 2325 (2016), Pakistan also
offers technical assistance to several countries to help them in implementing the
provisions of the UNSCR 1540 (2004).

●

Pakistan is committed to its obligation under UNSCR 1540 (2004), with a view to
strengthening the global framework to prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
biological and radiological material to the non-state actors, however at the same
time maintains that there is a dire need to strike a proper balance between nonproliferation related obligations of the States and their inherent right to have
access to dual-use material and technologies imperative for their socio-economic
development.

●

Pakistan also calls for fair and equitable access to new and emerging technologies
for the developing countries and contends that if undue restrictions on access to
the new and emerging technologies is not removed, developing countries are
likely to remain even further behind.

●

Being fully aware of unregulated military applications of new and emerging
technologies such cyber and Artificial Intelligences (AI) and their impact on global
peace and security, Pakistan calls for a treaty-based mechanism to ensure the
responsible uses of new and emerging technologies in military domain.

Chemical Weapons Convention:
●

Pakistan established the National Authority on Chemical Weapons Convention
(NA CWC), under CWC Implementation Ordinance-2000 which regulates export
and import of chemical weapons related materials and equipment. It oversees
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, ensures chemical safety
and security and conducts regular national and international trainings and
awareness/outreach programmes. It also coordinates OPCW inspections in
Pakistan. Till date, OPCW has conducted 25 inspections in Pakistan.

●

Pakistan continuously updates its regulatory framework and is currently in the
process of updating CWC Implementation Rules (2010) to further broaden the

245

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
scope of safety and security procedures and guidelines in procurement,
production, storage, transfer, usage, import and export of chemicals.
Biological Weapons Convention:
●

Since ratification of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) in
1974, Pakistan has instituted a comprehensive legislative, regulatory and
administrative framework to regulate life sciences in Pakistan and to strengthen
export control systems on biological agents and toxins. Additionally, Pakistan has
strengthened the national export control system on biological agents and toxins
and brought it in conformity with the Australia Group.

●

Pakistan regularly submits Confidence Building Measures (CBMs) under BWC as
a useful tool for increasing transparency and building trust among States Parties
in implementation of the Convention.

II.

Pakistan’s Role in the UN Peacekeeping Missions
Peacekeeping is a key tool at the disposal of the United Nations and the Security Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security. Much of the United Nation’s
success in the domain of peace and security is owed to peacekeeping. UN has undertaken
71 peacekeeping operations since 1948. This includes the United Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP), one of the first UN peacekeeping
missions, that continues to monitor ceasefire along the Line of Control in Jammu and
Kashmir.

Peacekeeping has progressively evolved and adapted itself over time to correspond to the
changing nature of conflict. Traditional peacekeeping, which continues in several
missions, comprises mostly of truce supervision and separation of warring sides in interstate conflicts. Since the end of the Cold War, UN Peacekeeping mission have been
increasingly deployed to handle intra-state or internal conflicts and civil wars. These
missions have multidimensional mandates designed to address the political, security,
humanitarian and development dimensions of complex crises, and often to ensure the
implementation of comprehensive peace agreements.

246

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
1. Pakistan’s role in peacekeeping
Pakistan has a longstanding commitment to UN peacekeeping, as a leading troop
contributor, and has significant stake in its success. Our participation in UN
peacekeeping, spanning over five decades, is the most tangible manifestation of
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security, Pakistan’s
role in peacekeeping is underpinned by national consensus and is an integral part
of our foreign policy.

Pakistani peacekeepers have earned respect and repute for their professionalism
and devotion to duty. Pakistan is proud of its role in some of the notable
successes of peacekeeping – Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Liberia. 172 Pakistani
peacekeepers have made the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of world peace.

Currently, Pakistan is ranked fifth, contributing 4344 personnel (as of May 2023)
deployed in 09 ongoing missions, Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), South Sudan (UNMISS), United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Western Sahara (MINURSO), United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP), United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS), United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei is a United Nations
peacekeeping force in Abyei, and United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS)

Pakistan has gained valuable experience in handling diverse and difficult conflict
and post-conflict situations. Our personnel have supported implementation of
peace agreements, deterred spoilers through robust peacekeeping, assisted host
states with rule of law, institution building, disarmament and demobilization of
rebels, and security sector reform, protected civilians, facilitated humanitarian
assistance, provided social services, built infrastructure, and carried our quick
impact projects. We have seen first-hand the inter-linkages between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and the importance of credible peace
processes in order for peacekeeping to deliver.

247

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Pakistan’s contribution to peacekeeping on ground has been complemented by
our sustained engagement at the policy level in the UN. Pakistan has worked with
other member states and the UN Secretariat to promote shared objectives and
reach common ground as we continue to evolve peacekeeping policy and
practice and strengthen the peacekeeping architecture in face of the changing
nature of conflict, new requirements and merging trends.

Pakistan has also been at the forefront of norm setting in peacekeeping. We
engage constructively in the premier policy making body of the UN in the field of
peacekeeping, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34),
Resolution 2086 on Multidimensional Peacekeeping, adopted under Pakistan’s
Presidency of the Security Council in January 2013, is considered a landmark.

Pakistan is also host to one of the UN’s first peacekeeping missions, UNMOGIP,
which continues to monitor the ceasefire along the Line of Control in Jammu and
Kashmir, a task, which we greatly value as a contribution to peace and security in
our fraught region.

2. Pakistani Women in Peacekeeping
Our women have also been outstanding in the field. Shahzadi Gulfam of Pakistan
Police was the first ever recipient of International Female Police Peacekeeping
Award in 2011. Pakistan Army is in the process of progressive enhancement of
women participation in UN assignments. Currently 85 female officers are serving
in various peacekeeping missions
.
III.

Transnational Organized Crime
Transnational organized crimes pose serious challenge to the international community.
They undermine rule of law, threaten peace and security, violate human rights and
impede sustainable development in varying degrees in different countries across the
globe. The transnational organized crimes can be broadly categorized into drug trafficking,
smuggling of migrants, human trafficking, money-laundering, trafficking in firearms,
counterfeit goods, wildlife and cultural property, and cybercrime.

248

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Pakistan is fully committed to combating transnational organized crimes in all their forms
and manifestations. We are cognizant of the fact that peace and stability, and rule of law
are a pre-requisite for social and economic development at the domestic, regional and
international levels. With this in mind, Pakistan has actively contributed to global efforts
as well as policy discussions on transnational organized crimes at the United Nations and
other multilateral forums.

1. Drug Trafficking:
Despite the fact that Pakistan itself is a poppy Free State since 2001, still it is a
major victim and transit country of illicit drugs produced in the region. Strict drug
law enforcement has resulted into domestic drug proliferation which has further
added to the challenges.

Pakistan has a strong political resolve and policy of zero tolerance against any
manifestation of Drug Trafficking. A dedicated act of Parliament ‘Control of
Narcotics Substances Act 1997’ lays down the basic legal framework of Pakistan
Counter Narcotics (CN) efforts. Anti-Narcotics Force (ANF), Pakistan works as the
premier drug law enforcement agency. Pakistan formulated a National AntiNarcotics policy 2019 in order to effectively address the domestic drugs abuse.
Main pillars of this Strategy include Drug Abuse Prevention, Treatment and
Rehabilitation, Community Participation in Drug Demand Reduction, Mass
Awareness Campaigns.

Pakistan is a signatory of United Nations and SAARC conventions of Drug Control.
We have signed MOUs on drugs and psychotropic substances with 33 countries
and Extradition treaties with 29 countries. Pakistan has also taken measures to
promote judicial cooperation and extending Mutual Legal assistance to
requesting countries.

Pakistan believes that the World Drug Problem needs to be addressed in a
multilateral setting through effective and increased cooperation. It demands a
multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing, balanced and comprehensive approach to
supply and demand reduction strategies. The overarching goal should be to

249

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
promote “a society free of drug abuse” based on the principle of ‘common and
shared responsibility’

2. Smuggling of migrants and Trafficking in Persons:
Smuggling of Migrants and Trafficking in persons (TIP) are horrendous forms of
transnational organized crimes. They adversely affect many countries around the
world in varying degrees by undermining rule of law, promoting corruption and
violating human rights. The massive scale of these crimes and the resultant multifaceted challenges they pose to the global community can be gauged by the fact
that according to UNODC’s Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2022, more
than 250,000 victims and 300,000 (suspected) offenders were detected
worldwide between 2003 and 2021.

Being a country of origin, transit and destination, Pakistan has taken a number of
policy, legislative and administrative steps to check irregular migration and TIP.
Pakistan is a party to United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime (UNTOC) and also acceded to Trafficking in Persons (TIP) protocol of the
convention in November, 2022. Pakistan is also considering accession to
Smuggling of Migrants (SOM) Protocol of the UNTOC Convention. Domestically,
In May 2018, Pakistan passed two separate legislations on smuggling of migrants
and trafficking in persons (i.e. the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Ordinance,
2018 and the Prevention of Smuggling of Migrants Act, 2018).

With a view to assisting and protecting victims of human trafficking, the Federal
and Provincial Governments in Pakistan allocated more than 10 billion rupees in
2022. Pakistan’s Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), the lead national agency for
controlling illegal migration and TIP, investigated 1501 cases on sex trafficking,
forced labour and unspecified exploitation and prosecuted 1104 cases in 2022.
The specialized unit of TIP established in FIA in 2022 coordinates between Federal
and Provincial stakeholders for anti-trafficking efforts. National coordination
Committee on Trafficking in persons has been constituted in February 2022,
comprising of all Stakeholders. Provincial and District, Anti Human Trafficking and
Anti Bonded Labour Monitoring Committees were also constituted during 2022
and are functional now.

250

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

On numerous occasions, the Government of Pakistan has launched nation-wide
awareness campaigns to educate people about harms and dangers associated
with irregular migration & TIP. The relevant Government departments have
evolved elaborate mechanisms to encourage and ensure that migrant workers do
not fall prey to human smugglers and traffickers. Cognizant of the transnational
nature of the problem, FIA regularly collaborate with its counter-parts in different
countries, especially along the most frequented routes of human smuggling and
trafficking.

To check forced labour/child labour exploitation, the Provincial Governments
have passed legislation prohibiting employment of children, in general, and at
brick kilns in particular. Thousands of brick kilns and factories have been
prosecuted for non-implementation of relevant labour laws.

3. Illicit Financial Flows/Money Laundering:
Illicit financial flows (IFFs) caused by tax evasion, corruption and transnational
organized crimes have been recognized as a key challenge for the international
community in mobilizing resources for the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). IFFs affect developing countries disproportionally
due to the lack of governance structures and expertise required to detect and
counter them. As per estimates, seven trillion Dollars are parked in the financial
“haven” countries.

Pakistan is among strident voices on international level to strengthen
International Framework against Illicit Financial Flows. Pakistan has called for
multiple steps under United Nations auspices; Initiate negotiations on new
international tax cooperation and anti-money laundering legal instruments, like
UNCAC, adopt common principles that will apply to all financial transactions and
establish a UN Coordination, Adjudication and Mediation Mechanism on Illicit
Financial Flows. Pakistan is an active member of Asia Pacific Group (APG) on
Money Laundering. We’ve also been consistent in the implementation of the
(40+9) recommendations of Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on Money
Laundering and Terror Financing.

251

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Pakistan has introduced strict anti-money laundering Efforts in the past decade
to curb this Menace. The Anti-Money Laundering Act was passed in 2010. The
financial Monitoring Unit (FMU) created under this act works with several Law
enforcement agencies that are responsible for enforcing financial crime laws,
including the National Accountability Bureau, the Anti-Narcotics Force, the
Directorate of Customs Intelligence and Investigations (CII) and the Federal
Investigation Agency (FIA). FIA operates a dedicated Wing i.e. Economic Crimes
Wing (ECW) for curbing Money Laundering.

4. Cyber Crime and Cyber Security:
The trend of growing use of ICTs for malicious purposes/Cyber Crime undermines
international security and stability, place strains on economic growth and
sustainable development, and hinders the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

Although some regional Conventions are in place on Cyber Crime, No Universal
Convention yet exists. Pakistan welcomed the formulation of United Nations Adhoc Committee to formulate a comprehensive International Convention on use
of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) for criminal purposes
established in 2020, and is positively contributing towards the formulation of an
International Convention. We have also been actively engaged in the
negotiations in the Open-ended Working Group on developments in the field of
information and telecommunications in the context of international security
(OEWG) under the United Nations Framework which collaborates on the issue of
Cyber Security.

Pakistan introduced National Cyber Security Policy in 2021 which provides a
comprehensive direction for protecting cyber infrastructure, emerging global
cyber trends, technological advancements and cyber security governance
framework at large. The Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act (PECA) was
formulated in 2016 which deals with unauthorized data access (hacking), Denial
of Service (DoS) assault (DOS Attack), Electronic forgery and electronic fraud,

252

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Cyber terrorism. Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) operates a dedicated wing to
counter Cyber Crimes.

IV.

Role of ARF

Future of ARF and National contributions to enhancing the ARF and regional security

Pakistan is a consistent proponent of multilateralism and an active participant in the UN
and other global and regional organizations and groupings. It considers ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) as an important platform for peace and security in Asia-Pacific. Pakistan thus
strives to contribute constructively to its agenda-setting, policy formulation, and
normative development. It is a leading voice on issues of sustainable and equitable
development, climate change, debt relief, illicit financial flows, maritime security and
peacekeeping. Pakistan has always maintained that the international community needs
to coordinate efforts in averting risks to international peace. However, it is concerned that
multilateral mechanisms and groupings are at times in competition with each other due
to certain powers that wish to impose their agenda, ignoring the spirit of multilateralism
and cooperation.

The ARF faces unprecedented challenges today in the face of myriad conflicts and tensions
across the globe, including Ukraine-Russia conflict, growing US-China rivalry, lingering
dispute of Jammu and Kashmir, Palestine, economic and humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan and situation in Myanmar. On all these issues, Pakistan’s position has been
consistent and in accordance with the purposes and principles of the UN charter. Its
contributions to international peacekeeping, global campaign against transnational
organized crime, terrorism and extremism, its support for the right of self-determination
of Kashmiris and for peace in Afghanistan and South Asia are inspired by these ideas.

We believe that all disputes must be settled peacefully through dialogue and within the
confines of international legal norms. Conflict and war are not in the interest of any
country especially the developing countries which face greatest difficulties because of the
instability in markets that arises because of the conflict. The ARF can contribute more
meaningfully to peace and security in the Indo-Pacific if it undertakes to scale down

253

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
specific tensions or disputes in the region and attempts to bring the stakeholders to the
conflict closer.

254

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

THE PHILIPPINES
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment

The Indo-Pacific has increasingly become an arena for the geopolitical struggle between
and among major powers, and ASEAN is in an inevitable position to play a central role in
balancing the interests of big and small states. Great power rivalries create a complex
web of relationships geared toward outcompeting the gains of the other. The continued
implementation of grand policies of major powers, be it geopolitical or economic, has
created diverging strategies, policies, and views that compel smaller states to navigate
their interests and pragmatically engage the major powers while expanding their
relations with other partners.

Corollary to these realities are other issues that exacerbate the security uncertainties in
the region, which limit the probability of cooperative actions between and among states.
These include longstanding interstate territorial and maritime disputes, the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, and the persistence of domestic political challenges with
regional repercussions. One such domestic challenge is the political tensions in Myanmar
brought about by the 2021 coup d’état, which elicited strong reactions from the
international community.

Two years since the military authorities took over Myanmar, the political and
humanitarian situation in the country remains a serious concern. The lack of concrete
positive developments, such as constructive dialogue among all parties and cessation of
violence under ASEAN's Five Point Consensus, continues to be the stumbling block for
ASEAN.

Apart from this, the rapid increase of tensions from the territorial and maritime disputes
in the South China Sea unremittingly challenges regional peace and stability. The
intensified implementation of grey-zone tactics through the swarming of Chinese
maritime militia vessels and the militarization of strategic waters, coupled with the
elusiveness of a finalized Code of Conduct, reinforce distrust in the region. These
destabilizing actions blatantly violate international rule of law, particularly the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Laws of the Sea (UNCLOS), and undermine the

255

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
commitments to the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea
(DOC).

Another development is the brewing tension in the cross-strait relations that, if left
unresolved, will embroil the region into full-blown armed conflict. In addition, the newly
established AUKUS has received polarizing opinions among state actors in the region
amid concerns that it could further escalate military competition, trigger an outright arms
race, and aggravate the proliferation, testing, and existence of nuclear weapons.

At the same time, the Indo-Pacific region continues to face challenges emanating from
non-traditional security issues such as terrorism, transnational crimes, natural disasters,
humanitarian crises, and cybercrimes. These post-Cold War security threats require
practical interstate cooperation, transparent intraregional policy coordination, and the
execution of timely, efficient, enduring, and people-centred solutions.

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to be one of the most critical nontraditional global security issues, exposing the vulnerabilities of states, particularly in the
health sector. Its effects drastically impacted economies by closing borders, which
plummeted international and intra-regional manufacturing and trade relations. Adopting
the new normal, countries are regaining the economic losses from the pandemic through
the successful and effective inoculation of the COVID-19 vaccines that enabled the
reopening of borders, societies, and international trade and economy. Nevertheless, the
unequal distribution of vaccines and the disparities in research and development sectors
among developed and developing countries prove that the poorest nations are the most
vulnerable during pandemics.

With the rapidly evolving landscape in the international arena, maintaining global peace
and stability is a daunting endeavour. Therefore, it should be imperative for each state,
external partners, and stakeholders in the region to make constructive dialogue and
cooperation an integral part of their strategies to manage and address both traditional
and non-traditional security issues effectively. Transparent communication among states
must come hand in hand with genuine intent and action on the ground. This calls for all
states to explore new forms of confidence-building measures to strengthen cooperation
in addressing critical contemporary international issues today:

256

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

1. Maritime Security Challenges
As a maritime and archipelagic country, the Philippines underscores the importance
of balancing the exploitation of marine resources against protecting coastal and
marine ecosystems to allow continued and sustained benefits for future
generations.

Threats to free, open, and sustainable seas are multidimensional and transboundary. These include piracy and armed robbery at sea; maritime kidnapping and
terrorism; trafficking in and smuggling of weapons, drugs, and persons; illegal,
unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing, including poaching; intentional
destruction of the marine environment; climate change; and engaging in
manoeuvres that increase the risk of collisions.

Disputes over maritime rights and entitlements also threaten maritime security.
They hamper the capacity of coastal states to exploit their marine resources and
address crimes at sea. Disregarding international law and undertaking unilateral
actions, including militarizing offshore outposts and using military and paramilitary
assets and technologies to assert sovereignty claims, while short of war are still
coercive, increase tensions, and undermine regional stability.

To address maritime security threats, strengthening states' maritime law
enforcement capabilities and capacities should be prioritized. However, since these
security threats are trans-boundary in nature, sustained constructive regional
dialogues are needed. These efforts must be complemented with meaningful
cooperation grounded in international law, particularly the 1982 UN Convention on
the Law of the Sea, as well as shared values and common maritime interests.

2. Situation in the Korean Peninsula
Since becoming a democracy in 1987, the March 2022 presidential election of the
Republic of Korea (ROK) was its tightest race to date. This crucial election was won
by Yoon Suk-yeol of the People Power Party (PPP) with 48.56 % of the votes, besting
the ruling Democratic Party candidate Lee Jae-myung with 47.83 %.

257

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

As a presidential candidate, President Yoon promised to adopt a more aggressive
strategy towards the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) by emphasizing
the abolition of DPRK's nuclear program as a prerequisite for any engagement with
them. Yoon Suk-yeol's assumption in May 2022 ushered in significant foreign policy
changes for the ROK and the Korean Peninsula. In his inaugural speech in May 2022,
President Yoon highlighted that DPRK's denuclearization would greatly contribute to
lasting peace and prosperity in the Peninsula. This point was reemphasized in Yoon's
speech during ROK's 77th Liberation Day on 15 August 2022, where he also launched
the "Audacious Initiative"—a plan to significantly improve DPRK's economy and its
people's livelihoods in stages should DPRK halt the development of its nuclear
program and embark on a genuine and substantive process for denuclearization.

Based on news reports, DPRK conducted more than ninety (90) missile launches in
2022, with most of these tests as cruise and ballistic missiles. In September 2022,
the DPRK, through its parliament, the Supreme People's Assembly (PSA), passed a
new law that enshrines its right to use pre-emptive nuclear strikes to protect itself.
This law cements DPRK's nuclear status as "irreversible" and implies rejecting further
denuclearization talks. Aside from these actions, five (5) drones from DPRK crossed
over the Military Demarcation Line toward ROK last 26 December 2022 after being
detected in the skies of Gimpo.

With DPRK's apparent rejection of Yoon's "Audacious Initiative," its more than 90
missile launches in 2022 alone, its new pre-emptive nuclear strike law, a looming
seventh nuclear test, and other provocations, ROK is responding by strengthening
its security response capabilities, and intensifying its security cooperation with the
United States (US) and Japan. US, ROK, and Japanese warships performed a missile
defence exercise in the Sea of Japan last October 2022, days after DPRK sent a
ballistic missile over Japan.

In February 2023, the US and ROK conducted a joint military exercise simulating a
response to a nuclear strike by DPRK. Further military exercises between the two
countries were held for eleven (11) days, starting 13 March 2023, which is the
longest uninterrupted exercise between the two allies, according to ROK media. As

258

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
part of the 70th anniversary of the US-ROK alliance in June 2023, ROK plans to hold
its "largest-ever" live-fire drills involving mobilizing high-tech military equipment
with the US. However, the ROK's strengthening of its security cooperation with the
US and Japan could be perceived as a provocation by DPRK, creating a more
heightened security dilemma in the Peninsula. In an increasingly interconnected and
globalized world, a robust security environment between the ROK and DPRK should
cultivate sustainable peace and verifiable denuclearization.

3. Regional Power Dynamics
The competition among major powers to expand their spheres of influence is
palpable in their attempt to strengthen their relations with other states through
development aid, trade and investment, and health initiatives. However, these
initiatives have been accompanied by asymmetrical military strategies and the use
of economic carrots and sticks, which have caused great alarm in the region.

There are competing visions for regional order and norms that will govern future
regional affairs. Initiatives, such as the Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) and China's
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), underscore the region's strategic and economic
importance. The AUKUS, QUAD, and Five-Eyes are minilateral security arrangements
that may affect the political affairs in the Indo-Pacific region. These new ideas and
concepts for a regional security architecture must be harmonized to complement
and enhance existing mechanisms, ensure mutually beneficial cooperation, and
maintain inclusiveness. Furthermore, Southeast Asian states must delicately
navigate through the complexities of this developing regional political arena and
ensure that balance is kept.

Amidst regional power competition, maintaining ASEAN Centrality is vital to
managing the impact of unilateral actions of major powers and their interactions in
the region. Should major powers desire an active role in shaping global governance
rules, it must be through international and regional organizations such as ASEAN. To
play this role, however, ASEAN must demonstrate collective and coherent action.

Equally important, all states must strive to become responsible stakeholders in the
global community and abide by the international rules-based order. Regional peace

259

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and stability will rest on the commitment and efforts of all states for a stable, open,
and rules-based order.

4. Terrorism
As countries in Southeast Asia begin to recover from the pandemic, the threat of
terrorism in the region remains a significant challenge. In the Philippines, a complex
constellation of IS-aligned factions continues to operate and has shown remarkable
resilience despite the government's relentless counterterrorism efforts. The
situation is more complicated because these factions often work independently,
with varying levels of coordination and communication.

Among the IS-aligned factions, the Dawlah Islamiyah in Lanao, Dawlah IslamiyaMaguindanao, and Dawlah Islamiya-Soccsksargen in South Cotabato, Sarangani, and
General Santos City have been particularly active in recent years. Other groups
include the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) and its IS-aligned elements in Basilan and Sulu,
the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF), and rogue factions of the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). Despite the elusiveness of the designated emir of IS
in Southeast Asia, Fahrudin Hadji Satar alias Abu Zacariah, Dawlah Islamiyah is
expected to continue its terror campaigns in the region.

Terrorist groups in the Philippines and the broader Southeast Asian region have
become adept at using various methods to indoctrinate and recruit new members,
with social networks playing a crucial role in these efforts. These extensive social
networks are essential not only for recruiting new members but also for financing
and mobilizing terrorists.

It is crucial to highlight, however, that these recruitment and financial networks are
not the only factors contributing to the resilience of terrorist groups in the region.
Other variables contributing to this are weak local institutions and law enforcement
mechanisms, porous borders, local grievances, social divisions, and weaponizing
new technology.

While the Philippine government's successful counterterrorism efforts have
weakened violent extremism in Mindanao compared to previous years, according

260

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
to the 2023 Global Terrorism Index, the government cannot afford to be
complacent, given the ability of terrorist groups to utilize technological
advancements. Artificial intelligence, 3D printing, autonomous vehicles, and cyber
defence systems are already being weaponized in other parts of the world and may
soon fall into the wrong hands. The government's counterterrorism strategy must
evolve as quickly as terrorists' adaptation to the changing technological landscape
and intensify cross-border cooperation.

Despite the localized concentration of terror and counterterror operations in
maritime Southeast Asian countries, terrorism remains a transnational threat
because their networking activities cut across national borders. Therefore, the
persistence of terrorism in the Philippines necessitates the government's stronger
collaboration

with

neighbouring

countries,

development

partners,

local

government units, religious leaders, and the community. Communities in terroristprone areas must be empowered to play an active part in recognizing and reporting
potential threats. This can be accomplished through public awareness campaigns,
education and training, and the development of trust between communities and
government agencies.

Additionally, national governments in the region must strengthen security laws and
border controls, increase intelligence-sharing, encourage defection, strengthen the
reintegration program, and improve community capacities.

As the Philippines slowly recovers from the onslaught of the pandemic, it remains
imperative to strengthen social and economic institutions to build inclusive, just,
and resilient communities.

5. Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction
Recent developments, notably the protracted Russia-Ukraine conflict, have
renewed the risk of nuclear weapon use. Nuclear weapons have returned to
prominence in national security strategies, and all nuclear-armed states continue
extensive and expansive programs to modernize their nuclear warheads, delivery
systems, and nuclear weapon production facilities. Further deterioration of the
global security environment, erosion of the arms control architecture, and the

261

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
unwillingness of the parties to engage in meaningful strategic dialogue further
increase the possibility of conflict between nuclear-armed states and those that rely
on extended nuclear deterrence. These trends, combined with the disappointing
outcome of the Tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), have fuelled concerns about the nonproliferation regime's fragility and future. Unsurprisingly, ASEAN has reinvigorated
discussions on the signing of Nuclear Weapon States onto the Protocol to the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ) Treaty.

6. Taiwan Strait Issue
There has been a deterioration of relations between Taiwan and China following the
visit of the former US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi in August 2022. In March and
April 2023, Taiwan's Tsai Ing-wen visited the US House of Representatives. This
brought another swift condemnation from China which conducted military exercises
and declared its troops' readiness to counter any form of "Taiwan independence"
or foreign interference attempts.

The current cross-strait dynamics present continued security challenges for the
ASEAN region. Tensions between Taiwan and China could escalate into a military
conflict, which would have far-reaching consequences for regional peace and
stability. Any escalation of tensions in the Taiwan Strait could have adverse
economic implications for ASEAN countries since Taiwan is a significant regional
economic player and a crucial trading partner for many ASEAN member states.
Strategically, the Taiwan Strait is an important maritime corridor through which
significant global trade passes. Any military conflict would impact maritime security,
including freedom of navigation. Ultimately, ASEAN should maintain its call for all
parties concerned to exercise maximum restraint and refrain from provocative
action.

7. Trafficking in Persons
The increasing use of technology in facilitating people smuggling and trafficking in
persons is an urgent concern. In the Philippines’ experience, nationals are illegally
recruited through spurious job offers online and trafficked by criminal syndicates.
Once recruited purportedly as customer service representatives, they are flown

262

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
abroad on tourist visas and then sent to remote areas to work as online
cryptocurrency scammers. Some victims report that they have a daily investment
quota and were being meted corporal punishment for failing to meet these.

An ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Combating Trafficking in Persons Caused by The
Abuse of Technology was issued during the 42nd ASEAN Summit in May 2023,
providing impetus for closer cooperation to address this emerging issue.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
A. Overview of National Security and Defence Policy
The Philippines' National Security Council is finalizing the draft National Security Policy
(NSP) 2023-2028. The NSP contains the statement of principles that sets the strategic
policy goals and objectives of the Marcos, Jr. administration so that all instruments of
national power will be used to strengthen Philippine national security. The NSP
complements the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2023-2028, which is the
comprehensive roadmap of policies and programs toward attaining the country's
long-term economic vision of becoming a "prosperous, predominantly middle-class
society where no one is poor.".

In line with the President Marcos, Jr. administration's promise of a stronger and better
Philippines, the Philippines' Department of Defence (DND) released its 10-point
agenda in July 2022, covering the following areas:

●

Sovereignty and territorial integrity;

●

Internal security and stability;

●

Disaster resilience and climate change adaptation;

●

Cyber defence;

●

Modernization;

●

Capability and capacity development;

●

Security cooperation and engagements;

●

Reserve Force development;

●

Welfare of soldiers, veterans, and civilian human resource;

●

Legal and legislative agenda; and,

●

Protection of cognitive domain.

263

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

The DND's 10-point agenda underscores the development of the defence sector's
capacity to operate across an entire spectrum of operations and address the
multifaceted nature of national security.

B. Data Contribution to the ARF Arms Register
i. Total defence expenditure on an annual basis
1. Defence expenditure
For the fiscal year 2023, the total new appropriations available for the DND
amounts to PhP204.56 billion. More than one-half (67.7 %) or PhP138.5 billion
is allocated for personnel services; about PhP59.47 billion (29.07%) will go to
maintenance and other operating expenses, while PhP6.592 billion (3.22%)
will be used for capital outlay. The approved defence budget is a 7.22%
decrease from PhP220.48 billion in the previous year. The defence budget
also makes up 3.88 % of the total government budget of PhP5.268 trillion for
2023.
2. Defence expenditure as a %age of gross domestic product (GDP)
The Philippines' 2022 defence expenditure (PhP220.86 billion/USD4.052
billion) was 1 % of its GDP (PhP22.024 trillion/USD404.079 billion).
3. Defence expenditure per capita
In 2022, the Philippine defence expenditure per capita was PhP2,019.69
(USD37.05), an increase from PhP1,775.63 (USD36.05) in the previous year.

ii. Total number of active military personnel in the national armed forces and its
%age in the population
Philippine Army

103,200 (0.09%)

Philippine Navy

24,500 (0.02%)

Philippine Air Force 17,648 (0.016%)

III.

National Contributions to Regional Security

A. Counterterrorism

264

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The Philippines improved its standing in the 2023 Global Terrorism Index1 (GTI). Still,
the impact assessment remains high as it is the second country most affected by
terrorism in the Asia-Pacific region. The report finds that although terrorism deaths
have decreased by 9%, outside of Afghanistan, terrorism deaths have increased by 4%
in the rest of the world. The lethality of attacks has increased by 26 %, and unknown
jihadists have become a leading cause of terrorism deaths. The report also notes that
the Islamic State and its affiliates remain the world's deadliest terrorist group.
The Philippine government's counterterrorism strategy involves a mix of military
operations, law enforcement efforts, and social programs aimed at addressing the root
causes of extremism. The primary focus remains to be on countering the threat posed
by extremist groups such as the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG), Dawlah Islamiyah, the
Bangsamoro Freedom Fighters (BIFF), and foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), who
continue to collaborate with local terrorist groups (LTG) to carry out terror attacks.
The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) conducted a series of military and law
enforcement operations in various parts of the country in February 2023, neutralizing
a total of 123 local terrorists and insurgents and seizing 136 weapons during the
operations.2 The AFP continues to conduct intelligence-driven operations to address
the root of insurgency and violent extremism.
On the social front, the AFP is actively working to improve its understanding of
radicalization and counter extremist views. The AFP is participating in seminars and
symposia on violent extremism and engaging with local communities. The AFP executes
its Prevent and Counter Violent Extremism (PCVE) framework3 through communitybased and proactive programs. These include the four-day Community Support
Program (CSP-PCVE) Operations Course in the Unified Commands to educate
participants on Islam, radicalism, and violent extremism, instilling cultural sensitivity
and diversity awareness, and educating participants on CSP-PCVE.4

1

Institute for Economics & Peace, Global Terrorism Index 2023: Measuring the Impact of Terrorism (Sydney: March 2023),
https://www.visionofhumanity.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/GTI-2023-web-270323.pdf
2 Priam Nepomuceno, “AFP: 123 terrorists neutralized, 136 weapons seized in February,” Philippine News Agency, March 6,
2023, https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1196685
3 Joviland Rita, “Philippines ranks 2nd most affected by terrorism in Asia Pacific – Global Terrorism Index,” GMA News
Online, March 23, 2023, https://www.gmanetwork.com/news/topstories/nation/864798/philippines-ranks-2nd-mostaffected-by-terrorism-in-asia-pacific-global-terrorism-index/story/
4 Philippine Mission to the United Nations, Measures Undertaken by the Philippine Government to Eliminate International
Terrorism (May 2020), https://www.un.org/en/ga/sixth/75/int_terrorism/philippines_e.pdf

265

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The Philippine government is committed to its whole-of-nation approach to address,
mitigate, and eliminate terrorism as a national security threat. The Department of
National Defence (DND) and the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) are leading efforts
to promote a people-centred approach to counterterrorism and encourage interfaith
dialogues. The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), under the supervision of the DND,
continues to strengthen its cooperation among government agencies to combat
terrorism.
The Philippines has been working closely with other countries and international
organizations in the fight against terrorism, particularly through information sharing
and capacity-building. For instance, the United States (US) has donated US$3.3 million
worth of state-of-the-art equipment to the Philippine National Police (PNP) to help
boost its counterterrorism capability.5 The equipment, which includes bomb suits,
digital scanners, and X-ray sources, will enhance the PNP's capabilities in detecting,
preventing, and responding to terrorist threats. The US State Department's Bureau of
Diplomatic Security has provided training and equipment to the Philippine government
since 1986, providing the PNP with over US$100 million in assistance. This 2023, the US
government's Antiterrorism Assistance Program invested more than USD5 million in the
PNP.
The DND is actively involved in addressing terrorism at the international level by sharing
its knowledge and expertise through cooperative activities and initiatives with the
ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting (ADMM)-Plus Experts' Working Group (EWG).
Moreover, it has played a significant role in establishing sub-regional initiatives aimed
at strengthening counterterrorism cooperation in Southeast Asia, such as the Trilateral
Cooperative Arrangement (TCA) among the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia. The
TCA is a crucial collaboration expected to enhance security in the "tri-border" area,
which is vulnerable to extremist movements, kidnapping, and piracy across the three
countries.
On the other hand, the DFA has been collaborating with various government units and
the United Nations to enhance the country's ability to combat terrorism. The DFA
organized significant visits such as the UN-Counterterrorism Executive Directorate Visit
to the Philippines (CTED Visit) and the UN Countering Terrorist Travel (UNCTT) Program
5

Christopher Lloyd Caliwan, “PNP receives $3-M counter-terrorism equipment from the US,” Philippine News Agency,
March 1, 2023, https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1196372

266

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Technical Assessment Visit, which aimed to reassess the country's terrorism and
extremism threats. The DFA maintains its unwavering dedication to combat terrorism
through global partnerships.
The DND and the DFA have been working together in facilitating the major expansion
of the Enhanced Defence Cooperation Alliance (EDCA) under the US-Philippines
alliance. The expansion will give the US access to four additional Philippine military
bases. Under the agreement, US forces can build facilities at the military bases,
preposition equipment, and rotate troops through them. The strategic locations of the
bases are deemed to facilitate counterterrorism operations along with other focus
areas, such as disaster relief and maritime security.6
In the cyberspace domain, public-private partnerships (PPP) are expected to build
capacity to address the risks of cyber terrorism. The Philippines' Cybercrime
Investigation and Coordination Centre (CICC) is collaborating with Binance, the world's
leading blockchain ecosystem and infrastructure provider, to open the National
Cybercrime Hub. The hub, operating under the Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT), aims to reduce the Philippines' cybercrime rate.
Binance will leverage its expertise in blockchain forensics and cybercrime prosecution
to aid the CICC.
B. Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
The Philippines' staunch commitment to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation is
anchored in its constitution. Article II, Section 8 of the 1987 Constitution declares that
"the Philippines, consistent with the national interest, adopts and pursues a policy of
freedom from nuclear weapons in its territory." Regionally, the Philippines commits to
preserving Southeast Asia as a region free from nuclear weapons and all other weapons
of mass destruction, in accordance with the ASEAN Charter and the Treaty on the
Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ). The Plan of Action to
Strengthen the Implementation of the Treaty of the SEANWFZ (2023-2027) identifies
the actionable measures that can be adopted by the state parties to ensure compliance
with the undertaking of the Treaty.

6

Gregory Poling, “The Transformation of the US-Philippines Alliance,” Center for Strategic & International Studies, February
2, 2023, https://www.csis.org/analysis/transformation-us-philippines-alliance

267

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Rejecting the notion that nuclear weapons contribute to international stability and
security, the Philippines was among the first countries to sign and ratify the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW), which entered into force on 22 January
2021. The Philippines further showed its full support to working with the international
community toward the total elimination of nuclear weapons through its active
participation in the first meeting of State Parties of the TPNW held on 21-23 June 2022
in Vienna, Austria.
The Philippines affirms the complementarity between the TPNW, the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT), and the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). The
TPNW provides the legal framework for the implementation of Article 6 of the NPT and
further operationalizes the disarmament measures identified in the 13 practical steps
in the 2000 NPT Review Conference and the 64-point action plan in the 2010 NPT
Review Conference.
After several postponements due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020 NPT Review
Conference took place from 1-26 August 2022 in New York. The NPT Review Conference
convened against the backdrop of heightened tensions, the brandishing of nuclear
threats, and doubts about the credibility of the multilateral systems to secure peace. In
the conference, the Philippines, through its coalitions and partners, endeavoured to
affect change and bridge differences among the nuclear and non-nuclear weapon
states.
On 22-23 March 2023, the Philippines and Australia co-chaired the second ARF
Workshop on Nuclear Risk Reduction in Brisbane, Australia. The workshop sought to
develop a shared understanding of nuclear risks; discuss the different approaches to
risk reduction, including through collaborative work between nuclear weapon states
and non-nuclear weapon states; and consider the path forward to addressing these
risks. A draft ARF Guidance Document on Nuclear Risk Reduction was circulated to the
ARF members for their inputs and comments, and is envisioned to be endorsed by the
ARF Foreign Ministers at their next meeting in July 2023.
The Philippines, on its own, has been hosting the Regional Secretariat of the European
Union Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Risk Mitigation Centres of
Excellence Initiative (CBRN CoE) for Southeast Asia since 2013. The country also actively
strengthens regional cooperation and preparedness, response, and assistance in

268

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
addressing CBRN threats by holding several workshops and table top exercises on issues
such as biological threat reduction; bio-risk management; disease detection and
surveillance; preparedness and response to a biological event; countering illicit
trafficking of CBRN materials; and raising awareness on CBRN risk management.
On the national level, The Philippines implements a unified and whole-of-government
approach to counter the threat of weapons of mass destruction under the CBRN
National Action Plan. The country's diplomatic, security, health, science, and technology
sectors closely coordinate to improve standards, processes, and regulations for threat
reduction, risk management, preparedness, and response. The Armed Forces of the
Philippines, in particular, follows the Joint CBRN Operations Interim Manual (JCBRNO)
and the Medical Prepared Plan in Response to CBRN and High Yield Explosives
Emergencies Standard Operating Procedures.
The Philippines also continues to strengthen its national implementation of the United
Nations Security Council Resolution 1540. The Strategic Trade Management Office
(STMO), the dedicated agency on all matters relating to strategic trade management,
launched the Philippines' e-Licensing Platform in February 2023. The e-Licensing
Platform is envisioned as the one-stop shop for all strategic trade-related services,
including registration and application for authorization to export strategic goods and
technologies.
To raise awareness of the Philippine Strategic Trade Management Act (Republic Act No.
10697) and increase compliance by the industry, the STMO has reached out to more
than 500 companies in the country. One-on-one consultations have also been provided
to address specific concerns about registration and authorization requirements, setting
up an Internal Compliance Programme (ICP), and classifying strategic commodities
based on the Philippine National Strategic Goods List (NSGL). The STMO adopts a
phased implementation approach, with registration already operational since 2019;
exports authorization since 2020; transit or transhipment in 2024; re-export or reassignment to be available in 2025; and related services and import in 2028.
C. Transnational Crime
i. Proliferation of Illicit Drugs

269

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The nexus between drugs and crime continues to challenge the peace and order of
states and threaten human security.7 With the ultimate goal of preventing the
spread of illicit drugs, the Philippines implements its Philippine Anti-Illegal Drug
Strategy (PADS), serving as the government's blueprint to harmonize the efforts of
national and local government agencies against illegal drugs while upholding the
rule of law.
Concomitantly, the Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB)—the primary agency tasked to
oversee the Philippine illegal drugs situation—has been an active institution in
implementing various development-based policies, programs, and services by
engaging the youth, family, employment, educators, health professionals, and other
sectors through scientific and evidenced-based education, knowledge and
information-sharing on the effects and consequences of illegal drugs to the lives of
people and society.8
The Philippines views the spread of illicit drugs as a health problem. In this light, the
Philippines continues to implement the Community-Based Drug Rehabilitation
Programs (CBDRP), which recognize the vital role of local communities in creating a
conducive environment for the treatment and rehabilitation of people who use
drugs (PWUDs)9. This effort runs in congruence with the government's advocacy of
creating drug-resistant and self-policing communities through the implementation
of the Barangay Drug Clearing Program (BDCP) aimed at reducing drug-affectation
by restricting the supply, demand, and harm mechanism brought by illegal drugs.
This people-centred initiative is made possible by establishing the Integrated Drug
Monitoring and Reporting Information System (IDMRIS) that monitors the
implementation of anti-drug programs by national agencies, local government
units, and partner groups and organizations. The government's Integrated Drug
Abuse Data and Information Network (IDADIN) is an online data pooling and
collection system used by Treatment and Rehabilitation Facilities nationwide for the
treatment, rehabilitation, and aftercare of drug dependents. Moreover, the

7

Susanne MacGregor, Editorial: “The Drugs-Crime Nexus, Drugs: Education, Prevention, and Policy”, Taylor & Francis Group,
2000.
8

Dangerous Drugs Board,” Philippine National and Regional Initiatives, Efforts and Achievements in Combating the Spread
of Illicit Drugs January 2022 - March 2023”, 18 April 2023.
9 Ibid.

270

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
enactment of Republic Act No. 1152 on 29 January 2021 strengthens the
government's judicial position in prosecuting drug-related cases by intensifying the
investigation of unscrupulous financial transactions of drug-related activities.
At the regional level, the Philippines supports ASEAN initiatives such as the ASEAN
Drug Monitoring Network (ADMN) and the ASEAN Work Plan on Securing
Communities Against Illicit Drugs 2016-2025. In the ASEAN Senior Officials on Drug
Matters, the Philippines continues to commit itself to the policies and best practices
on institutionalizing treatment and rehabilitation initiatives that it benchmarked as
the Chair of the Treatment and Rehabilitation Working Group. The country has also
collaborated with The Colombo Plan on implementing the Universal Prevention
Curriculum (UPC) with the Department of Education and the ASEAN Training Centre
for Preventive Drug Education in meeting the demands for evidence-based practices
in substance abuse prevention.
At the global level, the Philippines adheres to the anti-drug policies enshrined in
various international protocols, laws, and standards, such as the United Nations
(UN) General Assembly 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation toward an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter
the World Drug Problem. The country also supports the UN Office on Drugs and
Crime's policy of establishing an Early Warning System (EWS) within states. The
Philippines believes that establishing EWS will bolster its national capacity to
address the rapidly evolving flow of the synthetic drug market in the region.
ii. Trafficking in Persons
The Philippines retained its Tier 1 status in the 2022 State Department Report on
Trafficking in Persons, denoting that the country has fully met the minimum
standards for the elimination of trafficking in persons under the US Trafficking
Victims Protection Act of 2000 by demonstrating serious and sustained efforts to
address the problem during the covered period. The report acknowledged the
government's capacity in anti-trafficking despite the COVID-19 pandemic.
The country recognizes the changing trends observed in cases of trafficking in
persons, especially with the rise of online markets. Efforts to address these through
the passing of laws and strengthening cooperation amongst government agencies
and partners in the region have been taken to combat the issue.
271

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
In response to growing exploitation on the internet and to maximize technology in
prosecuting this crime, Republic Act No. 11862, or the "Expanded Anti-Trafficking
in Persons Act of 2022," was passed on 23 June 2022. This act allows for internet
intermediaries, including social media platforms and financial and e-commerce
industries, to be held accountable for knowingly or by gross negligence allowing
their infrastructure to be used for human trafficking purposes. The measure would
also enable law enforcers to pursue investigations of violations involving the use
of the internet and other digital platforms upon a written order from the court. It
provides measures for dealing with crime in the context of the pandemic, disasters,
and other humanitarian crises. Finally, it seeks to provide the rescue and
subsequent rehabilitation of trafficking victims.
On 14 June 2022, a memorandum of agreement (MOA) between the Inter-Agency
Council Against Trafficking (IACAT) and the Anti-Money Laundering Council (AMLC)
was signed to strengthen their cooperation and coordination in the investigation
and prosecution of money laundering and trafficking in persons. Through the
strengthened partnership of these two bodies, they can exchange information vital
to the investigation and prosecution of these crimes and carry out joint training to
ensure the interoperability of their respective personnel.
The Philippines hosted the 8th Manila International Dialogue on Human Trafficking:
"Strengthening Cooperation in South East Asia" last 13 December 2022. ASEAN
countries explored how to build complementing and formal mechanisms to
strengthen international cooperation in combating trafficking in persons.
The Philippines continues to demonstrate serious and sustained efforts in the
prosecution of traffickers and the rescue of victims. The Bureau of Immigration
reported that in 2022, 472 Filipinos who deferred from departure were "found to
be victims of human trafficking or illegal recruitment."
The Philippine Internet Crimes Against Children Centre (PICACC), in 2021 alone, has
rescued 154 victims and arrested 48 suspects, and more than 500 since 2019. The
PICACC is a result of the collaboration between the National Bureau of
Investigation, the Philippine National Police, the Australian Federal Police, the UK
National Crime Agency, the National Policy of the Netherlands, and the

272

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
International Justice Mission to strengthen global law enforcement collaboration
in combating the online sexual exploitation of children.
Comprehensive services to trafficked victims for their physical and psychological
recovery and reintegration into society are also paramount. The Department of
Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) has a Recovery and Reintegration
Program for Trafficked Persons, which provides temporary shelter, counselling,
and legal assistance to trafficking victims, as well as skills training and job
placement services.
In ASEAN, the Philippines in its capacity as lead shepherd for cooperation against
trafficking in persons under ASEAN Senior Officials’ Meeting on Transnational
Crime (SOMTC) is spearheading the development of a Multi-Sectoral Work Plan
Against Trafficking in Persons 2023-2028, the successor plan to the Bohol TIP Work
Plan 2017-2020. The Philippines also led the adoption of Terms of Reference of
National Representatives for the Implementation of the ASEAN Convention against
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (ACTIP) in September 2022.
The national representatives will be tasked to coordinate on the implementation
of the ACTIP at the national level.
D. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
Situated in the Western Pacific typhoon belt, the Philippines is constantly exposed to
various natural disasters, including volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and tropical storms.
The Philippines has lost over US$10 billion within the last ten years due to climate-related
hazards. According to the United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(UN-OCHA), an average of 22 tropical cyclones enter the Philippine Area of Responsibility
every year. In 2022, the country was beset by 18 tropical storms, 5 of which made landfall.
The most significant typhoons were Tropical Storms Agaton, Karding, and Paeng.
The Philippines continues to be guided by the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Plan (NDRRMP) 2011-2028. It serves as the compass for the country to
execute proactive policies and initiatives to tackle the impact of climate change, as well
as natural and human-induced hazards. The NDRRMP is anchored on various global,
regional, and national development and policy frameworks, including the Paris
Agreement, UN Sustainable Development Goals, ASEAN Agreement on Disaster

273

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Management and Emergency Response, and the Philippine National Climate Change
Action Plan.
The Philippines also partners with different ARF members to build its capacity and
coordinate activities for timely emergency response. In 2022, the Philippines and
Australia conducted HADR exercises in Manila as part of the latter's flagship regional
maritime engagement activity, Indo-Pacific Endeavour 2022. On 9 February 2023, the
Philippines and Japan signed the Terms of Reference (TOR) concerning Humanitarian Aid
and Disaster Relief activities, which aims to simplify procedures on visitations by the
Japan Self-Defence Forces to the Philippines during natural disasters. The Philippines-US
Balikatan military exercises are also an example of intra-ARF partnerships that include
capacity-building in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations.
The Philippines is one of the most biologically diverse countries in the world but also one
of the most vulnerable to climate-related hazards. As such, the Philippines is committed
to the fight against climate change by supporting initiatives and mechanisms that address
climate-related issues. The Philippines has been very active in its commitment to the Paris
Agreement and other international cooperation mechanisms. The country has identified
its goal of a 75% greenhouse gas emission (GHG) reduction by 2030 in its Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement.
Chapter 15 of the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028, entitled "Accelerate Climate
Action and Strengthen Disaster Resilience," provides a comprehensive plan of action
involving the government, the general public, and respective stakeholders. In line with
this, the Climate Change Commission (CCC) has committed to updating and strengthening
programs and mechanisms that will enable the Philippines to reach its goal of mitigating
climate-related hazards. While Chapter 15 provided a targeted framework for the
Philippines' plan of action towards climate-related threats, other climate change-related
action points were also iterated in other chapters of the PDP, further reflecting the
holistic nature of the issue.
In November 2022, the Philippines and other ASEAN Member states joined the 27 th
Session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC COP-27), held in Egypt, to reaffirm their commitment to the
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement. The Philippines also echoes the Joint Statement of
ASEAN in its call for collective action toward mitigating and addressing the climate crisis.

274

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The country supports the ASEAN State of Climate Change Report and other regional
efforts to address the climate crisis.
Climate change-related natural disasters require a collective regional approach.
International cooperation should be encouraged and intensified to ensure an effective,
comprehensive response to these challenges. Through enhanced capacity-building,
information-sharing and joint activities, the Philippines and ASEAN can achieve more in
their goals toward regional resilience and stability.
E. Maritime Security
As a maritime and archipelagic state, the Philippines regards maritime security highly in
its priorities. The country remains fully committed to the amicable resolution of territorial
and maritime disputes, effective management of crimes at sea, freedom, and safety of
navigation, and the sustainable use of coastal and marine resources in accordance with
international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), and in cooperation with regional partners and the international community.
The country also seriously addresses issues such as piracy and armed robbery at sea;
maritime kidnapping and terrorism; trafficking in and smuggling of weapons, drugs, and
persons; illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing, including poaching;
intentional destruction of the marine environment, especially coral reef ecosystems;
climate change; and engaging in manoeuvres that increase the risk of collisions at sea.
The South China Sea Issue
The Philippines aspires to realize a peaceful, stable, secure, and prosperous South China
Sea. The country emphasizes the importance of the peaceful settlement of disputes
which involves the non-threat and non-use of force, friendly and cordial consultations,
and negotiations in good faith, and promoting a healthy environment conducive to
dispute settlement. It ensures that these aspirations are upheld under international law
and the rules-based international order, including the Charter of the United Nations and
the 1982 Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes.
Promoting the rule of law is paramount to the Philippines. It firmly believes that the 1982
UNCLOS and the Award on the South China Sea Arbitration of 12 July 2016 set a clear
framework for a peaceful, fair, just, and equitable solution for all maritime disputes. In
his remarks during the 6th anniversary of the Award in 2022, Foreign Affairs Secretary

275

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Enrique A. Manalo stressed that the Award is final, and the Philippines rejects attempts
to undermine it. The Philippines appreciates the growing support from other states for
the Award.
Aside from UNCLOS, the Philippines also adheres to the principle of ASEAN Centrality. As
a member of the regional bloc, the Philippines reaffirms its commitment to maintain and
promote peace, security, and stability in the region, as well as to the peaceful resolution
of disputes, without resorting to the threat or use of force, in accordance with
international law.
The Philippines, as a signatory to the 2002 ASEAN-China Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), underscores the urgency and importance of the
early conclusion of an effective and substantive Code of Conduct in the South China Sea
(COC) consistent with international law, including the UNCLOS. The Philippines welcomes
the continuation of the negotiations on the Single Draft COC Negotiating Text (SDNT) and
the commitment of the parties to expedite the conclusion of the COC. The Philippines
commits to collaborating closely with Myanmar as the Country Coordinator for the
ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations for 2021-2024 to ensure continued progress in the COC
negotiations.
In addition, the Philippines reiterates the importance of promoting and maintaining a
conducive environment for the COC negotiations. Actions that coerce, intimidate,
provoke and escalate tensions undermine mutual trust and confidence, violate state
sovereignty and sovereign rights and jurisdiction guaranteed by international law,
particularly the UNCLOS, and only impede the progress of COC negotiations. The
Philippines encourages all parties to continue exploring practical avenues for maritime
cooperation under the 2002 DOC
On functional cooperation, the Philippines hopes for substantive regional cooperation
from the 2017 Declaration for a Decade of Coastal and Marine Environment Protection
in the South China Sea (2017-2027), which affirms the commitment of the ASEANMember States and China to preserve and sustainably manage coastal and marine
ecosystems in the South China Sea.

International Initiatives on Maritime Security

276

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
To manage other various maritime security threats in the Indo-Pacific region, the
Philippines supports ASEAN-led maritime security fora, such as the ASEAN Regional
Forum Inter-Sessional Meeting on Maritime Security (ARF-ISM on MS), the ASEAN
Maritime Forum (AMF), the Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum (EAMF), the ASEAN
Defence Ministers Meeting (ADMM), the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting Plus
(ADMM-Plus), and the East Asia Summit (EAS).
In the ARF, the Philippines is co-chairing a three-part ARF Training Series on the
International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code with India, Papua New Guinea,
and the United States. The training series aims to increase understanding and
implementation of the ISPS Code among ARF members, with a view to developing a
regional manual highlighting best practices of implementation, identifying compliance
drills and exercises, and providing resources for technical assistance. Part 1 of the training
series was held in September 2022 at the International Maritime Organization (IMO) in
London, United Kingdom, while Part 2 was held in April 2023 in Mumbai, India. A Best
Practices Manual, intended as the outcome of the Training Series, is expected to be
completed in Part 3 in Papua New Guinea.
The Philippines hosted the 2nd EAS Workshop on Maritime Cooperation on 30 August to
01 September 2022. The workshop featured experts from the UN Environment
Programme (UNEP), UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(UNESCAP), and Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO (IOC) where
they discussed the current status of the oceans in East Asia and the Indo-Pacific regions,
and how EAS states are implementing regional and international commitments
concerning ocean sustainability. The workshop participants reaffirmed their commitment
to strengthening regional cooperation in achieving "clean, healthy, and sustainable
oceans."
In December 2022, the Philippines hosted the 12th AMF and the 10th EAMF. The iteration
of the 12th AMF featured an evaluation of the implementation of the 1982 UNCLOS in its
40th anniversary: assessment of maritime-related activities in ASEAN and exchange of
views on regional maritime developments. The Philippines stressed that cooperation
under these ASEAN-led fora facilitates a clear path in realizing the ASEAN Outlook on the
Indo-Pacific.

277

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Acknowledging the importance of regional efforts to protect and preserve the marine
environment, the Philippines hosts the ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity (ACB) in Los Baños,
Laguna. ACB fosters collaboration among ASEAN Member States on biodiversity
conservation, such as through the ASEAN Heritage Parks Program. The Philippines also
recognizes the roles of the Coral Triangle Initiative (CTI), the Partnerships in
Environmental Management for the Seas of East Asia (PEMSEA), and the Southeast Asian
Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC) in bolstering regional cooperation on
sustainable marine economic development and marine environmental protection.
The Philippines advocates for greater cooperation among regional coast guards and
maritime law enforcement agencies. In November 2022, coast guards from the ASEANMember States signed the ASEAN Coast Guard Declaration cementing and formalizing
their commitment towards promoting "safe, peaceful, and secure ASEAN seas." By the
2nd quarter of 2023, the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) will host the Expert's Working
Group Meeting of ASEAN Coast Guards.
The Philippines is pleased with the conclusion of the Marine Biodiversity of Areas Beyond
National Jurisdiction (BBNJ) Treaty or the High Seas Treaty adopted last 04 March 2023.
This monumental, legally binding international agreement under the 1982 UNCLOS sets
forth the equitable, holistic, and sustainable management of marine resources on the
high seas.
Bilateral Maritime Cooperation
To complement ASEAN and ASEAN-led mechanisms, the Philippines also utilizes bilateral
channels in dealing with other claimant states in the South China Sea to discuss regional
developments, issues, and pragmatic maritime security cooperation, among other
concerns. The Philippines and China hold the Bilateral Consultation Mechanism on the
South China Sea (BCM). Announced through the Philippines-China Joint Statement
following former President Rodrigo R. Duterte’s state visit to China in 2016, it is a
confidence-building mechanism for the regular exchange of views on maritime issues and
discussion on maritime areas of cooperation, including security, fisheries, and
environment. In the most recent BCM held in March 2023, the Philippines and China
explored new initiatives for practical maritime cooperation while reaffirming their
adherence to international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS.

278

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Exclusive economic zone boundary agreement with Indonesia, the two states held the
First Special Meeting of the Joint Permanent Working Group on Maritime and Ocean
Concerns (JPWG-MOC) on the Delimitation of the Continental Shelf Boundary in July2022.
In October 2022, the Philippines and Indonesia signed the "Principles and Guidelines''
document marking a significant step for the continental shelf boundary delimitation
between the two states. This document serves as the cornerstone for delimiting their
continental shelf boundary. The parties also reaffirmed that the provisions under the
1982 UNCLOS will be the basis of the delimitation process. The Philippines considers this
maritime boundary delimitation agreement with Indonesia a valuable example of
peaceful and rules-based dispute settlement under the 1982 UNCLOS.
With Vietnam, the Philippines held the 10th Meeting of the Philippines-Vietnam JPWGMOC in Ha Long City on 15-16 May 2023. Both sides agreed to explore a broad range of
maritime cooperation activities to enhance their strategic partnership, as well as
strengthen coordination on maritime issues in regional and multilateral bodies, especially
in working towards the conclusion of an effective and substantive Code of Conduct on
the South China Sea (COC). They committed to work together to protect their rights and
legitimate interests under 1982 UNCLOS, and enhance confidence-building measures
between relevant agencies.
Regarding maritime cooperation with non-ASEAN partners, the Philippines met with
Australia in June 2022 at the 2nd Philippines-Australia Maritime Dialogue. They agreed to
strengthen maritime cooperation in fisheries, maritime domain awareness, marine
environmental protection, defence, and marine science. This agreement was reaffirmed
during the 6th Philippines-Australia Strategic Dialogue in November 2022. The Philippines
and South Korea held their inaugural Maritime Dialogue in September 2022, discussing
possible cooperation in maritime domain awareness, marine environment protection,
and the ocean economy. The Philippines and Japan co-organized their 5th Maritime
Dialogue in March 2023. The parties exchanged views on issues of mutual interest,
including regional efforts to maintain peace and stability, climate change, and the vital
waterways of the two states. The Philippines looks forward to the 2nd Maritime Dialogue
with the United States set this 2023. The planned dialogue aims to provides an
opportunity to explore potential areas of maritime cooperation. These bilateral
engagements will expand as the Philippines deepens its maritime cooperation with likeminded states.

279

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
F. Security of Information and Communications Technology
The Philippines' outlook on the security of information and communications technology
(ICT) is a response to the increasing reliance on internet-based transactions and the
proliferation of cybercrime incidents. The Philippine National Police (PNP) has identified
cybercrimes as one of the greatest threats facing Filipinos this 2023. They highlighted the
significant rise of cybercrimes as the fastest-growing transnational organized crimes
affecting the Philippines and other parts of the world.10 This comes after the Philippines
ranked as the second most vulnerable country to cyber attacks in 2022 worldwide, a twostep increases from 2021.11
At the forefront of the ICT agenda is the Department of Information and Communications
Technology (DICT), which is now crafting a National Cybersecurity Strategy for 2023 to
2028.12 It aims to enhance the country's readiness to address the growing complexity of
online threats. The DICT has initiated a series of consultations for the new 5-year
cybersecurity plan, inviting all stakeholders, advocates, and concerned individuals to
submit feedback on the drafted strategy.13 The strategy aims to ensure a trusted, secure,
and reliable cyberspace for all Filipinos. It acknowledges the need to defend the
government and the people in cyberspace and emphasizes the importance of building
trust in the digital space for economic growth.
The new strategy considers the previous strategy's successes and introduces a policy
shift. It proposes enacting a Cybersecurity Act that balances economic relationships and
cybersecurity regulations. The strategy also promotes standards-based policy and riskbased approaches. Instead of entire sectors, individual sectors are identified as Critical
Information Infrastructures (CII) based on their size and impact. The strategy highlights
the importance of building a robust cyber workforce and enhancing international
cooperation for cybersecurity. Another critical aspect of the proposed strategy is the
10

Jonathan de Santos, “PNP says to focus on cybercrime as among ‘greatest threats’ to Filipinos,” Philstar Global, January
9, 2023, https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2023/01/09/2236412/pnp-says-focus-cybercrime-among-greatest-threatsfilipinos
11 Rainier Allan Ronda, “Philippines 2nd most attacked by web threats world wide last year”, PhilStar Globa, January
15,2023, https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2023/03/15/2251710/philippines-2nd-most-attacked-web-threatsworldwide-last-year. To note, the report was based on the research conducted by the Kasperksy Security Network (KSN)—a
renowned international cybersecurity company. See also ASEAN Regional Forum Security Outlook 2022, p. 174.
12 Arjay L. Balinbin, “DICT crafts new cybersecurity plan to address more complex threats,” BusinessWorld, December 15,
2022, https://www.bworldonline.com/technology/2022/12/15/493112/dict-crafts-new-cybersecurity-plan-to-addressmore-complex-threats/
13 Yen Ocampo, “The Philippines National Cybersecurity Plan Shaping a Secure Cyber Landscape,” OpenGov Asia, May 29,
2023, https://opengovasia.com/the-philippines-national-cybersecurity-plan-shaping-a-secure-cyberlandscape/#:~:text=“The%20NCSP%202023%2D2028%20shows,%2DAgency%20Committebbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbb
bbbbbbbbbbbbbbe%20(NCIAC).

280

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
convergence of all government agencies in implementing it. It outlines steps for
coordination through the National Cybersecurity Inter-Agency Committee (NCIAC) and
establishes two national-level Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs).14 The
ambitious endeavour is seen to be achievable through the collaboration of government
agencies, the private sector, and all branches of government.
The ardent resolve of the Philippines to strengthen its cybersecurity posture is also in line
with its commitment to boost the capacity of the intra-ASEAN cybersecurity landscape
through the ASEAN Cybersecurity Cooperation Strategy (2021-2025) as the bloc
continues to capacitate itself in facing threats emanating from digital industrialization. 15
The Philippines also hosted the Third ASEAN Digital Ministers’ Meeting and Related
Meetings on 06-10 February 2023 in Boracay, Aklan, which provided a venue for
discussion on ICT-related issues among others.
IV.

Role of the ARF
This year marks the 30th anniversary of the inception of the ARF. Over three decades, the
ARF has been constantly adapting to the ever-changing security challenges. Apart from
engaging stakeholders to discuss matters involving traditional security issues such as
maritime security and non-proliferation and disarmament, the ARF has also given
importance to the discussion of non-traditional security concerns such as humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief (HADR), counterterrorism, cybersecurity, transnational
crime and drug trafficking, and marine environmental protection. The expansion of issues
being tackled in the ARF also broadens the opportunity for cooperation. The region has
more to gain with a peaceful and stable environment than one fraught with unresolved
conflicts, brewing tensions, and miscalculations. Hence, the Philippines reaffirms its
commitment to play an active role in the endeavours of the ARF as a platform for
confidence-building and preventive diplomacy.

The country will continue collaborating with the ARF and its partners to strengthen
existing institutional mechanisms for crisis management and raise awareness on critical
issues. The Philippines has been engaging in multi-track diplomacy. Track 1 efforts of the

14

Ibid
ASEAN Secretariat, “ASEAN Cybersecurity Cooperation Strategy (2021-2025)”, ASEAN Digital Sector, n.d,
https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/01-ASEAN-Cybersecurity-Cooperation-Paper-2021-2025_final-230122.pdf. See also ASEAN Indonesia 2023 Chairman’s Statement wherein AMS lauded the progress made on the
implementation of the ASEAN Cybersecurity Cooperation Strategy (2021-2025).
15

281

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Department of Foreign Affairs and other government agencies continue to be
complemented by Track 2 and 1.5 initiatives of various think tanks and academic
institutions through timely research studies and recommendations on issues and
problems with foreign policy implications, including conflict analyses and dispute
resolution mechanisms.

Looking ahead, the ARF must not only provide mechanisms for collaboration among
nations while asserting the principle of ASEAN Centrality but also deliver tangible and
measurable results that address shared concerns. It must achieve its primary goal of
developing effective preventive diplomacy (PD) mechanisms and conflict resolution. The
future and relevance of ARF will depend on its ability to shape the discourse and take
action toward a direction that contributes to regional stability and development. For its
part, ASEAN must be able to balance the interests of various external partners and ensure
that outcomes benefit all stakeholders. ***

282

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

REPUBLIC OF KOREA (SOUTH KOREA)
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment

Today, this region and the world are faced with a polycrisis—major power rivalry and
geopolitical tensions are placing the rules-based international order under increasing
strain while non-traditional security challenges continue to pose significant risks to the
global and regional efforts for economic recovery, public health resilience and climate
change mitigation and adaptation among others.

As the regional security environment becomes increasingly uncertain and complex,
dialogue and confidence-building efforts will be important to successfully navigate
through the challenges. It is against this backdrop that ASEAN set forth the ASEAN Outlook
on the Indo-Pacific which provides a guide for ASEAN’s engagement in the region for
peace, stability, and prosperity. Based on its firm support for ASEAN Centrality and the
principles of the AOIP, the ROK is committed to working with partners in the region to
promote freedom, peace and prosperity. Given the ASEAN Regional Forum’s unique role
in confidence-building and preventive diplomacy over the past 30 years, and as the
founding member of the forum, the ROK is committed to strengthening the ARF’s role to
advance peace and stability in this region.

a. Korean Peninsula

Despite its economic hardship and dire food situation, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) continues to escalate tensions with a series of missile
provocations. Since last year, the DPRK has launched over 100 ballistic missiles,
including more than ten intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launches. These
missile launches are not only clear violations of and flagrant disregard for UN Security
Council resolutions but also pose a serious threat to the peace and stability of the
Korean Peninsula, the entire region, and beyond.

It is particularly concerning that the DPRK revealed its intention to further accelerate
the advancement of its nuclear and missile programs. The DPRK significantly lowered
the bar for potential nuclear use and is becoming increasingly bold with its nuclear
threats. For example, in March and April 2023, the DPRK launched a solid-fuel ICBM,

283

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
tested an underwater nuclear attack drone, and unveiled a tactical nuclear warhead
called Hwasan-31 for the first time. It even threatened to "use the Pacific as its firing
range."

This year sombrely marks the 30th anniversary of the DPRK's withdrawal from the NPT.
Over the last three decades, the international community has been earnestly calling
for the DPRK to return to the path of complete denuclearization. However, the DPRK
has been blatantly ignoring these calls. In April 2023, during his address to a joint
session of the US Congress, the ROK President Yoon Suk Yeol has reaffirmed his
proposal “Audacious Initiative” for the DPRK. However, the DPRK continues to ignore
the ROK and US’ calls for dialogue, while continuously developing its nuclear and
missile capabilities.

In the face of this disturbing situation, the international community must unite and
send a clear message: it will never accept the DPRK's possession of nuclear weapons
or tolerate its blatant provocations. It is deeply regretful that the Security Council has
failed to adopt a resolution on the DPRK’s repeated ICBM launches despite its
mandate from previous resolutions and overwhelming support from its members.

The international community's united and firm response is crucial for curbing the
DPRK's incessant destabilizing activities. As the DPRK gears up to reopen its borders,
full implementation of relevant UN Security Council resolutions should be prioritized.
Particular attention must be given to UNSC Resolution 2397 (2017), which requires
UN Member States to repatriate all DPRK labourers earning income in their
jurisdictions, unless repatriation is prohibited by applicable national or international
law. UN Member States should ensure that no work authorizations are renewed or
granted to overseas DPRK labourers consistent with UNSC Resolution 2375 (2017) and
address the DPRK's attempts to evade sanctions.

Furthermore, overseas DPRK IT workers continue to use forged identities and
nationalities to evade UNSC sanctions and earn income, which funds the DPRK's
unlawful WMD and ballistic missile programs. It is deeply concerning that the DPRK
supports these programs also by stealing and laundering funds as well as gathering
information through malicious cyber activities. According to the UN Panel of Experts,

284

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the DPRK attempted to steal as much as 2 billion USD between 2015 and 2019 through
cyber means. Private industry estimates suggest the DPRK stole up to 1.7 billion USD
in cryptocurrency in 2022 alone.

While the ROK-US combined defence posture remains solid and fully prepared to
respond to any further provocations by the DPRK, the Alliance is also committed to
the complete denuclearization of the DPRK. The door to dialogue remains open. In his
state visit to the US in April 2023, President Yoon Suk Yeol, alongside President Joe
Biden, reiterated the ROK and US’ commitment to diplomacy with the DPRK as the
only viable means of achieving lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula and called on
the DPRK to return to negotiations. President Biden also reaffirmed his support for the
goals of the ROK's Audacious Initiative, which will significantly improve the DPRK's
economy and livelihood once Pyongyang halts its nuclear program and begins a
substantive denuclearization process.

Meanwhile, the DPRK's human rights and humanitarian situation remains deeply
concerning. In this context, the ROK government is strengthening cooperation with
the international community to improve the human rights situation in the DPRK. In
July 2022, the ROK government appointed an Ambassador for International
Cooperation on North Korean Human Rights and returned as a co-sponsor of the
United Nations General Assembly and the Human Rights Council resolution on North
Korean Human Rights. In addition, as part of its efforts to enable the international
community to be better informed about the grave human rights situation in the DPRK,
the ROK government has recently published the “2023 North Korean Human Rights
Report.” The ROK government will continue its efforts to promote human rights in the
DPRK.

b. ROK’s Vision for Regional Cooperation

For over three decades, the ROK has been a steadfast partner of ASEAN and active
participant of ASEAN-led mechanisms. The ROK takes part in various ASEAN platforms
including the ASEAN+1, ASEAN+3, East Asia Summit (EAS), ADMM+, EAMF as well as
the ARF to promote peace and growth through dialogue and a habit of cooperation
among countries the region. In this regard, the ROK is committed to providing

285

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
steadfast support for ASEAN Centrality and a rules-based multilateral order in this
region.

Recently, this region is witnessing growing uncertainties in the security environment.
There is growing concern about democratic backsliding, challenges to universal values
such as the rule of law and attempts at unilateral change of the status quo by force.
To strengthen a regional order that enables countries in the region to cooperate and
prosper together, it is imperative to foster a peaceful environment that upholds and
international norms and universal values.

To this end, the ROK set out its foreign policy vision as a “global pivotal state” that
actively seeks out agenda for cooperation work with other key nations to build a
sustainable and resilient regional order. Under this vision, the ROK announced the
Strategy for a Free, Peaceful and Prosperous Indo-Pacific Region, at the 23rd ASEANROK Summit in Phnom Pehn in 2022. It underscores ROK’s commitment to increase its
role and contribution in the region, based on three principles of cooperationinclusiveness, trust, and reciprocity.

The strategy highlights ROK’s commitment to deepen bonds with ASEAN, as a key
partner in building peace and shared prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region. To put this
commitment into action, the ROK-launched the Korea-ASEAN Solidarity Initiative
(KASI), as a regional policy tailored to ASEAN within the framework of our Indo-Pacific
Strategy. KASI is anchored in ROK’s firm support for ASEAN Centrality and the AOIP
(ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific). It also aims to foster a more comprehensive
partnership with ASEAN by broadening our cooperation which has been largely
focused on economic and socio-cultural areas to include traditional and nontraditional security fields as well as future and emerging issues.

Also, recognizing the effectiveness of sub-regional approach in addressing
development gaps, the ROK has been strengthening sub-regional cooperation with
ASEAN Member States as well. In the Mekong sub-region, the ROK focuses on
cooperation in areas such as human resources development, infrastructure, and
environment with a view to promoting the region‘s sustainable economic and social

286

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
development. The ROK also established partnership with the BIMP-EAGA to
contribute to promoting inclusive and balanced growth in the maritime sub-region.

Furthermore, the ROK seeks to generate synergy by strengthening cooperation and
coordination among the policies and initiatives of ASEAN and dialogue partners. Over
the years, many countries in the region have stepped up engagement with the IndoPacific region under various strategies, policies and initiatives. Sharing common values
of openness, inclusiveness, transparency, and respect for international norms,
coordination among these strategies, policies and initiatives is expected to generate
synergy in safeguarding a rules-based order and promoting greater stability.

The ROK has been committed to working together with ARF partners in implementing
such initiatives. In addition to harmonizing ROK’s policy on ASEAN with ASEAN’s major
initiatives and plans, including the AOIP and ACRF, the ROK held policy dialogues with
US, Australia, and the EU to explore areas of collaboration to promote public health,
connectivity, maritime security, and digital transformation among others in the IndoPacific region.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy

a. Overview of the ROK’s National Security and Defence Policy

The ROK government has established and been promoting its National Security
Strategy that includes the vision of a Peaceful and Prosperous Korean Peninsula in the
security domain. While maintaining robust security, the ROK government is
determined to realize denuclearization and establish permanent peace on the Korean
Peninsula.

The ROK military has established and promotes defence policies to realize the vision
of Competent Security, Robust Defence. The ROK will maintain its robust security
posture in support of the establishment of permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula,
and will continue its efforts in developing a science and technology-based military
power. Furthermore, the ROK seeks to foster an advanced military culture in order to
build a trusted military that stands by the people.

287

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

b. Data Contribution to the ARF Arms Register (The ROK’s defence expenditure in
2022)
ⅰ. Total defence expenditure : KRW 54,611 billion
ⅱ. Defence expenditure as a %age of the GDP : 2.53%
ⅲ. Defence expenditure per capita : KRW 0.001 billion

III.

National Contribution to Regional Security
The ROK has been working with ARF participants both bilaterally and multilaterally to
address ongoing and emerging security threats in the region. The ROK has taken the
initiative to address disarmament, non-proliferation, and ICT security issues; engage
actively in maritime security and disaster management issues; and doubled its efforts to
fight against terrorism and transnational crimes.

a. Counter-terrorism

Terrorism and violent extremism continue to pose a grave threat to international
peace and security. With the global increase in the use of the Internet and social media
during the pandemic, terrorists and violent extremists are stepping up their attempts
to spread violent extremism content through online platforms. The ROK stands firm
by its position that terrorism should be eradicated and not be tolerated in any form
and has been doubling its efforts to combat terrorism at the national, regional, and
global levels.

Recognizing the challenges and opportunities related to new technologies in
countering terrorism, the ROK government is working closely with the UN Office of
Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) to make the world safer and less vulnerable to
technology-enabled terrorism through the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Specifically, the ROK government is funding the
UNOCT Global Counter-Terrorism Programme on Cybersecurity and New
Technologies to support UN Member States in cybersecurity activities.

The ROK government is also working with UNOCT to help countries strengthen their
border security and increase their capacity for countering and preventing terrorism

288

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
through its joint project with the UN Counter-Terrorism Center (UNCCT), namely the
Initiative to Expand the UNCCT Border Security and Management Good Practices in
Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic. As a follow-up activity, the ROK government cohosted the regional workshop with the UNOCT for the Southeast Asia region to
promote the best practices in border security and management in October 2022.

The ROK government is also actively participating in the global fight against terrorist
financing. The ROK has worked together with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
to prevent illegal financial transactions and encourage member states to implement
relevant policies. The FATF’s Mutual Evaluation Report published in April 2020
recognized that the ROK had improved its legal framework since its last evaluation,
including its terrorist financing offenses and confiscation regime. Along with its
international contribution, the ROK faithfully implemented UN Security Council
resolutions 1267, 1988, 1989, and 2253 to prevent terrorist-related financial flows
into domestic institutions.

b. Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms Control, and Disarmament

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of delivery
continue to pose grave challenges to the global community, and the DPRK’s nuclear
and ballistic missile programs remain a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. To counter such circumstances, the ROK will continue to faithfully
implement relevant UN Security Council Resolutions until the complete, verifiable,
and irreversible denuclearization of the DPRK has been achieved.

The ROK remains firmly committed to the full implementation of the Non-Proliferation
of the Nuclear Weapons Treaty (NPT), which has been the cornerstone of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. The ROK will actively contribute to
maintaining and further strengthening the NPT regime. The ROK has actively
participated in the last NPT review process and will continue to work with other states
parties for balanced progress across all of its three pillars. In order to facilitate
progress in nuclear disarmament, the ROK is also actively participating in the Creating
an Environment for Nuclear Disarmament Initiative as one of the co-chairs of the
subgroup 2, the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification, and

289

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the Stockholm Initiative. The ROK will closely cooperate with its partners to achieve
concrete deliverables. In addition, the ROK will continue to seek an early entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and call for an immediate start
of the negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty.

In response to the growing risk of WMD terrorism, the ROK is working toward a full
implementation of UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1540. The ROK welcomes
the extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee to November 2032, based on
UNSCR 2663. As preventing WMDs and related materials from falling into the hands
of terrorists is vital, the ROK has been making efforts to implement UNSCR 1540
effectively. Such efforts include chairing the 1540 committee in the 2013-2014 term,
hosting industrial outreach conferences in September 2016 and September 2018, and
providing financial assistance for the UNSCR 1540 online education program in 2018
and 2019 and for the project on applying emerging technologies to help strengthen
UNSCR 1540 implementation in 2022.

As one of the original States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, the ROK
has actively participated in international efforts to support and strengthen the regime
and prevent chemical weapon use. As the first State Party to have made voluntary
contributions to the ChemTech Centre project in 2017, the ROK has since continued
to make financial contributions on an annual basis. The ROK has also been hosting the
Seoul Workshop on the Peaceful Development and Use of Chemistry annually with the
OPCW to facilitate regional cooperation in chemical safety and security since 2012.
With the resumption of in-person events in 2022, the ROK looks forward to the
eleventh workshop in 2023.

The ROK has also contributed to supporting the Biological Weapons Convention since
its ratification. The ROK welcomes the adoption of the Final Document at the 9th BWC
Review Conference in 2022. During the Review Conference, the ROK held a side event
on bio risk management and presented the outcome of the ARF Table Top Exercise on
Response Capabilities to Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Incidents,
which the ROK, the Republic of the Philippines, and the United States of America cohosted. The ROK will actively participate in the Working Group discussion on
strengthening the Convention and continue its contribution to reinforcing the BWC.

290

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Moreover, fast-paced technological advancements in new domains, such as
autonomous weapons systems and outer space, are becoming a new sphere of
strategic competition, posing severe challenges to the current international
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. In response to these challenges, the ROK
has actively participated in the relevant fora on specific disarmament issues, such as
the Group of Governmental Experts on Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems and the
Group of Governmental Experts on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, to
contribute to developing norms in these areas. As such, the ROK sponsored the UN
General Assembly First Committee’s resolutions on “Reducing space threats through
norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviours” (A/RES/75/36, A/RES/76/231)
as well as the resolution on “Destructive direct-ascent anti-satellite missile testing”
(A/RES/77/41). The ROK will constructively engage in relevant fora including the UN
Open-ended Working Group.

As a reliable and long-standing supporter of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), the ROK
imposes strict control over illicit transfers and diversion of conventional arms while
respecting the principles of international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. Drawing on its advanced national control system and best practices, the
ROK now serves as the President of the 9th session of the Conference of States Parties
to the ATT. As President, the ROK is actively promoting the treaty's universalization,
effective implementation, and transparency among State Parties and private sector
entities. The ROK reaffirms its commitment to establishing the highest possible
common standards for arms transfers.

The ROK has relentlessly sought ways to strengthen the global counter-proliferation
regime and actively participated in relevant international efforts such as the
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI). As part of such efforts, the ROK has been
attending the annual PSI Operational Experts Group meetings and Asia-Pacific Exercise
Rotation (APER) exercises. In May 2023, the ROK held a High-Level Political Meeting
(HLPM) of the PSI to mark the 20th anniversary of its launch. Alongside the HLPM, the
ROK also hosted APER exercise, Eastern Endeavour 23, to enhance the interdiction
capabilities of the participating countries. The ROK will continue working closely with
the PSI partners to strengthen global counter-proliferation efforts.

291

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Since 2002, the ROK and the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs have co-hosted the
annual ROK-UN Joint Conference on Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Issues. The
21st conference held in November 2022 brought together disarmament and nonproliferation experts from governments, international organizations, academia, and
civil society organizations. Under the theme “Assessing the future disarmament
landscape: space security and missile development,” the participants held an intensive
discussion on new and emerging challenges in the international security environment
in the face of rapidly growing threats to space systems and the recommencement of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s missile tests.

The ROK will continue to seek ways to contribute constructively to the international
community’s discussions on disarmament and non-proliferation issues. In December
2021, a resolution titled “Youth, Disarmament, and Non-Proliferation” was adopted
at the 76th session of the UN General Assembly, making it the second ROK-led
resolution to be adopted. In addition, the ROK hosted the Disarmament and Nonproliferation Youth Camp on June 2022 in Daejeon, Korea. The camp held two special
sessions with experts on new and emerging agendas such as Lethal Autonomous
Weapon System and space security, both of which were actively discussed by the
thirty young participants. It provided a good opportunity to promote understanding
of and to engage youth in the emerging issues. The ROK will explore ways to further
increase youth engagement in the fields of disarmament and non-proliferation.

c. Transnational Crime

ASEAN SOMTC (Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime) has been a major
platform to discuss transnational crimes such as terrorism, arms smuggling, illicit
human and drug trafficking. It facilitates exchange of best policies and experiences on
related issues, and enable the participating countries to collaborate on capacity
building, training and sharing of information.

In this regard, the ROK participated in the 15th ASEAN SOMTC + ROK in July 2022, and
the 3rd AMMTC + ROK. ROK shared its preventive measures and responses to

292

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
effectively deal with such crimes, and stressed the importance of effective regional
and international cooperation in law enforcement, investigation, and monitoring.

The ROK has been stepping up its efforts to investigate, prosecute, and convict
traffickers pursuant to its Criminal Act and, by doing so, to identify and protect victims
of human trafficking. The ROK amended its Criminal Act in 2013 to introduce a new
provision on trafficking as part of its efforts to meet the standards of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC). In August 2016,
the ROK’s National Human Rights Commission developed the Indicators for the
Identification and Protection of Trafficking in Persons, which were distributed to
relevant government branches and recommended for use as guidelines for identifying
and protecting victims. The ROK enacted the Act on the Prevention of Trafficking in
Persons and Victim Protection in March 2021, which requires establishing
government-wide measures to prevent trafficking in persons and enhance support for
the victims. In February 2023, the ROK actively engaged in Executive Policy and
Development Symposium on Transnational Organised Crime held by the International
Law Enforcement Academy(ILEA). The ROK presented its policy on prevention and
punishment of human trafficking, and how it is implemented.

Furthermore, the ROK is putting in a special effort to prevent human trafficking and
violation of human rights by workers in the marine and fishing industry. For instance,
the ROK annually conducts annual crackdowns to protect the victims of human
trafficking and prevent humanitarian crimes.

In 2019, the ROK participated as a co-sponsor in the EAS Leaders’ Statement on
Cooperation to Combat Transnational Crime, which was adopted at the 14th East Asia
Summit held in Bangkok, Thailand. Through the statement, the ROK reaffirmed its
commitment to advancing applicable international instruments such as UNTOC,
developing effective policies, and taking regulatory and operational responses to
transnational crimes. In 2020, the ROK also participated in the Conference of the
Parties to UNTOC held to mark the 10th anniversary of the adoption of UNTOC and the
Protocols thereto.

293

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Drug trafficking is another urgent issue that affects not only one country, but the
surrounding regions and continents which is linked via drug flow routes. Illicit drug
crimes undermine political and economic stability and it is imperative that countries
maintain close coordination in both information exchanges and regulatory responses.

To tackle this issue, the ROK has been maintaining close cooperation with United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In 2020, the ROK signed the MOU to strengthen
common efforts in the prevention of and fight against corruption and moneylaundering. From 2020 to 2022, the ROK set an annual budget of over 1.5 million USD
to support UNODC’s programs related to capacity building and strengthening legal
systems tailored to ASEAN countries. Further to such effort, the ROK joined South East
Asia Justice Network (SEAjust) in January 2023 to enhance judicial cooperation with
ASEAN countries, and held the first in-person meeting in Seoul in April this year.

d. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief

The ROK has actively responded to humanitarian needs caused by emergency
disasters such as earthquakes, typhoons, infectious diseases, and protracted
humanitarian crises in conflict areas such as Ukraine, Syria, Yemen, and Iraq. To
alleviate the sufferings of the affected people and to minimize damage from disasters,
the ROK government provided approximately US$220 million in humanitarian
assistance in 2022.

In response to unexpected disasters, which are growing in size and frequency due to
factors such as climate change, the ROK government provided approximately US$7
million to help relieve the damage caused by unexpected disasters —such as the
flooding in Pakistan, and the fire incident in Cuba. It also helped ASEAN countries
overcome natural disasters including Typhoon Rai and the earthquake in the
Philippines as well as the earthquake in Indonesia. In addition, the ROK provided
approximately US$100 million in response to humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. Regarding
protracted humanitarian crises such as those in Yemen and Syria, it provided about
US$45 million to improve the humanitarian situation in these countries.

294

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Given the vulnerability of this region to natural disasters, the ROK is playing a
constructive role in strengthening regional cooperation in disaster management and
relief. While serving as co-chair of the ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on Disaster Relief
along with Thailand in 2018, the ROK contributed to drafting the ARF Work Plan for
Disaster Relief 2018-2020. As a follow-up to the work plan, the ROK supported
countries such as Bangladesh, Timor-Leste, and Vietnam to develop disaster risk
reduction strategies in cooperation with the International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies.

The ROK is also seeking to share business models, best practices, and localized
approaches to raise awareness on potential disaster risks and to take further steps in
establishing contingency measures at the local and national levels. In 2022, the ROK
further strengthened cooperation with the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction (UNDRR) by providing unearmarked funding in a multi-year format in order
to support UNDRR's core mandates stated in its Work Programme 2022-2023 and its
new Strategic Framework 2022-2025.

Moreover, the ROK government is supporting the capacity building of ASEAN member
states in disaster management through the ASEAN-ROK Cooperation Fund.
Specifically, the ROK has been carrying out the Operationalizing the ASEAN Standards
and Certification for Experts in Disaster Management (ASCEND) project with the
ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management
since 2020 to create a regionally recognized certification scheme for disaster
management professionals and ensure and promote higher standards and quality in
managing disasters within the region. The ASCEND project will benefit the general
public of the ASEAN region by improving the quality of disaster management and
emergency response, thereby contributing to reducing the damage caused by
disasters and improving the resilience of communities.

The ROK will continue its efforts to address the gap between growing humanitarian
needs and available resources and to ensure that the resources efficiently reach those
in the greatest need.

e. Maritime Security

295

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Maritime security covers a wide range of issues. One of the most critical is countering
and preventing piracy and armed robbery against ships. To help address this problem,
the ROK has actively participated in regional maritime security forums, including the
ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on Maritime Security (ISM-MS) and the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia
(ReCAAP).

The ROK became a party to ReCAAP in 2006 and has been closely cooperating with the
ReCAAP Information Sharing Center by sending Korean staff to the centre since 2007.
Moreover, the ROK has made voluntary financial contributions to ReCAAP to support
regional capacity building. The ROK provided approximately 90,000 US dollars
annually from 2008 to 2012 and, from 2013 onwards, the ROK’s annual contribution
has reached 130,000 USD—nearly a fifty % increase—to broaden its role and scope in
combating piracy in Asia.

In order to take active part in the global efforts against piracy, the ROK has deployed
the Cheonghae Anti-Piracy Unit to the high seas off the coast of Somalia since 2009.
The Cheonghae Unit has been conducting convoy missions as part of the Combined
Task Force under the command of the Combined Maritime Forces. The Cheonghae
Unit has also been participating in the European Union Naval Force’s Operation
Atalanta since February 2017 to protect the vessels of the African Union Mission, the
World Food Programme, among others.

Since 2009, the ROK has played an important role in the Contact Group on Illicit
Maritime Activities (originally, the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia).
Specifically, the ROK made financial contributions to the group to help strengthen the
capacity of coastal states in countering piracy. Until the group announced its plan to
close the trust fund by 2021, the ROK had contributed a total of US$1.7 million to the
fund. To facilitate international cooperation promoting maritime security in the Gulf
of Guinea, the ROK also has been a member of the G7++ Group of Friends of the Gulf
of Guinea since 2013. The ROK participates in working groups focusing on maritime
domain awareness, education, training, exercises, and operations.

296

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Moreover, the ROK made financial contributions totalling US$800,000 to the
International Maritime Organization’s (IMO) Djibouti Code of Conduct Trust Fund to
strengthen the judicial capacity of Somalia and its neighbouring countries in tackling
piracy from 2009 to 2017. The ROK also provided US$100,000 annually to the IMO
West and Central Africa Maritime Security Trust Fund from 2018 to 2020 and, in light
of the recent rise in piracy attacks near West Africa, US$200,000 in 2021. The ROK
assisted training programs together with the IMO for maritime security officers from
the Gulf of Guinea countries and provided equipment to facilitate communication
between the region’s maritime operations centres. In 2023, ROK plans to extend the
assistance to more coastal States in the Gulf of Guinea.

f.

Cybersecurity

Information and communications technology (ICT) provides immense opportunities
for social and economic development. However, the recent increase in the number of
malicious cyber activities and the level of sophistication of such activities pose
significant challenges to international peace and security.

In order to address these growing threats, the ROK launched the National
Cybersecurity Strategy in April 2019 and is currently preparing to launch a new version
of this Strategy. The new Strategy will set out the ROK’s vision and goals in
cybersecurity.

Given the transnational nature of cyber-attacks and threats, strong partnerships at
the bilateral, regional, and international level are key to protecting cyberspace from
malicious cyber activities. The ROK remains committed to promoting mutual
understanding and working together to address cyber security challenges. In this
regard, the ROK has engaged in bilateral cyber consultations with 13 countries and
two organizations (the EU and NATO). In particular, the 6th ROK-US Cyber Policy
Consultations was held in Washington, D.C. in 2022 for the first time in four years to
reaffirm the commitment to promoting international cyberspace stability and deepen
bilateral cooperation on cybersecurity.

297

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The ROK has also been an active and constructive member of the ARF Inter-Sessional
Meeting on Security of and in the Use of Information and Communication
Technologies (ISM on ICTs Security) and the ARF Open Ended Study Group on
Confidence Building Measures. The ROK is co-chairing the ISM on ICTs Security in
2021-2023 along with Indonesia, Australia, and Russia. The ROK hosted the 4th ISM on
ICTs in 2022 with Indonesia and Australia. The meeting provided an opportunity for
member states to exchange their views on regional CBMs. The ROK’s proposal for
hosting the Workshop on Fostering Cybersecurity Professionals was adopted during
the meeting.

The ROK expects that the confidence building measures adopted at the recent ISM on
ICTs Security will produce a synergy effect with the ROK-led capacity building projects
currently underway in the ASEAN region, such as the training sessions held by the AsiaPacific Cybercrime Capacity Building Hub (APC-Hub), and the regional education and
training program of the Asia Pacific Information Security Centre. The ROK is also
implementing the "Capacity Development Project for Nurturing Cybersecurity
Professionals in Indonesia” in cooperation with the US

At the international level, the ROK actively participated in the work of the Open-ended
Working Group (OEWG) on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security and contributed to
producing a consensus-based final report. The ROK will continue to participate in
OEWG 2021-2025 and, to this end, will continue contributing to the drafting of the
Annual Progress Report.

In addition, the ROK has continuously contributed to elaborating a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of ICTs for Criminal Purposes at the
Ad Hoc Committee of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime. In 2022, the ROK participated
in discussions to discuss existing international instruments and new international legal
responses to the use of information and communications technologies for criminal
purposes. In order to strengthen international cooperation on cybercrime, the ROK
also submitted a letter of intent to the Council of Europe in 2021 and with the views
to acceding the Convention on Cybercrime (Budapest Convention) in the near future.

298

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

IV.

Role of the ARF
a. Contributing to Advancing the ARF and Regional Security

As a founding member, the ROK is committed to realizing the ARF’s vision of promoting
confidence building measures, developing preventive diplomacy, and elaborating
approaches to conflicts in the region. The ROK actively participated in the ARF’s various
confidence building measures and preventive diplomacy activities during the intersessional year of 2022-2023, which include the Inter-Sessional Support Group Meeting,
Inter-Sessional Meetings, and the Defence Officials’ Dialogue, along with other workshops
and seminars.

In particular, the ROK co-chaired the fourth and fifth ARF ISM on ICTs Security on May
2022 and April 2023 respectively and contributed to promoting information sharing and
confidence building on cyber security issues. The ROK is also co-hosting the ARF Workshop
on Fostering Cybersecurity Professionals this June with Vietnam, to share best practices
and knowledge and support training of cyber-security experts. The ROK expects such
efforts will contribute to narrowing the digital gap within the region and building a safer
cyber security environment.

Furthermore, the ROK will chair the 16th Meeting of the ARF Experts and Eminent Persons
(EEPs) for 2023-2024. This meeting will serve as an opportunity to vitalize the ARF’s track
II activities and exchange views on how to strengthen the ARF mechanism.

The ROK looks forward to working closely with ARF participants in securing peace and
stability and building confidence in various fields such as counter terrorism, maritime
security, transnational crime, humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, and other security
related areas.

b. Future of the ARF

Since its establishment in 1994, the ARF has played an essential role in promoting regional
peace and stability as a unique intergovernmental forum for multilateral security
cooperation. Even amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, the ARF has served as an effective

299

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
platform for exchanging views on common security threats, identifying common ground
as well as difference for confidence-building among countries in the region.

Moreover, today’s dynamic security landscape in the region requires the ARF to harness
its strengths to the fullest. Also, the growing complexity of the security environment has
increased the importance of working in concert with other regional mechanisms, such as
the ADMM+ and the East Asia Summit.

It is also essential that ARF participants strive to make the forum more efficient and
effective. In addition to candid and open exchange of views and active participation of
ARF participants, the voices of the private sector and the youth, who are also important
stakeholders in the future of this region, need to be heard as well.

In line with its objectives under KASI, the ROK will continue to contribute to making the
ARF a platform for enriching and expanding our understanding of security and bringing
views together to strengthen peace in the region.

300

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

RUSSIA
I.

Regional Security Situation
As a multipolar world is taking shape, the Asia-Pacific region, with its emerging centres of
growth and influence, is subjected to an increasing pressure from external forces that seek
to prevent the establishment of a fairer and more balanced international order. The
ASEAN-led architecture of inclusive interstate interaction, the backbone of reliable
security and sustainable development in East Asia, is in the risk zone. As an alternative,
Western selective “Indo-Pacific” structures based on the confrontational logic of
deterrence and antagonism are being imposed on the region.

The arbitrary expansion of the “zone of responsibility” of NATO, that is already bringing
its military and political infrastructure to the Asia-Pacific region supported by a number of
Asian partners, represents a serious regional security challenge. This is what forms the
basis of the US-led system of “network deterrence”. The trade, transport and logistics,
technological and other chains of interaction in the region are being reoriented to the
West so that political opponents and economic competitors of Washington and its allies
are left outside of cooperation processes. As a result, there is an increased potential for
conflicts and a narrower space for constructive cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region.

US’ persistent attempts to build a Washington controlled “axis” from Australia to South
Korea are destabilizing, lead to increased tension and provoke an arms race. Japan’s policy
of strengthening its national military power, including via the acquisition of its own missile
capability to deliver strikes “against enemy territory”, causes concern.

Russia’s position remains unchanged in favour of settling territorial disputes in the South
China Sea (SCS) through diplomatic means within the framework of international law,
including on the basis of the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as the
2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea and the 2011 Guidelines
for its implementation. The Code of Conduct in the South China Sea being drafted by China
and ASEAM Member States is intended to become an effective mechanism for resolving
disputes.

We

believe

that

outside

involvement

in

resolving

problems

is

counterproductive, as it only contributes to the growth of tension in these waters.

301

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Sustained commitment to the principles of non-interference in internal affairs should be
a prerequisite for international efforts at resolving the situation in the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar. We oppose attempts to employ UN tools and use the UN Security
Council as a platform for putting pressure on Myanmar. We welcome ASEAN’s desire to
provide additional impetus to the collective effort to implement the provisions of the Five
Point Consensus in close cooperation with the Myanmar side.

We are concerned about the US policy to strengthen sanctions against Nay Pyi Taw and
to support the Myanmar opposition at the same time, in particular, by helping equip
armed anti-government groups. Such destructive steps undermine the efforts by the
regional community to restore peace in the country and, given the cross-border nature of
the covert operations to arm militants, pose a direct threat to the security of neighbouring
states and Southeast Asia as a whole.

We note the deteriorating situation around the Korean Peninsula. Within its so-called
“extended deterrence” concept, the United States, together with Japan and the Republic
of Korea, almost continuously conduct exercises near the DPRK borders. Pyongyang
responds to every threat with new missile tests. We believe that toughening sanctions
pressure against the DPRK is futile, broad interpretation of international restrictive
measures is inadmissible, and it is necessary to limit the negative humanitarian
consequences of the current restrictions against the population of North Korea.

All parties involved need to refrain from actions that lead to an escalation of tensions and
to resume the dialogue on confidence-building, normalization of bilateral relations,
security guarantees and peace-building in Northeast Asia.
It is only in this context that the denuclearization issues may be constructively debated.
This work may be based on the Russian-Chinese “action plan” for a comprehensive
settlement of the problems in the Peninsula aimed not only at creating a multilateral
system of peace and security in the subregion, but also at building mutually beneficial
economic ties and developing humanitarian cooperation.

It is noted that Australia’s and New Zealand’s policies in the South Pacific are becoming
increasingly neo-colonialist. The attempts by Canberra and Wellington to limit the right of
the small island developing states of this subregion to an independent foreign policy and

302

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
choice of international cooperation partners clearly demonstrate the intention to
continue to decide on the fate of island peoples.

More than a year and a half after the Taliban came to power in Afghanistan, the situation
there remains tense. A significant negative factor is the presence of ISIS and other terrorist
organizations – the Islamic Movements of Uzbekistan and Eastern Turkistan, Jamaat
Ansarulla, Al Qaeda, who use illegal drug production and trafficking for financial support
(up to 80% of the world’s opiate suppliers). We note the efforts by the Government of
Afghanistan to stop the threats of terrorism and drug trafficking. It is stepping up efforts
to combat ISIS to ensure relative military and political stability in the country.

We attach great importance to the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). The steps taken within the Moscow format of consultations,
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
mechanism of Afghanistan neighbouring countries, etc., play an important role in the
settlement in Afghanistan and its integration into regional systems of economic
development.

II.

Defence Policy of the Russian Federation and International Military Cooperation in the
Asia-Pacific
The activities of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation in the Asia Pacific region are
carried out in compliance with international norms and bilateral agreements and aimed
at strengthening peace and security in the region by developing bilateral and multilateral
military contacts with the Asia-Pacific countries.

A special role in enhancing regional stability is given to the mechanism of ASEAN Defence
Ministers' Meetings-Plus (ADMM-Plus), where Russia (together with Myanmar) is
responsible for the counter-terrorist agenda in 2020-2023. Its work is focused on the
issues of anti-terrorist security in the Asia-Pacific region and worldwide, as well as sharing
experience in combating international terrorism, including such international terrorist
groups as Al Qaeda and ISIS. Preparations for the ASEAN-supported table-top and field
exercises scheduled for the latter half of 2023 are underway despite the opposition from
Australia, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea and the USA.

303

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The Russian Defence Ministry develops ties with key partners in the Asia-Pacific, primarily
China and India, as well as Mongolia and ASEAN states, namely Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos,
Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam.

Maritime Cooperation-2022, a joint Russia-China naval military exercise in the waters of
the East China Sea in December 2022, as well as joint flights of heavy bombers was an
important component contributing to regional and global security.

Military and military-technical cooperation with India both in bilateral and multilateral
formats, first of all, within the SCO, keeps getting stronger. Contracts for the supply of S400 missile systems and construction of multi-purpose frigates are being implemented on
schedule. Gradual transition to joint-venture start-ups to produce defence goods is
underway.

The interaction with Pakistan is aimed at strengthening its counter-terrorism capacity.

In June 2022, Russian navy’s Pacific Fleet ships called at the Cam Ranh port and, in
December 2022, a Russian Defence Ministry delegation attended the Vietnam Defence
2022 exhibition to contribute to strengthening military ties with Vietnam.

The experts from the International Mine Action Centre of the Armed Forces of the Russian
Federation continued to provide assistance in clearing the Laos territory of explosive
remnants of the Indochina War and training de-miners from among the Lao military
personnel. In November and December 2022, a regular Russia-Laos tank crew exercise
“Laros” took place in Laos.

In August 2022, representatives from Bangladesh, Brunei, Cambodia, China, India, Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Pakistan and Vietnam participated in the 10th Moscow Conference
on International Security.

The participation of Asia-Pacific states (China, India, Laos and Mongolia) in the commandpost exercise “Vostok-2022” in September 2022, International Army Games 2022
(Cambodia, China, India, Iran, Laos, Mongolia, Myanmar and Vietnam) and International
Military-Technical Forum ARMY 2022 (India, Laos, Myanmar, Pakistan and Vietnam) in

304

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
August 2022 organized by the Russian Defence Ministry helped strengthen the ties with
these countries in the defence area.

III.

Nuclear and Missile Disarmament, Nuclear Security, and Non Proliferation of WMD in
the Asia-Pacific
Strict compliance with international arms control treaties and agreements remains one of
the basic principles of Russia’s foreign policy enshrined in its doctrinal documents,
including the new Concept of the Foreign Policy of the Russian Federation adopted on 31
March 2023.

A party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Russia strictly
observes all of its provisions. Although the regular NPT review cycle came to its end
without adoption of a final document, the NPT remains the most important element of
the international security system and a major condition of the preservation of the nuclear
non-proliferation system for all the States Parties.

Russia urges the Western nuclear powers to strictly adhere to the substance and logic of
the Joint Statement of the Leaders of the Five Nuclear Weapon States on Preventing
Nuclear War and Avoiding Arms Races of 3 January 2022, which declares the priority of
preventing war and any military confrontation between nuclear States as well as mutual
recognition of interests and concerns of each other in the area of security.

Russia has ensured timely compliance with quantitative ceilings provided for by the Treaty
on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (New
START), and continues to strictly observe the limits set up by the treaty. However, the
United States manipulatively declared a considerable amount of its SOAs “converted” or
changed their names to bring them out of the scope of treaty definitions. Against the
backdrop of the West-instigated sharp aggravation of the Ukrainian crisis and the
dramatic decline of Russian-American relations in 2022-2023 caused by Washington, US’
violations of the letter and spirit of the Treaty became ultimately intolerable. For this
reason, on 21 February 2023, Russia suspended the New START and expressed its
intention to continue to adhere to the ceilings as regards SOAs and inform the United
States of its launches of ICBMs and SLBMs.

305

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The Russia-declared unilateral moratorium on placing the ground launched intermediateand shorter-range missiles in those regions where similar US-produced weapon do not
appear continues to be effective. However, it was not supported by relevant reciprocal
steps on behalf of NATO countries and comes under serious pressure due to the
destabilizing military programs actively implemented by Washington, as well as a result
of aggressive actions by the United States and their allies to project power towards
Russia's frontiers.

US policy on building a global anti-missile defence system and deploying its elements in
the Asia-Pacific Region, as well as Tokyo's rapid military build up, which in reality is not
limited to defensive purposes, undermine the security interests of regional states and
strategic stability.

The Republic of Korea's declared interest in hosting US nuclear weapons or developing its
own nuclear capability undermines the integrity of the NPT regime, creates dangerous
preconditions for further degradation of the situation on the Korean peninsula and
contributes to increased tensions in the Asia-Pacific.

For the same reason, there are concerns about the plans of the AUKUS military
partnership (the United States, Australia, and the United Kingdom) to pump weapons into
Australia (from nuclear-powered submarines to hypersonic missiles) and create shared
infrastructure in the country for deployment of nuclear weapon delivery vehicles, s well
as to enhance US military groups deployed on rotation, and expansion of the US Air Force
in the South Pacific with the help of Canberra. It has a destabilizing effect on the NPT
regime and could trigger an arms race in the region.

Russia is open to consultations with ASEAN countries to institutionalize the nuclearweapon-free zone in South-East Asia as soon as possible and reaffirms its readiness to sign
the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty with standard reservations, the relevance of which is
only increasing in the context of a deteriorating international security environment.

The threat of an arms race in outer space is of serious concern. The draft treaty on the
prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space, the threat or use of force against
outer space objects, proposed by Russia and China, aims at countering this negative trend.

306

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
At the 77th session of the UN General Assembly, our resolution entitled "No First
Placement of Weapons in Outer Space" (NFP) was co-sponsored by Cambodia, China,
DPRK, Laos and Vietnam, among others. Moreover, Cambodia, Indonesia, Myanmar, Laos,
Sri Lanka and Vietnam are full-fledged NFP participants who made the relevant
commitment in bilateral statements signed with Russia.

IV.

Combating International Terrorism and Transnational Crime in the Asia-Pacific
With the increasing number of global problems and a broadening range of trans-border
threats, the Russian Federation remains focused on expanding cooperation with AsiaPacific nations on a full range of issues related to fighting terrorism, transnational
organized crime, piracy, armed robbery at sea, illicit drug production and trafficking.
Special emphasis is traditionally put on combating ISIS, Al Qaeda, and affiliated terrorist
organizations, as well as foreign terrorist fighters, suppressing terrorist financing and the
spread of terrorist and extremist ideology, including online.

We note the negative trends of terrorism merging with transnational organised crime and
increased terrorist ICT uses for criminal purposes.

We support the intention of Asia-Pacific countries to combat the global drug threat in
accordance with the three relevant UN conventions. We welcome the initiative of ASEAN
to create a drug-free South-East Asia. We are interested in continuing the close
coordination of positions on anti-drug issues in the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the
SCO and the ASEAN-led platforms on the basis of the 2021 Statement of ASEAN and the
Russian Federation on Cooperation Against Illicit Drugs Trafficking, which provides a solid
foundation for developing practical cooperation between the competent authorities.

We believe to be unjustified the attempts to shift the focus from countering and
preventing terrorism to other issues, including human rights and gender-related matters,
as well as to erode the pivotal role of states in combating terrorism and extremism by
promoting the concept of violent extremism, aimed at substituting the existing
international legal regime for some "rule-based order" that allows interference in the
internal affairs of states.

307

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
We consider it unacceptable for the collective West to encourage xenophobic,
nationalistic, neo-Nazi and other radical manifestations in certain countries in order to
destabilize the situation and to undermine regional political and economic ties for the
sake of advancing its own geopolitical interests.

In such circumstances, the further strengthening of non-politicized, equitable and
pragmatic international cooperation within the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and ASEANRussia Dialogue Partnership, including the ASEAN-Russia Consultations of the High
Representative for Security Issues, is of particular relevance.

We advocate greater cooperation on common security threats between ASEAN and other
regional organisations, in particular the SCO and the CSTO.

V.

International Information Security in the Asia-Pacific
Cooperation in the field of international information security (IIS) with Asia-Pacific nations
both within relevant multilateral frameworks and at the bilateral level is a priority of the
Russian foreign policy. We are convinced that the regional mechanisms should take into
account the central role of the United Nations and the objective to establish a fair
international legal regime governing the information space, including in the field of
combating the use of ICTs for criminal purposes. Attention should be paid to ensuring the
secure and stable functioning and development of the Internet on the basis of equitable
participation by states in its governance. It is also important to use the resource of
regional frameworks to promote cooperation between the competent authorities of
states and to coordinate confidence- and capacity-building measures.

The abovementioned approaches guide the interaction with Asia-Pacific partners at
relevant UN negotiating fora, notably within the UN Open-Ended Working Group on
Security of and in the Use of Information and Communications Technologies 2021-2025,
and the UN Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention
on Countering the Use of Information and Communications Technologies for Criminal
Purposes.

We attach particular importance to the development of practical cooperation in that area
within the ARF. As co-chair of the ARF Inter-Sessional Meetings on Security of and in the

308

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Use of ICTs 2022-2024, we focus on promoting a pragmatic and depoliticized agenda. This
is illustrated by the workshops we have proposed on ICT security terminology and on
countering the use of ICTs for criminal purposes.

We are strengthening dialogue with ASEAN on issues related to ICT security. The second
ASEAN-Russia Dialogue on ICTs Security-Related Issues (videoconference, December
2022) confirmed their readiness to deepen inter-agency cooperation. We note the
contribution of major regional conferences on information security, in particular the VII
Singapore International Cyber Week (October 2022), to regional security.

Russia, together with China, is the Coordinator in the priority area “Security of and in the
Use of ICTs” of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia
(CICA). On our initiative, the CICA Summit (Astana, October 12-13, 2022) adopted a
leaders' statement on this issue.

VI.

Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief in the Asia Pacific
Russia continues to promote regional cooperation in disaster management and
humanitarian assistance to Asia-Pacific countries.

Increased attention is being paid to building practical cooperation and sharing experience
in this area within the ARF. During the 20th Inter-Sessional Meeting on Disaster Relief (May
2022) representatives of EMERCOM of Russia joined the discussion on mitigating the
consequences of natural disasters, improving mechanisms for regional cooperation, and
providing humanitarian assistance in the context of COVID 19. Russian experts
participated in the ARF Earthquake Response Exercise (videoconference, June 2022), and
in the 5th Workshop on Urban Search and Rescue (videoconference, November 2022).

We attach great importance to the functioning of the APEC Emergency Preparedness
Working Group, which promotes a more disaster-resilient environment in the region and
whose regular meeting in the context of the APEC Senior Disaster Management Officials
Forum was attended by representatives of EMERCOM of Russia (August 2022).

EMERCOM specialists shared their experience with colleagues within the SCO, in
particular during a workshop for disaster management agencies (October 2022).

309

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

We place special emphasis on developing emergency response cross-border cooperation
with neighbouring states. We work closely with Mongolia to prevent and respond to transboundary wild-land fires, and we promote the development of diving services and the
training of specialized personnel.

On the margins of the 3rd International Fire and Rescue Congress (Moscow, August 2022)
Memorandum of Understanding on exchanging of experience in warning and overcoming
emergencies was signed between the Ministry of Public Security of Vietnam and
EMERCOM of Russia. Discussions were held with representatives of Myanmar on the
establishment of a joint humanitarian response centre in the country.

We continue to provide humanitarian assistance within the UN framework. In 2022,
Russia made an earmarked contribution of US$2 million to the UN World Food Program
to assist Sri Lanka. In September 2022, 35 tons of humanitarian supplies were delivered
on a bilateral basis to Pakistan for flood victims.

VII.

Regional Security Architecture and Trends of Multilateral Diplomacy in the Asia-Pacific
Active attempts by the collective West to undermine ASEAN's effectiveness, scrap the
system of ASEAN-led mechanisms and remove from their agenda practical initiatives that
could contribute to a de-escalation of increasing tensions in Asia pose a serious challenge
to the existing ASEAN-led regional architecture of security and cooperation.

Russia has always stood for preserving and strengthening the system of interstate
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region based on international law, the principle of peaceful
settlement of disputes and a culture of compromise and mutual respect. An important
crisis response regulator is the expert consultations on security architecture in the AsiaPacific region held within the East Asia Summit framework.

We view the ASEAN Regional Forum as a key regional platform for developing confidencebuilding measures and introducing preventive diplomacy tools, and call for further
consolidation of the ARF and increasing its practical value. The necessary prerequisite for
this is an atmosphere of constructive and equitable dialogue, as well as the willingness of
all participants without exception to follow ARF's high standards of inclusivity.

310

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

A positive factor in regional development is the efforts to establish the Greater Eurasian
Partnership. The solid integration resource built into its basis with the idea of
consolidating the potential of continent-wide cross-platform cooperation frameworks,
including the SCO, ASEAN and Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) serves the interests of
creating a comfortable and safe foreign policy environment and promoting joint
constructive work on various vectors of connectivity in the Eurasian space.

311

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

SINGAPORE
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
We are facing intensifying global challenges, including major power rivalry, nationalistic
and protectionist tendencies, and a weakening of the multilateral rules-based order.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, on which ASEAN Foreign Ministers have issued three
statements, has also brought into focus the importance of the fundamental norms of
international law and the UN Charter which prohibit acts of aggression against a sovereign
state. Non-traditional security threats such as transnational crime and terrorism remain
unabated and increased reliance on digitalisation further exacerbated society’s
vulnerabilities to cybercrimes. It is all the more important that ASEAN and its partners
continue to make use of ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ASEAN Plus Three (APT),
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus), East Asia Summit (EAS), and the
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) to strengthen mutual confidence and trust, and enhance
practical cooperation among the key stakeholders of our region to tackle common
challenges. ASEAN can only be relevant and effective as a regional bloc if it remains at the
core of the regional architecture. It must stay innovative and continually reinvent itself to
meet the needs of our citizens as security threats evolve. Singapore will continue to work
towards strengthening ASEAN-related initiatives and mechanisms with ASEAN Centrality
as our guiding principle.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
Singapore’s defence policy is built on the twin pillars of deterrence and diplomacy.
Singapore believes in the need for a strong defence to ensure that we enjoy peace and
security. A strong defence also provides us with the space and freedom to act
independently and safeguard the interests of our people. Hence, Singapore has invested
steadily and prudently in defence over the years to build up a professional and capable
Singapore Armed Forces (SAF). To overcome our small size and lack of resources,
Singapore makes use of technology as a force multiplier to augment our well-educated
conscript force and to train our soldiers to fight effectively. The SAF has also played an
important role in assisting in domestic contingencies, such as supporting Singapore’s
COVID-19 response efforts by augmenting civilian frontline services. Singapore’s defence
expenditure in FY2021 stood at 2.7% of our Gross Domestic Product.

312

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
III.

National Contributions to Regional Security
Singapore firmly believes in the value of diplomacy and dialogue to enhance regional and
international stability by minimising the potential for misunderstanding and
miscalculation, as well as enhancing responses to common security challenges. As a small
country, Singapore’s security and prosperity are highly dependent on regional peace and
stability. Through extensive bilateral and multilateral cooperation, Singapore seeks to
establish strong and friendly ties with defence establishments and armed forces regionally
and globally. Singapore also believes in the importance of a rules-based, open and
inclusive regional security architecture that encourages countries to engage
constructively in dialogue and practical cooperation. As such, Singapore actively
participates in ASEAN-led platforms like the ADMM, ADMM-Plus, EAS, ARF as well as other
multilateral fora like the Shangri-La Dialogue (SLD) and the Five Power Defence
Arrangements.

The ADMM is the highest defence consultative and cooperative mechanism in ASEAN
which aims to promote regional peace and stability through dialogue and practical
cooperation. Singapore actively contributes to the ADMM and ADMM-Plus. Under the
Network of ASEAN Chemical, Biological and Radiological (CBR) Defence Experts, Singapore
contributes to strengthening regional capacity to deal with CBR threats. Since its inaugural
meeting in 2019, the Network has kept up a steady momentum of meetings, training and
workshops in each CBR domain, covering topics of interest such as scientific cooperation
to deal with COVID-19. Regional and international experts are invited as resource speakers
to exchange views and experiences. Last year, Singapore hosted the ADMM-Plus CBR
Conference to underscore the importance of international cooperation in this area.
Another area of contribution is in the cyber and information domains. Singapore
established the ADMM Cybersecurity and Information Centre of Excellence (ACICE) in
2021, in order to enhance information sharing and capacity building among defence
establishments against cyber and information threats. The ACICE is also complementary
to the ASEAN Cyber Defence Network (ACDN) in promoting regional exchanges,
interactions and cooperation on cybersecurity.

The ADMM-Plus enables practical cooperation among the 18 ADMM-Plus countries
through the Experts Working Groups (EWGs). The EWGs focus on maritime security (MS),
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HADR), peacekeeping operations (PKO),

313

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
counter-terrorism (CT), military medicine (MM), humanitarian mine action (HMA), and
cyber security (CS). Singapore is committed to sustaining military-to-military cooperation
and building trust among militaries through the EWGs and looks forward to the
commencement of the fifth three-year EWG cycle in 2024.

Singapore is also an active proponent of Confidence-Building Measures (CBMs) among
militaries and defence establishments. CBMs are useful guidelines particularly to reduce
miscalculations and preserve a peaceful and stable regional security environment. Under
Singapore and the ROK’s co-chairmanship of the EWG-MS from 2017-2020, the ADMMPlus navies agreed to collectively adopt the Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS)
Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES). CUES is regularly practised at several
ASEAN naval exercises, including the 2018 ASEAN-China Maritime Exercise, the 2019
ADMM-Plus Maritime Exercise, the 2021 ASEAN-Russia Naval Exercise, and the 2023
ASEAN-India Maritime Exercise (AIME). Another CBM proposed by Singapore and adopted
by the ADMM is the Guidelines for Air Military Encounters (GAME). GAME is the first
multilateral air-to-air confidence-building measure of its kind. It provides airmen with a
set of guidelines to enhance aviation safety and reduce miscalculations or unintended
incidents between military aircraft. The ADMM has practised GAME on several occasions,
most recently during the 9th ASEAN Air Forces’ Junior Officers Interaction Programme
hosted in Singapore in 2022. Singapore will work with the ADMM to explore opportunities
for the expansion of GAME to the ADMM-Plus.

Singapore also hosts the annual SLD organised by the International Institute for Strategic
Studies (IISS). Since its inception in 2002, the SLD has established itself as the foremost
defence and security conference in the Asia-Pacific region. After a two-year-hiatus due to
the global COVID-19 pandemic, the 19th SLD was held from 10 to 12 June 2022. It was
attended by 37 Ministerial-level delegates and more than 30 senior defence officials,
including Chief of Defence Forces, and prominent academics from 42 countries. Japanese
Prime Minister Kishida Fumio delivered the keynote address where he shared Japan’s
vision for a rules-based international order built through dialogue and the need for a free
and open Indo-Pacific. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy delivered a virtual
Special Address, where he spoke on the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict. This year marks
the 20th edition of the SLD, which will be held from 2 to 4 June 2023. In the lead-up to the
yearly SLD, the IISS Sherpa Meetings supplement the SLD process by providing an inter-

314

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
sessional platform for senior officials to engage in frank discussions on security issues,
have been held annually.

i. Counter-Terrorism
Terrorism and its underlying ideologies pose complex and long-term challenges.
Modes of radicalisation have evolved with rising consumption of digital content.
Continued vigilance and international cooperation are vital to deal with this threat.

Since the 1997 Declaration on Transnational Crime, ASEAN’s counter-terrorism efforts
have made much progress. Singapore was one of the first AMS to ratify the ASEAN
Convention on Counter-Terrorism (ACCT) in 2007, which is the first regional legallybinding anti-terrorism pact. Recognising the importance of preventing violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, Singapore supported the ASEAN Plan of Action to
Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalisation and Violent Extremism 2018-2025 in
2018. More recently, Singapore actively contributed to the drafting of the Work Plan
of the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalisation and
Violent Extremism 2019-2025 (“Bali Work Plan”) and supported its adoption at the
13th ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime in November 2019. Singapore
also supported the ARF Statement on the Treatment of Children Recruited by or
Associated with Terrorist Groups in 2020. Singapore welcomes these significant
achievements by ASEAN, which enhance regional cooperation and commitment to the
global strategy on counter-terrorism.

Singapore is committed to strengthening the regional counter-terrorism security
architecture. We support the ASEAN “Our Eyes” (AOE) initiative that was adopted by
the 12th ADMM in 2018 and its Standard Operating Procedures that was adopted by
the 14th ADMM in 2020. The AOE enhances strategic information exchange on
counter-terrorism among ASEAN defence establishments. To complement the AOE,
we operationalised the Counter Terrorism Information Facility (CITF) in January 2021
as an operational level CT information-sharing initiative. Singapore’s Network of
ASEAN CBR Defence Experts also facilitates information exchange and cooperation
between CBR experts from all 10 ASEAN Member States (AMS) through its secure web
portal and workshops, contributing to regional counter-terrorism preparedness
against CBR threats.

315

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

In 2019, Singapore seconded a senior Police Officer to kick-start the work of the
INTERPOL Regional Counter-terrorism Node for Asia and South Pacific (RCTN ASP)
located in the INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation (IGCI), Singapore. Singapore’s
seconded officer heads the RCTN ASP, covers as Head of RCTN Americas (including US,
Canada and Latin America) and oversees the CT representation of 74 member
countries. The RCTN ASP works with police units in the Asia-Pacific region to
encourage the transfer of intelligence concerning terrorist activities. It also has access
to 18 INTERPOL databases that provide information including on foreign terrorist
fighters, the social media platforms that terrorists use, and their travel patterns and
mode of transport. Singapore has been actively engaging INTERPOL to shape the RCTN
and its mission in four main areas: (i) intelligence; (ii) border management and
operations; (iii) capacity building; and (iv) incident response. Singapore’s seconded
officer to the RCTN was appointed the mission leader of the INTERPOL Incident
Response Team to support the Sri Lankan authorities in their investigations into the
Easter Sunday Bombings in May 2019.

ii. Non-Proliferation, Counter-Proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament

Singapore is active in combating the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction
(WMD). We ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1976
and concluded a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 1977. Singapore also ratified the IAEA Additional
Protocol (AP) and adopted the modified Small Quantities Protocol in March 2008.
Singapore supports the universalisation of both the CSA and the AP, and works closely
with the IAEA on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Singapore is currently a
member of the IAEA’s Board of Governors (BOG), and has hosted regional workshops
on topics such as emergency preparedness and response, nuclear regulatory law, and
nuclear safety and security. Singapore is also party to the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty and supports its early entry into force.

Singapore joined the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in May 2010 and
subscribed to The Hague Code of Conduct against the Proliferation of Ballistic Missiles
in August 2011. In September 2014, Singapore acceded to the Convention on the

316

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and accepted the 2005 Amendment
to the CPPNM. Singapore ratified the International Convention on the Suppression of
Nuclear Terrorism in September 2017.

Singapore signed the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), the first legally binding international
instrument that regulates the international transfer of conventional arms, on 5
December 2014. This reaffirms Singapore’s commitment to the elimination of the
threat posed by the illicit arms trade, and to international disarmament and nonproliferation initiatives that promote global peace and security.

Singapore strongly supports counter-proliferation initiatives such as the Proliferation
Security Initiative (PSI), and recognises the importance of preventing rogue groups,
such as terrorist organisations, from acquiring WMD. Singapore has actively
participated in the PSI since its establishment in 2003. Singapore is one of the 21
members of the PSI Operational Experts’ Group (OEG). As part of the PSI Asia-Pacific
Exercise Rotation (APER) grouping, we have hosted PSI exercises and meetings. In
October 2021, Singapore hosted Exercise Deep Sabre, which was the fourth time
Singapore hosted a PSI exercise. More recently, Singapore participated in the Italyhosted OEG meeting in October 2022, as well as the US-hosted Exercise Fortune Guard
in Hawaii in August 2022 alongside other APER partners.

Singapore fully supports the efforts of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to further develop capabilities and readiness against the threat of
chemical weapons. We participated in the 27th Conference of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) in November 2022. Pursuant to Article X of the
OPCW, Singapore has been conducting the Emergency Response to Chemical
Incidents training course on a biennial basis since 2009. The sixth instalment of the
course was conducted in December 2019, which benefitted 24 participants from 10 of
the OPCW Member States in Asia, and Singapore will continue to conduct the seventh
run of the course in 2023. The course has been a platform for the sharing of
experiences on the management of hazards. In addition, Singapore had contributed
experts to serve on the Scientific Advisory Board of the OPCW between 2017 and the
Technical Requirement Team of the OPCW ChemTech centre between 2020 and 2021.
Singapore is also committed to the non-proliferation of biological and toxin weapons.

317

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
We participated in 9th Review Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC) in November 2b022, and have submitted returns on the BWC CBMs annually
since 2012.

As a reflection of our commitment to prevent WMD proliferation, Singapore adheres
to a robust and enhanced export control regime. The Strategic Goods (Control) Act
controls the transfer and brokering of goods capable of being used to develop,
produce, operate, stockpile or acquire WMD, along with strategic goods and related
software and technology. The Act’s control list is regularly updated to ensure that it
keeps abreast of technological developments and remains aligned with the four
multilateral export control regimes. In May 2018, Singapore Customs organised the
Customs Competent Authority Seminar to enhance awareness of the trading
community on the regulatory requirements for various controlled goods and recent
developments.

iii. Transnational Crime

In today’s world, security challenges are increasingly transnational in nature. These
cannot be adequately addressed by individual countries’ domestic policies. Singapore
has therefore actively worked towards facilitating a concerted regional effort to
combat transnational crimes.

Under the aegis of the ASEAN Ministerial and Senior Officials’ Meetings on
Transnational Crime (AMMTC & SOMTC), Singapore is the ASEAN Voluntary Lead
Shepherd for international economic crime (IEC). Singapore conducted an annual
ASEAN Workshop on International Economic Crime to equip relevant investigators
with the competencies required for the investigation of commercial crime. These
workshops reviewed the latest trends, threats, and challenges facing law enforcement
agencies in the area of commercial crime and provided updates on the latest
developments in white-collar crime. The last workshop was organised in 2019, and
covered common concerns such as international fraud, payment systems fraud and
money laundering).

318

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Additionally, the Singapore Police Force’s Commercial Affairs Department (SPF/CAD)
runs the annual International Economic Crime Course (IECC). This course was attended
by local and foreign participants from ASEAN countries and our regional partners such
as Hong Kong, and Australia.

The Singapore Police Force actively supports various INTERPOL operations aimed at
tackling transnational financial crime.

o

Operation First Light 2022, March to May 2022 – CAD alongside LEAs from 75
other countries took part in the international operations to clamp down on
organised crime groups behind telecommunications and social engineering
scams. CAD is participating in a similar operations, taking place from March to
May 2023.

o

FATF-INTERPOL Roundtable Engagement (FIRE), 12-13 September 2022 – CAD
participated actively in this inaugural event in Singapore on tackling global
financial crime through enhanced international collaboration and enabling
greater asset recovery. CAD shared on its work to drive positive outcomes on
asset recovery and combatting cyber-enabled fraud. The second FIRE will likely
be scheduled in September 2023.

o

Operation HAECHI III, June-November 2022 – Singapore participated in Project
HAECHI-III which saw police across 30 countries arrest almost 1,000 suspects and
seize US$129.9 million worth of virtual assets. Additionally, during the conclusion
meeting in Singapore in November 2022, CAD hosted the attendees at the AntiScam Command office to see work live in action including the co-location sharing
with banks.

o

Project TORII Course, 9 to 11 November 2022 – CAD supported the course, which
is a continuation to the first run in December 2021 that seeks to establish
stronger collaboration against illicit financial flows derived from transnational
financial crimes in Southeast Asia. For this run, CAD invited speakers from the
Attorney General’s Chambers (AGC) and Association of Banks Singapore (ABS) to
provide insights from Singapore’s perspective. Additionally, CAD representatives

319

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
attended the course which deepened participants’ knowledge on open-source
best practices as well as knowing the available recovery channels for illicit funds
to be returned to the rightful owners.

SPF also participated in the following events under the Asset Recovery Interagency
Network – Asia Pacific (ARIN-AP)

Between June and September 2021, Singapore participated in Project HAECHI-II
which saw police across 22 jurisdictions arrest more than 1,000 individuals and
intercept a total of nearly US$27 million of illicit funds. In December 2021, SPF/CAD
partnered with INTERPOL on Project TORII, a capacity-building initiative which aims
to establish stronger collaboration against illicit financial flows derived from
transnational financial crimes in Southeast Asia.

Singapore takes a serious view of trafficking-in-persons (TIP) crimes. An inter-agency
taskforce, jointly led by Singapore’s Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of
Manpower, was formed in 2010 to coordinate whole-of-government strategies to
fight TIP. The Taskforce works closely with the law enforcement agencies and
embassies of countries that victims may originate from. Information-sharing and
upstream enforcement against human traffickers also prevent the exploitation of the
innocent.

Singapore supports regional and international efforts to combat TIP. Singapore
cooperates with other AMS through platforms such as the AMMTC and SOMTC,
which oversees the region’s effort to combat TIP. Singapore worked closely with
other AMS on the development of the ASEAN Convention on Trafficking in Persons
(ACTIP) which was signed by ASEAN Leaders at the 27th ASEAN Summit in November
2015. Following the signing of the ACTIP, Singapore also worked closely with other
AMS on the development of the ASEAN Plan of Action against Trafficking in Persons
(APA) and the Bohol Trafficking in Persons Work Plan, which were endorsed in 2015
and 2016 respectively. The APA and Work Plan complement the ACTIP by outlining
specific actions and policies to address the challenge of combatting TIP.

320

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Singapore is firmly committed to the regional and international fight against drug
trafficking. Singapore contributes actively at regional platforms such as the AMMD
and ASOD which oversees the region’s effort to combat drug trafficking. We have also
supported capacity building efforts in the region. In 2022/2023, the Central Narcotics
Bureau organised three training workshops – 2 virtual and 1 physical - for their
international partners. In total, 60 officers from 20 countries attended these
workshops, of which 3 were from ASEAN Member States. CNB will be organising the
4th Integrated Narcotics Enforcement Programme (INEP) for ASEAN Member States
in November 2023. Having secured membership to the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs (CND) for the term 2024 to 2027, we are committed to enhancing our
contributions in capacity building and sharing of best practices, to boost AMS’
capabilities to tackle drug trafficking.

Beyond ASEAN, Singapore works with partners such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) as well as the Group of Friends United Against Human
Trafficking (GOF) in New York and Geneva, to explore more effective ways to combat
TIP. In 2019, Singapore attended the 5th Ministerial Breakfast Meeting hosted by the
GOF in New York on the sidelines of the 74th Session of the United Nations General
Assembly. Singapore also co-sponsored an event organised by Belarus on behalf of
the GOF in Geneva on combatting TIP in the context of armed conflict held on the
sidelines of the 33rd International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in
December 2019. Singapore is a party to the United Nations Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (UN TIP
Protocol), which seeks to prevent, suppress, and punish trafficking in persons while
protecting victims and promoting cooperation among State Parties.

iv. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief

Disasters can affect any country without warning. As a good neighbour and friend,
Singapore contributes to HADR missions when the need arises.

Singapore is the co-chair of two out of three of the working groups of the ASEAN
Committee on Disaster Management (ACDM). ACDM Working Group (WG) on
Preparedness, Response and Recovery (PRR) and Global Leadership (GL). The ACDM

321

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
WGs oversee the implementation of the five priority programmes including projects
and activities enhancing regional cooperation in all aspects of disaster management
including humanitarian assistance response.

Singapore successfully concluded the Chairmanship of the ASEAN Committee on
Disaster Management (ACDM) in 2021 that saw the launch of three new ASEAN Plus
One mechanisms with China, Japan and ROK which will contribute towards the
enhancement of the regional capacities and capabilities in disaster management and
resiliency. The 6th ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (AADMER) Partnership Conference held in June 2021 generated pledges
close to US$11 million from 21 partners to support the implementation of the
AADMER Work Programme 2021 – 2025. ASEAN also rallied support to operationalise
the ASEAN Leaders’ mandate for ASEAN’s humanitarian assistance to Myanmar to be
delivered through the AHA Centre in support of Point 4 of the Five-Point Consensus.

The ASEAN-Emergency Response and Assessment Team (ERAT) is the official
resource of ASEAN and designed to support National Disaster Management Office
(NDMO) of the affected ASEAN Member State in the aftermath of a disaster. In 2019,
Singapore deployed two officers to be part of two ASEAN Emergency Response and
Assessment Team (ASEAN-ERAT) missions. The first mission was in support of the
ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management
(AHA Centre)’s efforts to conduct a preliminary needs assessment to identify possible
areas where ASEAN could support the repatriation process in the Rakhine State in
March 2019. The second mission was to support the Myanmar Delegation’s 2nd High
Level Visit to Bangladesh in December 2019. In 2022, Singapore deployed one officer
to participate in the deployment to Philippines in November 2022 to conduct a Rapid
Needs Assessment in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis. Two officers from Singapore’s
Changi Regional HADR Coordination Centre (RHCC) will also be facilitators for the
AHA Centre’s ERAT Course in 2023.

In April 2023, Singapore co-organised two ASEAN-ERAT Level 2 courses with the AHA
Centre, which was held in Singapore, namely the (a) ASEAN Humanitarian Logistics
Training and (b) Civil Military Coordination Course, for 14 ASEAN-ERAT members.

322

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Upon completion of the Humanitarian Logistics course, participants were recognized
as ASEAN-ERAT Humanitarian Logistics Specialists within ASEAN-ERAT.

In August 2023, Singapore would be hosting the inaugural ASEAN Disaster Resilience
Forum (ADRF), a biennial forum which provides an avenue for ASEAN and non-ASEAN
stakeholders to discuss topics related to disaster resilience in the region. The ADRF is
one of the modalities to deliberate on to promote synergy and coordination among
the relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies, ASEAN Centres and Entities. The ADRF will be
held back-to-back with the ASEAN Strategic Policy Dialogue on Disaster Management
(SPDDM) 2023, which has been held since 2015. The ASEAN SPDDM charts long-term
strategies for the ACDM and sharpens ASEAN’s policy direction, strategic
engagements and thought leadership in disaster management. In addition, Singapore
organises the ASEAN Senior Executive Programme in Disaster Management, (SEPDM)
annually to nurture the planning and crisis management capacities and facilitate
networking of the senior leadership cadre within each AMS’ National Disaster
Management Organisation.

Singapore launched the RHCC in September 2014 which aims to provide a platform
for both military-to-military and civil-military coordination in HADR, and to support
an Affected State. The RHCC’s coordination focus complements existing disaster
response institutions – such as the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), and the AHA Centre. RHCC’s OPERA Computer Information System
fuses information on assessed ground needs, status of deployments and key logistics
movements to aid its partners and the Affected State in coordination and planning
functions. Singapore is appreciative of like-minded countries that have supported
and partnered with the RHCC. These countries include Australia, Brunei, Canada,
China, France, India, Lao PDR, New Zealand, Peru, the Philippines, the ROK, Russia,
Thailand, the UK, the US, and Vietnam, which have attached International Liaison
Officers (ILOs) to the RHCC or exchanged contact points for disaster relief.

Exercise Coordinated Response (Ex COORES) is RHCC’s flagship multilateral table-top
exercise simulating the conduct of multinational coordination centre operations in
response to a natural disaster. Previous iterations of Ex COORES built military
linkages, enhanced mutual understanding and interoperability, and strengthened

323

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
military cooperation in disaster relief between international organisations,
governmental agencies and non-government organisations. The next iteration of Ex
COORES will be held in late 2023.

Since 2015, Singapore has been hosting the annual Strategic Policy Dialogue on
Disaster Management (SPDDM) to chart long-term strategies for the ASEAN
Committee on Disaster Management (ACDM) and sharpen ASEAN’s policy direction,
strategic engagements, and thought leadership in disaster management. In addition,
Singapore organises the ASEAN Senior Executive Programme in Disaster
Management, (SEPDM) annually to nurture the planning and crisis management
capacities, and facilitate networking of the senior leadership cadre within each AMS’
National Disaster Management Organisation.

v. Maritime Security

As a maritime nation, Singapore has a strong interest in keeping the international
sea lines of communication open, safe, and secure. Singapore takes a serious view
of any threats to the freedom and safety of navigation. To this end, Singapore works
with like-minded countries to uphold universally recognised principles of
international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS), and plays an active part in fostering regional maritime security
cooperation and enhancing port security.

As a major hub port and one of the top ten ship registries in the world, Singapore is
committed to the security of seaborne cargo. As one of the first States to implement
the International Maritime Organization (IMO) International Ship and Port Facility
Security (ISPS) Code, Singapore has contributed actively to capacity building
programmes at various regional forums to assist countries in their implementation
of the ISPS Code. Singapore is also party to the IMO’s International Convention for
the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (SUA Convention 1988), and the 1988
Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms
located on the Continental Shelf (SUA FFP 1988).

324

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Given the existence of vital sea lines of communication in the region such as the
South China Sea (SCS), the Straits of Malacca and Singapore (SOMS), the Lombok
Strait and the Sunda Strait, Singapore cooperates closely with key stakeholders to
uphold maritime security and freedom of navigation. To this end, Singapore remains
fully committed to the following three principles, which have gained broad
consensus amongst regional stakeholders: (i) primary responsibility for the security
of regional waterways lies with the littoral States; (ii) the international community,
including major user States and bodies, like the IMO, have an important role to play;
and (iii) new cooperative measures should be developed in accordance with the
1982 UNCLOS and other international conventions. Singapore is also supportive of
ASEAN’s approach towards the maritime issues encapsulated in the Bali Concord II,
signed in October 2003, which reiterates the trans-boundary nature of maritime
issues and the need to address them in a holistic, integrated and comprehensive
way.

These principles have translated into cooperative efforts at a regional level.
Singapore is part of the Malacca Straits Patrol (MSP), a joint undertaking by the
littoral States of Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand, to enhance maritime
security in the SOMS. Since its inception in July 2004, the MSP has substantially
reduced the incidence of piracy and armed robbery against ships occurring in the
SOMS. The 14th MSP Joint Coordinating Committee was conducted from 15 to 16
January 2020, where members discussed possible measures to strengthen
information-sharing and operational coordination to deter and disrupt sea robberies
within their respective territorial waters in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore.

Apart from conducting air and sea patrols, Singapore also believes in enhancing
maritime awareness and ensuring systematic and timely exchanges of information
to keep sea lanes safe. In this regard, the Information Fusion Centre (IFC) established
in April 2009 seeks to facilitate information-sharing and collaboration to enhance
maritime security. With operational linkages to 100 partners across 43 countries, the
IFC serves as a platform for multinational and inter-agency collaboration to resolve
common maritime security concerns, including piracy and armed robbery against
ships, hijacking, search and rescue, weapons proliferation, human/arms trafficking,
and smuggling. The IFC fuses, sense-makes, and disseminates maritime information

325

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
through its Real-time Information-sharing System (IRIS) to enable rapid
collaboration between maritime agencies and the shipping community. The IFC also
supports broader efforts to enhance regional capacity for maritime security though
the conduct of exercises, workshops and other training activities. These include the
annual Regional Maritime Practitioners’ Programme (RMPP) and the biennial
Maritime Information Sharing Exercise (MARISX). The IFC is also the permanent
secretariat for the ASEAN Navy Chiefs’ Meeting.

Singapore is a founding member of the Regional Cooperation Agreement on
Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP), the first
intergovernmental initiative that promotes and enhances cooperation against piracy
and armed robbery against ships in Asia. At present, 21 States are Contracting Parties
to the ReCAAP. Singapore has hosted the ReCAAP Information Sharing Centre (ISC)
since its inception in November 2006, and has renewed its commitment to host the
ISC for another 5 years, from 2022 to 2027. Over the years, the ReCAAP ISC has
established itself as a go-to authority on trends and analyses of piracy and armed
robbery against ships in Asia, and continues to play an instrumental role in
disseminating timely and accurate information for governments and industry
members alike.

The ReCAAP ISC has collaborated with partner organisations and the industry to
produce useful practice guides for the maritime community, such as the Regional
Guide 2 to Counter Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ships in Asia in March 2021
and the Guidance on Abduction of Crew in the Sulu-Celebes Seas and Waters off
Eastern Sabah in July 2019. The ReCAAP ISC has also supported numerous capacity
building efforts to improve the capability of regional governments to combat piracy
and armed robbery against ships in the region. The ReCAAP is held up as a successful
model of regional cooperation in combating piracy and armed robbery against ships
by the IMO and has inspired other similar initiatives, such as the Djibouti Code of
Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in
the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden (GoA).

326

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
vi. ICTs Security

Cyber threats are a transboundary and cross-cutting challenge to all AMS. At the
same time, cybersecurity is also a key enabler of economic progress, job creation
and better living standards as AMS step up their digitalisation efforts.

Under Singapore’s ASEAN Chairmanship in 2018, the first ever ASEAN Leaders’
Statement on Cybersecurity Coordination was endorsed by Leaders to reaffirm
ASEAN’s commitment to a secure and resilient rules-based cyberspace. Since 2016,
Singapore has also been hosting the ASEAN Ministerial Conference on Cybersecurity
(AMCC), held on the side-lines of the Singapore International Cyber Week (SICW).
AMS subscribed in-principle to the 11 voluntary, non-binding norms of responsible
State behaviour in the use of ICTs at the 3rd AMCC in 2018, making ASEAN the first
and only region to do so. At the 7th AMCC in 2022, participants shared their national
perspectives and efforts in managing cyber threats and attacks, and suggested ways
in which AMS could work with one another to strengthen collective, regional
response. Participants also expressed their support for Singapore’s efforts to
establish the ASEAN Regional Computer Emergency Response Team (“ASEAN CERT”)

As set out in the 2018 ASEAN Leaders’ Statement, Singapore worked closely with
ASEAN to draft the initial proposal for better cybersecurity policy coordination in
ASEAN. The proposal to establish an ASEAN Cybersecurity Coordinating Committee
(ASEAN Cyber-CC) comprising representatives from relevant ASEAN sectoral bodies
overseeing cybersecurity issues was considered at the ADGMIN in 2019. Its objective
is to strengthen cross-sectoral coordination on cybersecurity while preserving the
exclusive work domains of the sectoral bodies. The third ASEAN Cyber-CC meeting
was held in November 2022.

At the 10th ASEAN Network Security Action Council (ANSAC) Meeting and 2nd
Telecommunications and IT Senior Officials-ASEAN Telecommunications Regulators’
Council (TELSOM-ATRC) Leaders Retreat in August 2019 in Bangkok, the methods for
the implementation of the ASEAN CERT was noted, and the scope of work for the
ASEAN CERT was agreed on. Singapore was tasked to continue the study on its
implementation model. With tbhe endorsement of the ASEAN CERT Implementation

327

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Paper at ADGMIN 2022, the next steps are to work out the Terms of Reference and
financing details for the ASEAN CERT for a period of minimally 10 years.

Singapore has also been convening an annual ASEAN CERT Incident Drill (ACID) for
the last 17 years to strengthen the cybersecurity preparedness of AMS, reinforce
regional bbcoordination drills, and enhance regional cooperation.

Alongside Malaysia and Japan, Singapore co-chaired the ARF Inter-Sessional
Mbeeting on Security of and in the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies b(ARF ISM on ICTs Security) from August 2018 to July 2021. The ARF
ISM on ICTs Security abnd its Open-ended Study Group (OESG) focuses on the
adoption of CBMs bbto facilitate communication, information sharing as well as the
exchange of know-how anbd best practices. In so doing, we can reduce the risk of
cyber conflict, and build inter-country trust and confidence in cyberspace. For the
intersessional year 2023-2024, Singbapore is co-sponsoring two proposals. The first
is on a workshop on Protectbbion of ICT-Enabled Critical Infrastructures with the
European Union, and the second is on a workshop on the National Survey of
Implementation of UN recommendations on responsible use of ICTs with Australia
and Malaysia.

In support of international and regional capacity building efforts, Singapore has also
organised several programmes under the ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity Centre of
Excellence (ASCCE). The intent is to continue to work with fellow ARF Member States
to enhance our collective competencies and exchange of perspectives in the policy,
operational, technical and diplomacy domains of cybersecurity. Some examples of
key capacity building activities include the United Nations-Singapore Cyber
Fellowship (UNSCF) Programme which is co-organised with the UN Office of
Disarmament Affairs. The UNSCF is open to all UN Member States, including ARF
Member States and is targeted at Cyber Ambassadors and/or the heads/deputy
heads of national agencies overseeing cybersecurity. Singapore will be hosting two
runs of the UNSCF in May and August 2023. Singapore has also organised two Norms
Implementation Checklist Workshops in 2022 in support of the practical
implementation of 11 voluntary, non-binding norms of responsible State behaviour.
The next series of Workshops will be held over the course of 2023 to 2025

328

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

Multilaterally, Singapore participates actively in international discussions, including
at the UN Singapore has participated in and contributed to strengthening the rulesbased multilateral order at the 6th UN Group of Governmental Experts (UNGGE) on
Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of International
Security and the inaugural Open-ended Working Group (OEWG) on Developments
in the Field of ICTs

in the Context of International Security. Both processes

concluded in 2021 with their respective consensus reports were adopted by the UN
General Assembly. The reports contained specific recommendations on how
countries should work together towards an open, secure, stable, accessible and
peaceful cyberspace. Singapore chairs the ongoing five-year UN OEWG on Security
of and in the use of ICTs (2021 – 2025), which builds on the work of the inaugural UN
OEWG and the sixth UN GGE. The OEWG (2021 -2025) adopted its first Annual
Progress Report by consensus in 2022. This sets out a clear roadmap for the next
steps that the OEWG will take to foster practical international cooperation on areas
such as rules, norms and principles, international law, capacity building, and CBMs
towards a safe and secure cyberspace.

Within the defence sectoral, the ADMM-Plus EWG on CS, is a platform for defence
establishments from ASEAN and Plus countries to enhance cooperation in
addressing challenges to cybersecurity . Singapore actively participates in the EWG
on CS to foster understanding, strengthen practical cooperation and support
capacity-building efforts in the region.

The ACICE is part of Singapore’s contributions to strengthen cooperation amongst
ASEAN Member States (AMS) in building a safe, secure, stable and accessible cyber
and digital space. Since September 2021, ACICE has circulated monthly reports to
AMS to raise shared situational awareness, provided updates on recent
developments and trends, as well as tactics and techniques used by malicious actors
in the cyber and information domains. These reports are also published on ACICE’s
website. In February 2023, ACICE launched a Malware Information Sharing Platform
(MISP) for AMS to access, read and share real-time information on cyber malware
and other relevant cyber threats. The timely sharing of cybersecurity threat
information leverages the collective knowledge of AMS for early warning, timely

329

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
response and mitigation of cyberattacks. The inaugural ACICE Advisory Board
meeting was held via video conference in November 2022, with nominated
representatives from all AMS as well as the ASEAN Secretariat in attendance. The
Meeting exchanged views on how ASEAN defence establishments could cooperate
in the cyber and information domains, as well as the research areas, activities and
products that ACICE could work on. ACICE is located in Singapore, and the Centre is
expected to be ready by second half of 2023.

As a co-sponsor of the Programme of Action (POA) Proposal for long-term
institutional dialogue on cybersecurity issues at the UN, Singapore also looks
forward to working with international partners to explore how the POA and OEWG
can complement their work and build on the strong foundation of past GGE and
OEWG consensus reports.

In our capacity as the ASEAN Voluntary Lead Shepherd on Cybercrime, Singapore has
been working closely with other AMS and key stakeholders, such as INTERPOL, to
identify priority areas of common interest to harmonise ASEAN’s competencies in
combating cybercrime. Singapore has also organised training programmes and
meetings for AMS to encourage information sharing and build a close network of
cyber experts within the region. The initiatives proposed to combat cybercrime are
in close alignment with the objectives in the ASEAN Political-Security Blueprint 2025.
On 28 November 2019, Singapore was formally appointed a permanent member of
the INTERPOL Cybercrime Directors Workshop during the 10th edition of the
Workshop. Members would convene twice a year to exchange operational
information and experience in tackling various types of cybercrimes and cyber
threats in the region. The 11th and 12th Cybercrime Directors Workshop took place
on 23 April 2020 and 20 January 2021 respectively via video conference.

In order to bolster our regional efforts to effectively address the growing cybercrime
threat, Singapore has continued to work closely with the INTERPOL ASEAN
Cybercrime Operations Desk (ASEAN Desk), which currently has seconded officers
from Singapore and Vietnam. In February 2021, the ASEAN Desk published its 2nd
ASEAN Cyber Threat Assessment Report that provided analyses and insights on the
latest cyber threat landscape in ASEAN and highlighted strategies and the way

330

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
forward for the region. The ASEAN Desk also coordinates intelligence-led joint
operations in the region targeting cybercriminals. In 2022, a global operation
codenamed “Killer Bee” led by the ASEAN Desk targeted malware cyber fraud across
the region. Cooperation between INTERPOL, various law enforcement agencies in
the region, private-sector partner Trend Micro and Nigeria’s Economic and Financial
Crimes Commission led to the arrest of three suspected global scammers.

We have also actively contributed to capacity and awareness building efforts. In
conjunction with the Singapore International Cyber Week (SICW), the 5th ASEAN
Cybercrime Prosecutors’ Roundtable Meeting (ACPRM) and the 8th Senior Officials
Roundtable on Cybercrime (SORC) were organised in October 2022. The former
allows cybercrime prosecutors and law enforcement officers to share best practices
and chart the way forward for better cooperation in this domain, while the latter
provides a platform for high-level discussions among the ASEAN SOMTC Leaders and
the Plus Three Dialogue Partner countries, industry experts and academia to discuss
the latest threats, trends and solutions on cybercrime. In November 2022, Singapore
co-organised the Course on Cybercrime with Italy. The 3-day course, held in Rome
for ASEAN Member States and ASEANAPOL, explored the cybercrime fighting efforts
of the Italian agencies and discussed strengthening cooperation between Italy and
the ASEAN region.

The Singapore Police Force (SPF) CyberCrime Command (CCC) also organised the
ASEAN Plus Three Cybercrime Conference (APTCC) in 2022. The APTCC provides a
platform for ASEAN cybercrime agencies to take stock of new and emerging
cybercrime threats in ASEAN and to exchange information with the Plus Three
Dialogue Partners (People’s Republic of China, Japan and Republic of Korea) on the
latest prevention measures, law and regulatory policies; as well as best practices on
cybercrime forensics and investigations to strengthen ASEAN’s overall cybercrime
response. The APTCC started as a workshop in 2016, followed by in-person
conferences in 2018 and 2019 and a virtual conference in 2021.

From 9 to 10 November 2022, the SPF CCC organised the 5th APTCC. Held virtually,
the theme of the conference was “Building Resilience – Overcoming Shared
Challenges Together”. About 50 participants from the ASEAN Member States and

331

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Plus Three Dialogue Partners took part in the two-day virtual conference. The virtual
conference saw speakers from private companies such as Blackpanda, Group-IB,
Kasparsky Lab and Chainalysis share their insights on tackling cybercrime, as well as
the United States Department of Justice which presented on the importance of
international cooperation.

IV.

Role of ARF

Since its inception in 1994 as an open and inclusive forum to discuss key political and
security issues, the ARF has evolved from Stage I Promotion of CBMs to Stage II
Development of Preventive Diplomacy (PD) mechanisms. As the 2010 Hanoi Plan of Action
(POA) to implement the ARF Vision Statement expired in 2020, ARF Participants
developed a new POA (2020-2025), which will guide ARF’s future progress in accordance
with universally recognised norms and principles of international law. This is a timely
initiative as the world grapples with the political, economic and social consequences of a
global pandemic.

332

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Against this backdrop, we should be prepared to face more complicated regional security
challenges. More than ever, recovery and success would depend on greater confidence
and trust among ARF Participants, fostering closer collaboration and candid dialogue, as
well as responding collectively to the complex post-pandemic landscape. ASEAN will have
to ensure our continued Centrality and unity through initiatives, including at the ARF, that
assert our relevance. The regional architecture is constantly in flux and the increasing
complex geopolitical environment has intensified some centrifugal forces. The ARF must
be vigilant and renew our value as an open and inclusive platform for engaging all friendly
partners. To this end, Singapore remains fully committed to the ARF and its role as a key
pillar in the multi-layered regional security architecture.

333

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

THAILAND
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment

On 5 May 2023, the World Health Organization had officially declared that COVID-19 is no longer
a "public health emergency of international concern". However, its massive toll on human lives
all around the globe, the economy, and social dynamics cannot be overstated. With over
805,729 deaths in Southeast Asia alone, the region still suffers the lasting effect of the 3-year
long pandemic and struggles to recover in the post COVID-19 world.

The great-power rivalry continues to pose geopolitical uncertainties and increasing risks of
miscalculation and escalation, turning Southeast Asia into a major potential flashpoint.
Reactivation and formation of security alliances has further intensified competition between
major powers. To make matters worse, the situation in Ukraine has heightened uncertainty and
unsettled commodity markets. According to the World Bank, while the region’s direct
dependence on Russia and Ukraine for imports and exports of goods, services, and capitals, is
limited, the situation and sanctions against Russia are likely to increase international prices of
food and fuel, hurting consumers and growth. The conflict has exacerbated yet another global
existential threat: food insecurity.

ASEAN, as a regional grouping comprising small and medium sized countries, has been able to
work with major powers and play a central role in building strategic trust and confidence,
focusing global efforts on socio-economic recovery in the post COVID-19 era.

Implementation of ASEAN’s initiatives in response to COVID-19 has enhanced partnerships and
forged closer cooperation with external partners. Positive and concrete developments include
procuring COVID-19 vaccines through the COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fund; operationalisation
of the ASEAN Regional Reserve of Medical Supplies for Public Health Emergencies; proposal to
establish the APT Reserve; progress of the ASEAN Comprehensive Recovery Framework (ACRF)
implementation; and operationalisation of the ASEAN Travel Corridor.
The launch of ASEAN Centre for Public Health Emergencies and Emerging Diseases
(ACPHEED) has reinforced ASEAN’s collective efforts to strengthen regional capacity in
responding to future pandemics. Thailand hosts the ACPHEED Secretariat and also serves as an
ACPHEED Secretariat Office for the “Response” pillar, while Viet Nam for “Prevention” and
Indonesia for “Detection” pillars respectively. ASEAN is currently expediting the conclusion of

334

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
the Establishment Agreement of ACPHEED to start the operationalisation of the 3 offices at the
earliest.

ASEAN Centrality in the Evolving Regional Architecture
The COVID-19 crisis together with major powers rivalries and multiple shocks in the global
economy offer ASEAN an opportunity to recalibrate the ASEAN-centred regional architecture.
The strengthening of such architecture is supported by shared norms and principles of
international law, as enshrined in key instruments such as the ASEAN Charter, the Treaty of
Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), the Declaration of the East Asia Summit on the
Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations, among others. With wider recognition of its
governing principles in inter-state relations in response to security challenges in the uncertain
geopolitical environment, the TAC has become ever more relevant. Reinforcing the TAC and its
principles will strengthen regional norms and the promotion of peace and stability.

The long-term goal is to realise a strategic new equilibrium that will be conducive to peace,
security and prosperity for all in the Asia-Pacific region, from the Pacific Ocean to the Indian
Ocean. The 34th ASEAN Summit in Bangkok in November 2019 adopted the ASEAN Outlook on
the Indo-Pacific (AOIP) which is “ASEAN’s Vista” on the evolving regional geo-strategic
landscape anchored on existing norms and principles including those enshrined in the TAC, and
on engagement with its dialogue partners. It aims to promote win-win cooperation in areas that
are mutually beneficial, based on the principle of inclusiveness and the 3Ms: Mutual Trust,
Mutual Respect, and Mutual Benefit.

The ASEAN-centred regional architecture comprising the ASEAN Plus One, the ASEAN Plus
Three, the East Asia Summit (EAS), the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus)
and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) has provided ASEAN with a strong regional convening
power and a multi-layered platform to establish rules and norms for a regional order. These
fora have provided venues for key players to engage in dialogue for the enhancement of
strategic trust, the strengthening of confidence-building measures and the promotion of
preventive diplomacy, focusing on win-win cooperation and concrete deliverables. They will
ultimately contribute to attaining “sustainable security” within the ASEAN region and beyond.

II. Regional Security Environment

335

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Asia-Pacific’s strategic landscape has become more volatile as a result of more intense
competition amongst various states in order to gain geo-strategic advantages in the region.
Geopolitical uncertainties and confrontations could potentially affect regional peace and
security as well as undermine prosperity in the region, especially efforts to recover from COVID19 and attain long-term sustainable growth.
Additionally, the region is also encountering various challenges that could potentially affect
regional peace and stability as well as hinder our economic progress. Disputes emanating from
historical roots or in relation to border issues are likely to re-emerge, which pose risks for
regional instability and growing tension among countries. In addition, non-traditional security
issues, namely; transnational crimes, terrorism and violent extremism, cyber attacks, maritime
security as well as health security, in particular the adverse effects from the COVID-19
pandemic, have brought new challenges and posed threats to our security landscape.
In the maritime domain, maritime security and cooperation have assumed greater importance
for Southeast Asia and the Indo-Pacific. Therefore, challenges that would compromise safety
and security of Sea Lines of Communication (SLOCs) need to be addressed effectively. Other
increasingly crucial maritime issues, such as marine resources management, including
combatting illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU Fishing), transnational crime at sea,
piracy and armed robbery, people smuggling and wildlife smuggling also require closer
cooperation. To complement these efforts, practical cooperation, maritime domain awareness
(MDA), information sharing and intelligence exchange must also be enhanced.
On the South China Sea, increased tensions and provocative incidents in the area may
undermine regional peace, security and stability. It is therefore necessary for all parties
concerned to exercise self-restraint and avoid activities that may lead to miscalculation,
confrontation or even conflict. ASEAN Member States and China are encouraged to maintain
trust and confidence in the region through practical confidence-building measures, continued
dialogue and win-win cooperation under the ambit of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea (DOC). The completion of the second reading of the Single Draft Code of
Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) Negotiating Text in May 2023 by the ASEAN - China Joint
Working Group on the Implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South
China Sea (JWG-DOC) is welcomed as it signals a positive momentum towards an early
conclusion of an effective and substantive COC.

336

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Meanwhile, all parties concerned should create an environment conducive to the peaceful
resolution of disputes, consistent with international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. It is also
pertinent to pursue full and effective implementation of the DOC and properly implement its
measures, as well as ensuring freedom of navigation and overflight the South China Sea.
The region continues to be vulnerable to the threats and exploitation of transnational organised
crime, terrorist groups, and smugglers, including trafficking in persons and people smuggling,
irregular migration and particularly illicit drug trafficking. Illicit drug markets in the region have
expanded and diversified and appeared to be largely exacerbated by the pandemic outbreak.
This landscape requires ASEAN to enhance its border management cooperation through
enhanced coordination in all aspects, from information sharing and intelligence exchange,
institutional capacity building, implementing appropriate measures to ensure safety and
security from land, air and sea border challenges, to catalysing joint action to help address
multifaceted dimensions of transnational crime, with a view that it is an enormous task no single
country can tackle alone. Nevertheless, there is a need to ensure a balanced approach between
safety and security, including health security, and cross-border trade facilitation and the
seamless movement of goods and people.
The ever-increasing digital connectivity worldwide has been accompanied by trends where the
use of ICTs for criminal purposes has become more intensified, sophisticated and less
preventable. According to the UNODC, the increased digitalisation of society, compounded by
the COVID-19 outbreak, has contributed to a recent 600 % rise in cybercrimes in Southeast Asia.
The criminals target not only individuals, but increasingly focus on critical national infrastructure
and business of all sizes in both private and public sectors.
The establishment of ASEAN Cybersecurity Coordinating Committee (ASEAN Cyber-CC) and the
three ASEAN Cyber-CC meetings in November of 2020, 2021, and 2022 respectively, reflected
the importance of strengthening cross-sectoral regional coordination on cybersecurity,
including through the implementation of a list of voluntary, practical norms of responsible state
behaviour in cyberspace to promote an open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful ICT
environment. Equally important is cybersecurity training and capacity building, and this is where
the ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Capacity Building Centre (AJCCBC) plays an important catalytic
role to enhance the capacity of cybersecurity experts and specialists in the region.
In spite of the declining regional trend of terrorist attacks due to travel restrictions caused by
the pandemic, terrorist groups are likely to resume their activities and strengthen their

337

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
organisations once the situation has improved. Meanwhile, the use of social media and online
platforms to disseminate violent extremism and racism to the public have drastically increased
along with growing risks of potential lone-wolf terrorist attacks. In 2023, there are still threats
of local terrorist groups, especially those associated with the Islamic State (IS), in some parts of
Southeast Asia.
The situation on the Korean Peninsula remains a pressing security issue in the region. On 4
February 2022, ASEAN Foreign Ministers issued a statement entitled “The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) Missile Tests” expressing grave concerns over the continued ballistic
missile tests conducted by the DPRK, which may escalate tensions and threaten regional peace
and stability. The said statement also called on the DPRK to fully comply with all relevant United
Nations Security Council (UNSC) resolutions, taking into account the international community’s
calls for diplomacy, and reaffirmed ASEAN’s readiness to play a constructive role, including
through utilising ASEAN-led platform such as the ARF, to promote a conducive atmosphere for
peaceful dialogue amongst concerned parties to bring about a complete, verifiable, irreversible,
and peaceful denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula. On 10 June 2022, ASEAN Foreign
Ministers also issued a statement entitled “The Recent Surge of Missile Testing on the Korean
Peninsula” expressing grave concerns over the recent surge in DPRK’s Intercontinental Ballistic
Missile (ICBM) testing and ballistic missile launches. Said statement urged the DPRK to exercise
self-restraint and reiterated ASEAN’s call to the DPRK to fully comply with all relevant UNSC
resolutions and ASEAN’s readiness to utilise ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ARF to play a
constructive role to de-escalate tension to bring about a complete, verifiable, irreversible, and
peaceful denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula.
On 17 February 2022, ASEAN Foreign Ministers also issued a statement welcoming the Joint
Statement of the Leaders of the Five Nuclear-Weapons States on Preventing Nuclear War and
Avoiding Arms Race. The Statement reflects Thailand’s firm belief that the total elimination of
nuclear weapons is the only way to guarantee against its use and threat of use.
ASEAN reaffirms its leading role in helping Myanmar return to normalcy, renew the path to
democracy and revive its development track. In this regard, the ASEAN Leaders reaffirmed their
commitment to expediting the progress of the implementation of the Five-Point Consensus,
through the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders’ Review and Decision on the Implementation of the
Five-Point Consensus at the 40th and 41st ASEAN Summits in November 2022 in Phnom Penh.
Thailand continues to render its full support to the

338

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ASEAN Chair in moving forward the implementation of the Five-Point Consensus. Thailand joins
other ASEAN Member States in calling for immediate cessation of violence in all forms, in order
to create an environment conducive for inclusive national dialogues as well as the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to those most in need in a timely and effective manner. Thailand looks
forward to the phase 2 delivery of humanitarian assistance, led by the ASEAN Coordination
Centre of Humanitarian Management (AHA Centre) and the Secretary-General of ASEAN.
As a close neighbour of Myanmar, Thailand is gravely concerned over the rising trend in
transnational crimes from the prolonged conflict, including trafficking in persons and drug
trafficking, which have affected security and stability of the region and its people. The
complexity of the situation requires pragmatic and step-by-step approach that is Myanmar-led
and Myanmar-owned. Thailand believes in ASEAN way of engagement, non-interference, and
mutual respect, as well as 3Cs principles of Consultation, Cooperation and Consensus to guide
our collective efforts in helping Myanmar find a peaceful political solution. In that spirit,
Informal Discussions on Myanmar were convened on 22 December 2022, 25 February 2023 and
19 June 2023 respectively to provide a diplomatic space for candid, frank and constructive
discussion to find practical resolution to the situation in Myanmar. Although they were not
convened under the ASEAN Framework, the Informal Discussions could complement and
support ASEAN’s collective efforts in addressing the situation.
Thailand also attaches importance to resolving the situation in Rakhine State in a
comprehensive and holistic manner, through a multi-pronged approach that combines
sustainable development to address the root causes and promoting durable peace, stability and
harmony between local communities. Thailand reaffirms its commitment and support for the
implementation of projects identified under the Preliminary Needs Assessment (PNA) in
Rakhine State. Thailand’s International Cooperation Agency (TICA) has implemented three
projects under the PNA, one of which on provision and promotion of agriculture machinery was
finalised in October 2022. Thailand also reaffirms its support for repatriation of displaced
persons in Rakhine State in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner, and welcomes the progress
between Bangladesh and Myanmar cooperation in conducting the pilot project on this matter.
Finally, the escalation of hostilities and the use of military force in Ukraine has led to the loss of
lives and destruction of property and civilian infrastructure. The current humanitarian situation
in Ukraine and humanitarian consequences of the crisis are of grave concerns. The adverse
ramification of the situation, including food insecurity, energy crisis, and displaced refugees, is
severely felt by the Asia-Pacific region. All relevant parties must cease all hostilities and violence

339

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
as well as to exercise utmost restraint before the conflict could reach the point of no return.
Diplomatic means must be fully exhausted to find a peaceful settlement through dialogue.
Moreover, it is important to support the proposal of the United Nations Secretary-General
(UNSG) to establish effective humanitarian corridors to guarantee safe passage for people and
the needed supplies. ASEAN Foreign Ministers have issued three statements regarding the
situation in Ukraine, with the latest one dated 8 April 2022 expressing deepest condolences to
the people of Ukraine and support the UNSG’s call for an independent investigation of all
alleged atrocities against innocent civilians, including in Bucha.

III. National Security and Defence Policy
In relation to Thailand’s national security and defence policy, the Ministry of Defence has
published its policy statement in an effort to promote transparency and enhance trust and
confidence between Thailand and ASEAN Member States, as well as other partners within and
beyond the Asia-Pacific. The mission of the Ministry of Defence covers wide range of issues
including, amongst others, enhancing defence cooperation with neighbouring nations, ASEAN
Member States and international organisations, both at bilateral and multilateral levels,
enhancing the integration of strengths and capabilities with every sector, maintaining capability
of the armed forces and national defence system, increasing armed forces capability in order to
counter non-traditional threats and strengthening defence industry.
In addition, the Ministry of Defence attaches great importance to participation in cooperation
frameworks which will provide opportunities for the armed forces of the region to engage in
practical cooperation to promote mutual interest of participating countries and enhance
capabilities for the future. The activities of the ADMM’s initiatives and the ADMM-Plus Experts’
Working Groups include the enhancement of defence establishments’ role in supporting border
management to collectively respond to transnational challenges, and strengthening maritime
security cooperation to build trust and confidence as well as practical cooperation in the
maritime domain of the region.
The ASEAN Center of Military Medicine (ACMM), a subsidiary body under the ADMM, has
contributed to the region’s humanitarian assistance and disaster relief frameworks as well as
complemented the work of the AHA Centre in improving the region’s response and coordination
mechanism. During the COVID-19 outbreak, the ACMM has played an active role in monitoring
and responding to the situation. The important implementing plan of ACMM in 2023 includes
the meeting on Maritime Security Operations in Military Medicine, Endemic concern Post

340

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
COVID-19 Management, and Health Needs Assessment on 13-17 March 2023 which led to the
drafting of Maritime Security Operations in Military Medicine Guideline and Post COVID-19
Management Manual, and the amendment of ACMM Standard Operating Procedures 002 to be
in line with AHA Centre.

IV. National Contribution to Regional Security
Joint Exercise
Cobra Gold is one of the largest multinational exercises in the Asia-Pacific region which has been
held annually in Thailand since 1982. It is known to be one of the largest theater security
cooperation exercises in the Asia-Pacific region which aims to strengthen military ties, and
improve capabilities and interoperability of participating countries. The 42nd iteration of the
Cobra Gold theater exercises took place during 27 February - 10 March 2023, providing a
training for 7,394 participants from 30 countries. The training aimed for a military planning in
enforcing peace by using military forces, including the training to support non-traditional
security namely humanitarian assistance and disaster relief and cyber security. The training
course was comprised of training on command, individual’s assistance project namely
construction project and table top exercise, and physical training.
Peacekeeping
Thailand has been a steadfast troop-contributing country to UN peacekeeping missions since
1950. Over 27,000 Thai military and police personnel, men and women, have served in more
than 20 peacekeeping and related missions of the UN. At present, Thailand contributes an
engineering company of 273 personnel, including 8 female personnel, to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as well as military and police officers to two UN peacekeeping
missions, namely UNMOGIP in India and Pakistan and UNMISS in South Sudan. Thailand has also
been consistently deploying female military and police officers to UN peacekeeping missions
worldwide. In 2023, 10 female military personnel and 5 female police personnel are currently
being deployed in two UN peacekeeping Missions, namely UNMOGIP in India and Pakistan and
UNMISS in South Sudan.
As part of UNMISS, the Thai Horizontal Military Engineering Company (HMEC)’s main
responsibilities include road reconstruction and building infrastructure. Thai peacekeepers also
endeavour to promote development initiatives and the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy (SEP)
initiated by His Majesty the late King Bhumibol Adulyadej the Great to assist in achieving

341

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
sustaining peace which complements Sustainable Development Goal 16: Peaceful and inclusive
societies, justice and accountable institutions. Previous missions in Timor-Leste and Darfur were
a case in point where SEP was successfully applied.
The Peace Operations Center (POC) of the Royal Thai Armed Forces (RTARF) has collaborated
with other countries in exchanging trainers and instructors, and providing training courses,
namely (1) UN Staff Officers Course (UNSOC) and (2) Child Protection Course for both predeployed Thai and foreign officers to enhance awareness on child protection in conflicting areas
with an aim to establish a Centre of Excellence on peacekeeping and child protection in ASEAN.
In line with the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy (2021-2028), POC aims to promote the
Women, Peace and Security (WPS) agenda by increasing participation of female peacekeepers
and implementing the UN Triangular Partnership Project 2022-2023, and enhancing
cooperation on capacity building and joint training.
WPS
Regarding the WPS agenda, Thailand developed National Measures and Guidelines on WPS
2017-2021 and propelled in action through the establishment of Children and Women
Coordinating Center in Southern Thailand. The National Measures and Guidelines is currently in
the process of being reviewed to extend its implementation to 2023-2026 with an aim to
develop into National Action Plan on WPS. The important measures of the Action Plan include
prevention, protection and recovery, capacity building and empowerment and participation.

Counter-terrorism
The improvement of COVID-19 pandemic situation, the exploitation of cyberspace by terrorist
groups for propaganda and recruitment, and the volatile situation in certain regions, especially
in Afghanistan, have contributed to the rebounding of global and regional terrorist threat.
Therefore, the international community should prepare for and remain vigilant to such
circumstances.
The number of terrorist incidents in Southeast Asia in 2021 declined due to the continued
efforts of authorities in pursuing their operations and law enforcements. However, there are
still threats of local terrorist groups, especially those associated with the Islamic State
(IS)/Daesh. In addition, there is also a growing concern of reconnection of networks between

342

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
local and global terrorists after the ease of travel restrictions and re-opening of borders as well
as the resurgence of global terrorist groups, namely IS and Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. Issues to
be monitored and properly addressed include (1) threat from IS-associated groups in the region
(2) movement of international terrorists after the ease of travel restrictions (3) repatriation or
relocation of Foreign Terrorist Fighters (FTFs) (4) reconnection of terrorist networks (5) act of
terrorism by lone actors, wolf packs, and radicalised women and youth, and (6) spread of violent
extremism via social media platforms.
It is crucial to undertake a comprehensive and sustainable solution to terrorism by addressing
root causes through soft and hard approaches in a balanced and holistic manner; encouraging
international cooperation; and promoting interfaith dialogues and values of moderation and
peaceful coexistence in multicultural societies.
Thailand has ratified 12 out of 19 existing conventions and protocols related to counter
terrorism under the UN framework, and has recently adopted the Counter-Terrorism Action
Plan of Thailand (2023-2027) of which the concepts of prevention response, and rehabilitation
are core approaches. The Action Plan also highlights the importance of inter-agency
cooperation and multi-stakeholder to combat terrorism.
In 2022, the Thai Cabinet approved the National Guidelines on Strengthening Co-existence
Amidst Social Diversity. By translating Thailand’s commitment to counter-terrorism in regional
and international frameworks, particularly the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, into
national action, the Guidelines aim to promote the integration of efforts between government
agencies and stakeholders to address the issues of violent extremism in a comprehensive
manner, including through socio-economic and psychological measures and respect for human
rights.
Conventional Weapons- Arms Control
As a result of past conflicts, landmines have long posed threats to safety and security and
hindered economic development in the region. As a State Party to the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention (APMBC), and a member of the Universalization Coordination Group (UCG) under
such framework, Thailand fully supports the universalisation of the APMBC to reduce the risk
associated with anti-personnel mines and put an end to the decades of sufferings. Currently,
Thailand has no stockpiled anti-personnel mines and has successfully returned more than 99%
of safe land to its people.

343

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Abandoned mines are not only a problem of a single country but also a regional problem. The
remaining mines placed along the border pose risks to life and health of the people and halt
cross-border connectivity and economic development. Efforts to carry out demining operations
along the border areas can be challenging, especially in the areas yet to be demarcated.
Therefore, Thailand supports the drafting of the “Non-Binding Guideline on Cross-Border
Humanitarian Demining” within the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Centre (ARMAC) framework.
We believe that this would benefit the humanitarian mine action efforts in the region.
As the chair of the Committee on Enhancement of Cooperation and Assistance under the
APMBC framework, Thailand supports international cooperation and assistance at the regional
level, including sharing of experiences and best practices related to humanitarian mine action
operations within ASEAN. This will help improve the efficiency of mine action operations,
leading to the enhancement of safety and security, as well as economic prosperity, and
contribute towards the mine-free goal of ASEAN.
Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament
Thailand upholds the policy not to develop, acquire or proliferate any kind of WMD and their
means of delivery, as well as fully observes commitments and obligations on non-proliferation
of WMD.
On nuclear disarmament, as one of the first three countries to sign and ratify the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) on 20 September 2017, the entry into force of the
TPNW on 22 January 2021 has marked a historic milestone and the triumph of multilateralism.
Each TPNW State Party never undertakes at any circumstance to develop, test, produce,
manufacture, otherwise acquire, possess or stockpile nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices. Thailand welcomes the successful conclusion of its First Meeting of States
Parties on 21-23 June 2022 in Vienna. Given that 92 states have signed the TPNW and 68 states
are parties to the Treaty at the time of writing, it is crucial to promote further ratification and
accession to the TPNW, so as to achieve inclusiveness and universality of the Treaty. At the same
time, Thailand reaffirms the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as a
cornerstone for nuclear non-proliferation. The failure to adopt an outcome at the 10th Review
Conference of the NPT has made it more important than ever for all parties to reaffirm their
commitments towards implementing their obligations and undertakings under the NPT in all
three pillars in a balanced manner.

344

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Thailand recognises the complementarity between the TPNW and the NPT, as both share the
common goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. TPNW is fully in line with the obligations on
nuclear disarmament under the Article VI of the NPT, which requires States to pursue
negotiation in good faith on general and complete disarmament. As such, Thailand and the
Republic of Ireland have taken the role of informal co-facilitator on “Complementarity”, to
further explore and articulate possible areas of tangible cooperation between the TPNW, the
NPT and other instruments.
In this regard, Thailand looks forward to substantive outcomes of the Second Meeting of the
States Parties to the TPNW, as well as the Eleventh Review Conference of the Parties to the
NPT, which will play a crucial role in strengthening the global nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation regime.
At the regional level, Thailand played a leading role in the establishment and the
implementation of the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ) or the Bangkok
Treaty of 1995, and in initiating the cooperation of the ASEAN Network of regulatory Bodies on
Atomic Energy (ASEANTOM). Thailand is committed to supporting and advancing both
initiatives, including with the Nuclear Weapon States on the signing of the SEANWFZ Protocol
and with ASEAN Member States and friends on cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and technology, as its contribution to promote ASEAN non-proliferation efforts.
On 16-17 May 2023, Thailand co-chaired the 14th ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on NonProliferation and Disarmament (ISM on NPD) with the United States and Sri Lanka. The meeting
offered an opportunity for the ARF to serve as an inclusive platform to constructively discuss
pressing regional and international issues and promote a conducive atmosphere for dialogue.
The focused discussion covered the three priority areas of the ARF NPD Work Plan, namely
Disarmament, Non-Proliferation and Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. in addressing crossborder crimes
Thailand welcomes the UN Secretary-General’s Agenda for Disarmament under the ‘Securing
Our Common Future’ concept and its three outlined priorities on the control and disarmament
of weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons, and remaining vigilant of new and
emerging technologies and their effects on peace and security. In this connection, Thailand
looks forward to tangible cooperation and meaningful engagement between all UN agencies,
Member States, and other stakeholders in realising this Agenda. Thailand stands ready to
facilitate the exchange of views and best practices on disarmament and non-proliferation issues

345

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and will continue to act as a bridge-builder between ASEAN and other regional and international
groupings to bring about a safer and more secure world.
Transnational Crime
The Asia-Pacific Region continues to face threats posed by transnational organised crime groups
who exploit higher degree of global and regional connectivity. The ease of travel restrictions,
re-opening of borders and the impacts of recent economic downturn due to the COVID-19
pandemic are key factors luring more people to enter into transnational crime, especially drug
trafficking networks which still remain highly active in the region. Other illegal activities such as
people smuggling, human trafficking, illicit wildlife and timber trafficking continue to pose
potential threats in Thailand and countries in the region.
The National Strategy to Prevent and Combat Transnational Organised Crimes still plays a
central role in Thailand efforts to combat transnational crimes. In addition, domestic laws
addressing organised crime, money laundering, human trafficking, and cybercrime also serve as
policy guidelines and frameworks for Thailand’s relevant security agencies.
Thailand is of a firm belief that the “ASEAN Border Management Cooperation Roadmap”,
adopted at the 15th AMMTC on 29th September 2021, will help lay an important groundwork in
advancing cooperation on border management as well as addressing transnational crime in
ASEAN as reflected in the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 with the ultimate goal being the
establishment of an ASEAN-wide border management cooperation arrangement to ensure
border security and facilitate trade in tandem. Earlier this year the National Security Council,
chaired by the Prime Minister, has adopted the Action Plan on Border Security Management
(2023 - 2027), which aims to ensure that border areas are safe and secure, suitable for
economic, social, and human security development draw. The Action Plan draws elements from
and aligns itself to the Roadmap’s Priorities, for example, Priority V. Explore leveraging
advanced technologies by border security agencies and Priority VIII. Explore the development
of “risk–based” approaches in enhancing border management, which will help open up
opportunity for us to further expand cooperation in this matter with ASEAN.
On 28 February – 1 March 2023, Thailand and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) co-organised the ‘Border Management Cooperation Dialogue for the ASEAN Region’
in Pattaya, to provide a platform for ASEAN Member States to share information on the latest
trends of transnational crime and discuss national and regional preparedness in tackling the
issues—as well as to review the implementation of Roadmap over the past 2 years. Over 70
346

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
participants from ASEAN Member States’ relevant agencies were engaged in sharing
experiences, best practices, obstacles, and challenges, as well as views on the possible way
forward—with Recommendations to complement the Roadmap.
Despite the challenges posed by COVID-19 pandemic, Thailand continued to be resolute in
carrying out the national agenda of zero tolerance towards human trafficking, which was
adopted since 2014. In 2021, the Government had allocated more budget for preventing and
suppressing human trafficking, increasing by 10.69% from 2020. Thailand also attaches great
importance to ensure the safety and protection of victims and implementing preventive
measures to protect various vulnerable groups from human trafficking. Thailand provides
assistance and protection of all victims of trafficking in accordance with Thai laws and victimcentred and trauma-informed approaches. These have included improving services in the
shelters, introducing the mobile application “PROTECT-U” to increase access to protection and
assistance, providing legal assistance in shelters, providing capacity-building training for shelter
staff members, and providing protection and assistance for LGBTQI victims.
As a country of transit and destination for irregular migration, Thailand has been affected by
mass influx of irregular migrants from within and outside the region. Although Thailand is not a
party to the 1951 Refugee Convention, Thailand has long been committed to humanitarian
cause and will continue to work closely with the UNODC, the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
Illicit drug trafficking remains a grave challenge for ASEAN due to an increase in opium
cultivation,

heroin

production

and

methamphetamine

tablets

and

crystalline

methamphetamine manufacturing in the Golden Triangle. Thailand is therefore fully committed
to implementing the 4-year Mekong Drug Control Joint Operation Plan (2019-2022), in
collaboration with Lao PDR, Myanmar, Cambodia, Viet Nam and China. The Plan is a
continuation of the Safe Mekong Operation launched in 2015, aimed to comprehensively
address illicit drug production and distribution in the Golden Triangle area. Thailand also hosts
Safe Mekong Coordination Centre (SMCC) in Chiang Mai and together with Australia established
the “Taskforce Storm” in 2016 to oversee joint operations in suppressing illicit drug trafficking,
money laundering and transnational crimes. This Taskforce has succeeded in arresting several
drug syndicate criminals and seizing their proceeds of crime. As a lead shepherd for illicit drug
trafficking, under the SOMTC, Thailand will continue to promote cooperation and activities in a
concerted manner according to the ASEAN Cooperation Plan to Tackle Illicit Drug Production
and Trafficking in the Golden Triangle 2020-2022.

347

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
In 2019, Thailand enacted two laws to support Thailand’s digital economy, namely Cybersecurity
Act B.E.2562, leading to establishment of the National Cybersecurity Committee (NCSC) and
other frameworks to prevent and respond to cyber threats against Critical Information
Infrastructures (CIIs), and Personal Data Protection Act B.E 2562, aimed to standardise
mechanisms and supervisory measures to protect online personal information both in the
government and private sector. At present, the NCSA has finalised a new 5-year National Policy
and Plan on Cybersecurity (2022-2027) which comprises 4 strategic goals, namely enhancing
government agencies’ cyber capabilities, strengthening CIIs protection and resilience,
deepening collaboration with stakeholders, and incubating knowledge and technology.
The region has been increasingly interconnected due to the digital transformation accelerated
by the spread of the COVID-19. The connectivity in cyberspace comes at a price to public safety.
It is imperative for ASEAN to enhance cyber capabilities and strengthen common understanding
to reduce cyber risks. On this note, Thailand welcomes the adoption of Regional Action Plan on
the Implementation of UNGGE Norms of Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace (Cyber
Norms) at the 2nd ASEAN Cyber-CC in 2021, and the launch of the ASEAN Cybersecurity
Cooperation Strategy 2021-2025 at the 2nd ADGMIN in 2022. This reflects opportunities for
ASEAN to synergise efforts on cybersecurity cooperation across frameworks.
The ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Capacity Building Centre (AJCCBC) has continued to serve as a
training centre for authorities and information infrastructure operators in ASEAN on three
issues: Cyber Defence Exercise with Recurrence (CYDER), digital forensics and malware analysis.
As of February 2022, the AJCCBC has organised 19 training courses, including 9 online courses
since the COVID-19 outbreak. The Centre has held 14 technical training sessions and four Cyber
SEA Games in which the 4th Cyber SEA Game was held online due to the COVID-19. In addition
to its main activities, the Centre also organised the Threat-Hunting Exercise and Exercise for
SOC Analysts, sponsored by Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications: MIC for 44 ASEAN
professionals, and the Online Self-learning Course on Establishing a CSIRT and Cybersecurity
Awareness for 135 ASEAN professionals. Under 3rd Party Collaboration, the Centre hosted the
Secure Provision training course with the Government of Switzerland during 14-15 March 2022.
The Centre also plan to host on CSET training course with Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) with the United States, and multiple activities throughout 2023 to 2024.
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief

348

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency Response (AADMER) and its
Work Programme 2021-2025 form the basis for cooperation amongst ASEAN Member States to
prepare and respond to disaster emergencies in a concerted manner. The signing of the “ASEAN
Declaration on One ASEAN, One Response” in 2016 confirms that AADMER is the common
platform for the Declaration. Thailand, as a Party to the AADMER and a member of the
Governing Board of the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster
management (AHA Centre), will continue to strengthen ASEAN’s efforts in the area of disaster
management and reaffirm its support to an active role of the ASEAN-Emergency Response and
Assessment Team (ASEAN-ERAT) and other ASEAN tools to deal with HADR challenges.
As the Chair of the ASEAN Committee on Disaster Management (ACDM) and the ASEAN
Ministerial Meeting on Disaster Management (AMMDM) in 2022, Thailand attached great
importance to enhancing ASEAN’s efforts in disaster prevention and mitigation. The overarching
theme of Thailand’s chairmanship is “BALANCING ACT” which comprises accelerating the
implementation of the AADMER Work Programme 2021-2025, Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction, and Bangkok Principles, taking public health emergency, gender and inclusion,
localisation, and climate action into account.
Thailand supports regional efforts to enhance capacity in disaster response and disaster
management in line with the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Disaster Health Management,
adopted at the 31st ASEAN Summit in Manila. The Disaster Emergency Logistics System for
ASEAN (DELSA) launched on 7 December 2012 is a key mechanism to allow for swift provision
of relief items to ASEAN Member States facing post-disaster emergency situations. DELSA’s
establishment and operations have been supported by the Government of Japan, while the AHA
Centre works closely with WFP - UNHRD on logistics technical aspects.
During the 34th ASEAN Summit in June 2019, Thailand by the Department of Disaster Prevention
and Mitigation officially launched the DELSA Satellite Warehouse in Chai Nat Province. The
Warehouse serves as a stockpile during emergencies in Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Viet Nam
and Thailand. Recently, the Warehouse delivered 2,900 Personal Hygiene Kits to support COVID19 response in Cambodia in 2020 as well as 500 family tents, 2,000 mosquito nets, and 1,500
personal hygiene kits to Thailand in 2021. Further, the stockpile of relief materials from the
Warehouse has been deployed to affected communities in Myanmar.
Maritime Security and Cooperation

349

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The Asia-Pacific region continues to face maritime security challenges, including piracy, armed
robbery against ships and various forms of transnational crime as well as issues related to
marine environment and IUU fishing. An increase in the number of incidents in 2021 in
comparison to 2020 reflects that piracy and armed robbery against ships remains a prevailing
security concern. Such incidents are the result of active criminal activities in several areas and
vulnerability of important sea lines of communication, notably the Straits of Malacca and
Singapore, which connect two major waterways, namely, the Indian Ocean and the South China
Sea. Tensions between regional powers also pose challenges to international trade and
maritime connectivity.
Given the complex and wide-ranging nature of maritime security issues, Thailand enacted the
Maritime National Interests Protection Act B.E. 2562 (2019) to promote better coordination and
consolidate responses to deal with emerging threats. Under the Act, Thai Maritime
Enforcement Coordinating Centre has been upgraded to become Thai Maritime Enforcement
Command Centre (THAI-MECC) with augmented role and greater authority in managing
maritime security-related affairs. The Centre participated in the National Crisis Management
Exercise 2020 (C-MEX 20) to articulate understanding amongst relevant agencies in preparation
for interception of WMD, addressing water pollution, and tackling IUU fishing. Since October
2019, THAI-MECC has joined efforts on COVID-19 prevention and control in maritime transport,
including through National Single Windows (NSW) for reporting formalities from ships arriving
in and/or departing from ports.
Thailand has participated in regional efforts such as the Malacca Straits Coordinated Patrols
since 2008, the air patrol “Eyes in the Sky” since 2009, as well as the secondment of rotating
officers to the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Asia Information Sharing Centre (ReCAAP ISC). Moreover, Thailand has actively
taken part in regional maritime security and cooperation fora such as the EAS, the ADMM-Plus
which Thailand is currently co-chairing with the United States the ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working
Group on Maritime Security (EWG on MS) under the theme “Strengthening Maritime Security
Cooperation for Sustainable Development of ASEAN Member States’ Economies”, the ARF, the
ASEAN Maritime Forum (AMF) and the Expanded AMF (EAMF) with a view to paving the way
towards substantive cooperation, particularly in the areas of capacity building, maritime
domain awareness and maritime connectivity.
Under the ADMM-Plus EWG on MS, Thailand hosted the 18th ADMM-Plus EWG on MS and Table
Top Exercise on 20-24 February 2023 in Bangkok to review progress of the current Work Plan,

350

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
provide an update on the region’s maritime security environment, further discuss the Roadmap
and exchange views on sustainable Blue Economy development and Maritime Security
Environment in the Indo-Pacific Region. Upcoming activities include the 2nd Maritime Security
Conference and the Future Leaders’ Programme which aims to build network amongst young
officers and defence officials within the ADMM-Plus community in September 2023, the latter
held back-to-back with the 19th ADMM-Plus EWG on MS in Hawaii.
Thailand has embarked on a comprehensive reform of the fishery sector, resulting in the
European Union’s lifting of a yellow card for import ban of seafood products from Thailand in
2019. Building on such success, the ASEAN Network for Combating IUU Fishing (AN-IUU) was
established in 2020 with Thailand as the host country and coordinator of the AN-IUU Network
Centre and the AN-IUU Interactive Platform. Thailand hosted and co-hosted a number of
meetings, including the 1st Meeting of the AN-IUU Focal Point in December 2020 via
videoconference, and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd ASEAN Meeting on Combatting IUU Fishing in
Partnership with the EU virtually in 2019 and 2021. At the 3rd Meeting, Thailand was tasked to
take lead in developing the Guideline on sharing, access to, and use of IUU fishing related
information. The AN-IUU Guidelines were adopted at the 44th Meeting of the ASEAN Ministers
on Agriculture and Forestry (AMAF) on 25 October 2022. Thailand also plans to organise a
workshop on the use of AN-IUU Interactive Platform to familiarise users to effectively use
website and its full functionality.
Thailand has remained committed to promoting marine environmental protection, particularly
on marine debris issue. Following the adoption of the ASEAN Regional Action Plan for
Combating Marine Debris (ASEAN RAP) at the Meeting of ASEAN Senior Officials on
Environment on 1 March 2021. Thailand will co-chair with the United States and China the
“ARF Seminar on Marine Debris – Solid Waste Management and Scalable Solutions” to raise
awareness on components of developing, financing, and implementing solid waste
management plans, and share best practices and case studies on scalable solutions to address
regional marine debris challenges.
At the national level, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment has developed a
Roadmap “Plastic Waste Management 2018-2030” as a policy framework for the national
plastic waste management. The Roadmap’s main objective involves strengthening collaboration
amongst all stakeholders in preventing and addressing plastic waste problem in an integrated
manner to reduce and stop using certain types of plastic, such as plastic wrapping and water

351

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
bottle lid within 2019 and plastic bag, Styrofoam container, plastic cup, and plastic straw within
2022. Several activities under marine debris management project have also been organised,
such as “Everyday Say No to Plastic Bags” campaign in cooperation with private sector to end
distribution of single-use plastic bags by department and convenience stores.

V. Role of the ARF
National contributions to enhance the ARF and regional security
The ever-challenging global situation has provided an opportunity for the ARF to demonstrate
its relevance and efficiency as a primary forum for constructive dialogue and consultation on
political and security issues in the Asia-Pacific region. The Ha Noi Plan of Action II (2020-2025)
(HPoA II) at the 27th ARF in 2020 covers a period of 5 years, unlike the previous PoA which
covered 10 years. Thailand has therefore spared no efforts in actively implementing the HPoA
II and related Work Plans of each Inter-Sessional Meeting (ISM). Further, Thailand has followed
the Guide to ASEAN Regional Forum Processes, Procedures, Practices and Protocol, approved
at the 53rd ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, in conducting ARF initiatives and activities.
As for the inter-sessional year 2022-2023, Thailand co-chaired the 14th ARF ISM on NPD and will
co-chair the following activities in accordance with ARF’s purposes and principles: (1) ARF
Workshop on Countering the Use of ICTs for Criminal Purposes, with Russia and China, (2) ARF
Workshop on the National Survey of Implementation of United Nations recommendations on
responsible use of ICTs by states in the context of international security, with Australia and
Malaysia, (3) 2nd ARF Training on Ferry Safety Capacity Building, with China, and (4) ARF Seminar
on Marine Debris – Solid Waste Management and Scalable Solutions, with the United States
and China.
Future of the ARF
With the diverse expertise of the Participants, the ARF can serve as an inclusive platform for
concrete and practical cooperation on issues affecting regional security, ranging from public
health emergencies, cybersecurity, maritime security, transnational crime, terrorism, and
disaster relief. In the past year, despite the pandemic, it has been encouraging that Participants
delivered on activities, expressed high interest in undertaking co-chairmanship of ISMs,
proposed new concrete activities, and developed new ISMs Work Plans. It is even more
encouraging that there has been progress on issues which Participants may have divergent

352

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
views, but able to discuss and seek practical way forward by consensus, making progress at a
pace comfortable to all.
The HPoA II comprises shorter implementation period than the first PoA which on the one hand,
allows ARF Participants to be adaptable to emerging challenges. On the other hand, it requires
Participants to be more focused and effective in its implementation. Utilising the work of
national and regional think tanks as well as ARF Experts and Eminent Persons is underscored in
the HPoA II. Engaging and networking directly with other actors such as Council for Security
Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP), and ASEAN Institutes of Strategic and International
Studies (ASEAN-ISIS), including regional and international organisations, and listening to voices
that embody diversity and inclusivity will help advance the HPoA II implementation as well as
enhance the ARF’s relevance.
In realising the ARF’s full potential and objective, greater attention should be given to reviewing
the ARF Work Plan on Preventive Diplomacy adopted in 2011, with a view to identify gaps and
challenges in moving the ARF process forward from Stage I - Confidence Building Measures
(CBMs) to Stage II – Preventive Diplomacy (PD), as well as enable a more efficient and effective
policy response to emerging challenges. It is imperative to increase the capacity and capabilities
of the ARF in the area of PD which includes helping prevent disputes and conflicts from arising
between states and minimise the impact of such disputes and conflicts on the region. PD
measures/mechanisms must be subject to a step-by-step approach,

non-coercive,

voluntary and conducted in accordance with universally recognised norms and principles of
international law, and inter alia, in line with the UN Charter and the TAC.
Moving forward, the ARF needs to continue positioning and revitalising itself to address
emerging challenges in a holistic manner. A novel idea should be explored so that the ARF can
truly serve as a platform for constructive dialogues on security issues affecting the region.
Maintaining the ARF relevance and significance as an action-oriented forum is also imperative.
In this regard, the ARF needs to enable its work to be synergised with other ASEAN-led
mechanisms such as ADMM-Plus and the EAS, as well as to promote cooperation with other
regional and international bodies such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). In so doing, the ARF will remain
relevant and credible in bringing regional players and stakeholders together in constructive
dialogues and security cooperation in the region.

353

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

TIMOR LESTE
The contribution to the Annual Security Outlook (ASO) of 2023 is to reaffirm Timor-Leste’s strong
commitment to work with all ARF participants to promote peace, stability, security, and prosperity in
the region. The Annual Security Outlook is an effective channel to promote confidence, understanding,
transparency, and the exchange of views among ARF participants. It is also a useful publication to
strengthen public awareness of the efforts of individual ARF participants towards confidence-building
and preventive diplomacy in the region
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
The current regional security environment remains unpredictable and fragile affected by
the dynamic change in the balance of power in the region. in the region. International
order is being disrupted by the intensified power rivalry characterized by the latest
escalation of tensions affecting the region and beyond. The regional security environment
is becoming severe and uncertain as powerful States with outstanding military capabilities
has a clear tendency of further reinforcement of military capabilities and acceleration of
military activities.

At this critical juncture, ARF remains an effective ASEAN-led mechanisms for dialogue and
cooperation for participating countries to reaffirm their collective commitment to the
region’s continued development and prosperity. In this regard, harnessing the full
potential of the ARF as a platform for dialogue on security issues will be important to
address the challenges facing the region, and build confidence among states so as to
create an environment that is conducive to peace and prosperity.

Timor-Leste has manifested its interest to integrate into regional mechanism of ASEAN
through the accession into ASEAN community. Timor-Leste has been granted observer
status in December 2022 and recently, during the ASEAN Summit of 2023, ASEAN Leaders
adopted the Roadmap for Timor-Leste’s Full Membership in ASEAN in the near future.
Timor-Leste has, therefore, shared the view of ASEAN and respect the ASEAN Centrality
in the promotion of peace and stability in the region in line with the guiding principles of
the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia.

354

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The Myanmar Political Crisis
The prolonged political crisis in Myanmar has dragged the People of Myanmar into
humanitarian sufferings without certainty for an immediate solution of the crisis. TimorLeste is deeply concerned with the ongoing violence in Myanmar and urge the immediate
cessation of all forms of violence and the use of force to create a conducive environment
for the safe and timely delivery of humanitarian assistance.

Despite the current challenges, there is still space for finding a solution where ASEAN
Member States must play a creative and constructive leading role in resolving the crisis in
accordance with the ASEAN Way principles and ASEAN existing mechanisms. Therefore,
Timor-Leste has supported the efforts of the Chair of ASEAN to find a peaceful solution
through an all-inclusive dialogue engaging all stakeholders in Myanmar and to encourage
all parties to implement the Five-Point Consensus.

The Russia-Ukraine war
The Russia-Ukraine war and its ramifications have gone far beyond the impact on Europe.
Its escalation and spill over effects have multidimensional and multidirectional effects
across the globe including Indo-Pacific region. The war has disrupted the international
order and systems and also caused shortage of energy and food security. It has posed such
a geopolitical and geo-economics challenges that has made nations rethink their strategic
position in the region. The recent escalation of tensions of the war has led to a security
dilemma which will only perpetuate the conflict.

The prolonged and intensified war has caused significantly greater economic damage
around the world. Timor-Leste believes the right solution is through peaceful means and
dialogue. All parties to the war must exercise maximum restraint and make utmost efforts
to pursue dialogues through all channels, including diplomatic means to contain the
situation, to de-escalate tensions, and to seek peaceful resolution in accordance with
international law, the principles of the United Nations Charter. Timor-Leste has been
consistent to abide by the principles of mutual respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and equal rights of all nations. Timor-Leste, therefore, condemns any aggression
over the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in
accordance with its internationally recognized borders.

355

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Apparently, the US and EU could not solve the war alone as they are involved in the
conflict, an alternative path must be taken. Alternatively, Timor-Leste’s President Dr. Jose
Ramos Horta has urged the middle power countries namely Brazil, Indonesia, Turkey,
South Africa, and India to use “middle power diplomacy” to pursue multilateral solutions
to end the Ukraine-Russia war. It is believed that Middle powers help maintain
international order by building coalitions, serving as mediators and ‘go-betweens’, and
through international conflict management and resolution activities such as UN
peacekeeping.

Denuclearization of Korean Peninsula
Korean Peninsula Missile tests has been an issue of grave concern for Timor-Leste and the
region. The recent relentless ballistic missile tests conducted by Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (DPRK) indicates how fragile we are living in such a high-risk security
environment. The provocation and exhibition of nuclear threat which has escalated
tensions and threatened regional peace and stability, especially for neighbouring
countries such as Japan and South Korea. These tests of missiles may have discouraged
regional efforts to achieve regional security goals on non-proliferation, counterproliferation, arms control and disarmament in the region.

Timor-Leste, however, continues to believe in the power of peaceful dialogue and
constructive role played by ARF to promote a conducive atmosphere for a peaceful
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. Timor-Leste detests any justification of the use
of nuclear weapons for the sake of self-defence or deterrence weapon for other threats.

In this respect, Timor-Leste re-affirms its support for the Statement by ASEAN Foreign
Minister’s on the 4th of February 2022 on DPRK to comply fully with all relevant United
Nations Security Council resolutions and take into account the international community’s
call for diplomacy and in the interest of maintaining peace and security in the region.

South China Sea Conflict
On the dispute of South China Sea, the best solution for conflicting parties should be to
respect the principle of rules based international order and resolve the dispute peacefully
in accordance with international law, particularly the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Above all, a conducive atmosphere must be maintained

356

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
prior to dialogue for solution. Hence, all parties must exercise self-restraint in the conduct
of activities and avoid excessive actions that may lead to open conflict.

Timor-Leste continues to support ASEAN to create a conducive atmosphere and lead
negotiations towards a fair resolution of the dispute. The conclusion of the Code of
Conduct (COC) is the crucial step to regulate actions of parties in the South China Sea. It
is expected that ASEAN and China would reach an agreement on the Code of Conduct
concerning several contentious issues, including its legality, the scope of geographic and
maritime activities and the role of other powers that have increased their presence in the
Indo-Pacific region.

II.

Timor-Leste’s National Security Policies
As the nation building and state building efforts are underway, Timor-Leste continues
upgrading its national security system to respond to the emerging regional and global
security challenges. Timor-Leste’s National Security Policies has been based on the National
Security Law (2010) which established an Integrated National Security System to act under
a democratic control and to approach national security matters in a holistic and integrated
way.

In the context of international relation and in its best interests, Timor-Leste adopted a
cooperative security approach which allows Timor-Leste to work cooperatively with its
regional partners through various platforms and mechanisms to address common security
challenges faced in the region and beyond.

2.1. New Superior Council for Military Defence’s Regulations

The Council of Ministers approved the draft Decree-Law referring to the new Superior
Council for Military Defence’s Regulations to make the Superior Council for Military
Defence’s Regulations compatible with the National Defence Law in force. The Superior
Council for Military Defence will be integrated by Generals out of active service who have
served as Supreme Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, Deputy Supreme Chief of Staff of the
Armed Forces or Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, to ensure the transition and
implementation of the development objectives outlined in the strategic documents of
defence.

357

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

The Council has also the mandatory in matters concerning the amendment of the organic
structure of the F-FDTL, the proposals for appointment and dismissal for the positions of
Supreme Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, Deputy Supreme Chief of Staff of the Armed
Forces and Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces and the F-FDTL Military Build-Up.

Early this year, the Ministry of Defence also made another important upgrade in the defence
with the approval of the Military Programming Law. The National Parliament approved “The
draft law on the Military Programming Law which would help to frame the budget for public
spending on equipment and weapons, with aim of building the military capabilities needed
to sustain the National Defence Force (F-FDTL).

2.2. Professional Status of Timor-Leste National Police
On internal security affairs, The Council of Ministers has approved the decree-law on the
professional status of the personnel with police functions in the National Police of TimorLeste (PNTL). The decree-law provides the PNTL with a professional statute for its staff, with
the perspective of improving the working conditions, to elevate the motivational framework
and the self-esteem of the PNTL police officers, reinforcing their ability to face the growing
responsibility, demand and need for efficiency in the provision of public security services.

The Decree-Law on the remuneration scheme of the National Police (PNTL) was also
amended to increase the basic remuneration of the PNTL members by 15% in 2023. In
addition to the planned increase in basic remuneration, the decree-law is also updated,
taking into account the amendment to the Organic Law of the National Police of Timor-Leste
(PNTL).

In addition, the legislative intervention was made to make the military career more
attractive, with a salary condition consistent with the modernization and growing
professionalization of the armed forces. Hence, the Council of Ministers approved, with
amendments, the draft Decree-Law regarding the new remuneration regime for FALINTIL –
Timor-Leste’s Defence Forces (F-FDTL) with a salary increase of around 5% in all military
posts and the updating of salary supplements.

358

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
2.3. Disaster risk management guidelines
Timor-Leste is located in the northern subduction zone between the Eurasian and Australian
plates makes it highly vulnerable to natural hazards. Timor-Leste also experiences the
cyclical effects of El Niño-related weather anomalies, which are linked to droughts. Thus,
the Government of Timor-Leste is committed to developing its response capacity to the
natural disasters.

The partnership between OIM and Civil Protection Authority of Timor-Leste has focused on
developing disaster risk management guidelines and capacity building for Civil Protection
officers to respond to disasters. Early this year, International Organization for Migration
(IOM) together with the Secretariat of State for Civilian Protection (SoSCP) developed
disaster risk management guidelines for Civil Protection Authority (CPA) on early disaster
response. The guideline also contributes to implementing a well management on disasters
response and can support Civil Protection Authority to be on readiness to support the
communities in the emergency in the capital and also at the municipal level.

III.

Contributions to Regional Security
Timor-Leste’s contributions to regional security will lead to more constructive efforts
towards promoting peace, security in the region. As a participant of the ARF, Timor-Leste
is committed to contributing to regional security through strengthening the existing
cooperative bilateral and multilateral arrangements with its regional partners especially
with ARF participating countries.

3.1. Timor-Leste and Australian Defence Cooperation Agreement
Australia as one of Timor-Leste’s proximate neighbour and one of the major development
partners, has contributed significantly to development of defence and security of TimorLeste. For many years, Australia has supported Timor–Leste’s armed forces and national
police and cooperated on regional security issues, including maritime challenges, border
security and transnational crime.

The defence cooperation has been enhanced with the signing of an agreement on
September 7th, 2022 in Canberra, Australia. The Minister of Defence, Filomeno da Paixão
de Jesus and his Australian counterpart, Richard Marles, signed a cooperation agreement
on defence, in a ceremony held at the National Parliament of the Commonwealth of

359

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Australia, in Canberra witnessed by the President of the Republic, José Ramos-Horta and
the Australian Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese.

This agreement establishes the reciprocal protections, responsibilities and privileges that
each country will grant to the military of the other in the territory. Accordingly, Timorese
military personnel operating, exercising or training in Australia will receive the same
protections, responsibilities and privileges that Australian personnel will receive in TimorLeste.

Timor-Leste and Australia will increase cooperation in the areas of defence and security,
especially in the maritime domain, given their shared borders and adjacent maritime
areas. It will increase the capacity of the two countries to operate together as required,
conduct exercises and training, and cooperate in humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief.

3.2. Japan’s Grants to Civil Protection Authority
Timor-Leste continues to enhance its capacity to respond to natural disasters with the
financial support of Japan. The Government of Japan through The United Nations
Development Program (UNDP) has granted US$40,000, to support the Civil Protection
Authorities (CPA) of Timor-Leste to conduct the preparedness in facing the tsunami. This
grant will support CPA on tsunami preparedness to empower the training for teachers
from schools and CPA’s commanders from municipalities to increase their knowledge
about tsunamis and how to handle the tsunami. This grant for tsunami preparedness is
also provided for 10 other countries in the Asia Pacific region with a total budget of US$ 1
million, while Timor-Leste receives over US$40,000, for this year for the preparedness of
preventing early tsunami in Timor-Leste.

Japan has been cooperating with the Timor-Leste government through various projects
for every cycle of Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR). It is important to address the DRR-related
issues comprehensively to strengthen Timor-Leste’s response capacity through the
disaster management cycle namely preparedness, response, recovery prevention, and
mitigation.

3.3. KOICA and PNTL training on a criminal investigation

360

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Capacity building remains an important pillar of development of Timor-Leste’s National
Security system including the National Police (PNTL). The Korea International Cooperation
Agency (KOICA) and Timor-Leste National Police (PNTL) cooperated in capacity building
activities in the area of criminal investigation targeting Timorese policies in the
investigation unit in Timor-Leste.

This annual training focused on empowering Timorese policies skills on criminal
investigation. The Korean Police Centre sent Korean Central Police Academy Instructors
to Timor-Leste to provide capacity building to 20 Timorese police,

The PNTL has developed its capacity in large quantities of force for prevention, mitigation,
and response since its inception in 2000. PNTL needs to invest more in the scientific area
and identify and discover the activities and modes of criminals through the use of scientific
intervention of criminal investigation. Since Korea is a country that is advanced in science
and technology, PNTL participation in this annual training provided by KOICA through the
CAIT program will pave the way to the defend goal.

3.4. Timor-Leste’s Annual Action Plan of Women, Peace and Security (WPS)
Timor-Leste stands ready for the implementation of next WPS National Action Plan
starting this year. Upon the approval of Timor-Leste’s National Action Plan for WPS of
2023 – 2027 by the Council of Ministers, Timor-Leste will mark another important
milestone to implementing the UN Security Council #1325 on Women, Peace and Security.
The implementation of the second national plan of Women, Peace and Security is in line
with the ARF inclusivity agenda and corresponds to the ASEAN Joint Statement on
Promoting Women, Peace and Security (WPS).

The Joint Statement on WPS (2017) recognizes that peace and security are essential to
the achievement of sustainable development, are interconnected, and vital to the future
of ASEAN. Therefore, it is in the interest of Timor-Leste to contribute to promoting the
WPS agenda together with regional organizations as a collective effort to advance the
WPS agenda in the region. Seeing that conflicts are increasingly taking on regional
dimensions, there is a need to develop and advance regional commitments to
implementing the WPS agenda.

361

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
III.5.

Timor-Leste’s Cooperation Afloat and Readiness Training (CARAT) with The
United States.

Timor-Leste and The United States conducted a joint military exercise to further deepen
their security partnership by promoting security cooperation, maintaining and
strengthening maritime partnerships, and enhancing maritime inter-operability. This
longstanding security cooperation may help Timor-Leste strengthen its ability to better
monitor its territory, respond to natural disasters, and promote economic development.
Moreover, this joint exercise will prepare better Timor-Leste to defend its citizens, protect
its sovereignty, and advance its national interests.

The CARAT exercise builds on the growing US-Timorese security partnership, most notably
the US commitment of over $23 million to jointly rehabilitate with the Government of
Timor-Leste the Baucau airport. Through the creation of an Air Component, the project
will assist the F-FDTL and help the Timorese government better monitor its maritime
territory, respond to natural disasters, and promote economic development.

IV.

The Role of ARF
Since ARF was founded in 1993 as the first intra-regional security institution encompassing
the Asia-Pacific region, it has remained a relevant forum for constructive dialogue
between nations and for regional security cooperation. Timor-Leste supports the role of
ASEAN to be the main driving force of the ARF in the evolving regional security
architecture to maintain the security viability of the region and to prevent regional
disorder.

The emergence of new regional mini-multilateralism seemingly has been contesting the
role of ARF as the regional security dialogue and cooperation mechanism. Nevertheless,
ARF remains the relevant regional forum for dialogue and cooperation in its own unique
way. Specifically, ARF has introduced a new norm into the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) process of cooperative security that emphasized inclusiveness through
the promotion of dialogue among both like-minded and non-like-minded states. In
addition, the forum’s objective and function is to build confidence and trust as well as
develop cooperative norms of behavior by adopting a multilateral approach to prevent
potential conflicts in the region.*

362

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
For over 20 years, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) has worked to advance stability and
cooperation within the Indo-Pacific region. Traditional and non-traditional security
concerns continue to pose a challenge to peace and stability in the region, making ongoing
engagement through the ARF valuable. The ARF has been successful over time using open
dialogue, tangible cooperation, civil society, inclusivity, and results-driven initiatives to
find common understandings and solutions to emerging challenges. Through our
membership in the ARF, the United States affirms its commitment to finding inclusive and
consensus-based solutions in accordance with respect for international law, human rights,
and mutually shared priorities. ASEAN centrality plays an essential role in the ARF process,
and the United States fully supports a constructive action- and results-oriented ARF with
ASEAN at its core. Furthermore, the United States believes that clearly defined, proactive
approaches in the ARF will yield the largest benefits to long-term regional stability.
Therefore, we pledge to support the ARF to advance its goal of advancing from Confidence
Building to Preventive Diplomacy to Conflict Resolution. Furthering coordination between
the various ASEAN-centred multilateral fora and streamlined and focused engagements
will continue to help the ARF progress to achieve its goals. Therefore, the United States
urges all ARF participants to engage with transparency, deliberation, understanding, and
vision to deepen our cooperation and advance peace in the Indo-Pacific region for
decades to come.

The Indo-Pacific Strategy

Our Indo-Pacific Strategy lays out an affirmative vision for the Indo-Pacific, rooted in
shared values, and aims to advance policy priorities important to the entire Indo-Pacific
region. The Indo-Pacific Strategy is a vision for a region that remains free and open,
emphasizes collective capacity through interconnectedness, promotes broad-based
prosperity, bolsters Indo-Pacific security, and builds a more resilient region. Perhaps more
than any time in modern history, we are seeing a convergence of interests in the IndoPacific region. The US Indo-Pacific strategy shares many of the same goals of ASEAN’s
Outlook on the Indo-Pacific, as well as other partners’ strategies like Japan's Free and
Open Indo-Pacific, Australia's Step Up, ROK's Indo-Pacific Strategy, India’s Act East Policy,
Bangladesh’s Indo-Pacific Outlook, Canada’s Indo-Pacific Strategy, and the EU’s Indo-

363

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Pacific Strategy. We will spare no efforts to coordinate and align efforts with those whose
values we share. We are in a decisive decade, one that holds both considerable promise
and historic obstacles for the Indo-Pacific. Working with our ASEAN partners, we will build
the collective capacity for the region to meet the challenges of the present, adapt for the
crises of the future, and seize the opportunities of the 21st century.

Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment

The United States and ASEAN seek to expand engagement in gender equality and
empowerment of women and girls in all their diversity. Working with the ASEAN
Committee on Women, the United States and ASEAN intend to hold a senior officials
meeting on gender issues in July 2022, followed by a ministerial level meeting in the fall.
The joint statement on gender equality and empowerment of all women will touch on
issues such as gender mainstreaming, women’s economic empowerment, women, peace,
and security, and gender-based violence.

Additionally, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) Symposium on Inclusive Processes for
Preventive Diplomacy and Conflict Resolution took place in Honolulu June 28-30, 2022.
The Symposium draws from United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCR) 1325
and 2250, which recognize that women and youth are often disproportionately affected
by armed conflict, including as refugees and displaced persons and that peace outcomes
are considered to last longer when these groups are included in the discussions. These
unique demographics can meaningfully contribute to lasting peace and economic
prosperity if inclusive policies are in place.

The DPRK’s UN-proscribed nuclear and ballistic missile programs remain a serious threat
to international peace and security. The DPRK’s sophisticated sanctions evasion tactics
continue to allow it to abuse the international financial system, generate revenue, and
procure items for its unlawful WMD and ballistic missile programs. The United States
remains in close contact with the ROK and Japan to coordinate our DPRK engagement;
our alliances remain ironclad and ensure peace and stability in the region. All UN Member
States must do more to prevent the DPRK from undermining the UN Security Council
resolutions aimed at peaceful denuclearization to protect international peace and
security.

364

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

The United States-Japan Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security is the cornerstone of
our strategic engagement in the Indo-Pacific. The US-Japan Alliance codified by this treaty
advances a shared vision for a free and open Indo-Pacific. We are committed to peacefully
resolving disputes and to opposing coercion and cooperate on a wide range of regional
and global security issues. The close cooperation between Japan and the United States in
responding to the region’s natural disasters demonstrates the importance of our
relationship and our exceptional capabilities to respond quickly. We are also moving
forward with the Government of Japan to implement our military base realignment and
consolidation plan. Progress on force realignment will help us to establish a geographically
distributed, operationally resilient, and politically sustainable force posture in the IndoPacific region – critical to advancing US national interests and to ensuring peace,
prosperity, and stability in the region. We continue to work closely with the Japanese
Government to address emerging challenges in space and cyberspace, and to strengthen
our missile defence capabilities to counter threats from the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea (DPRK), including trilaterally with the Republic of Korea. In the ARF, Japan has
played an active leadership role on Information Communication Technology (ICT) and
cyber issues, including as a co-chair of the ARF Intersessional Meeting on Information and
Communications Technology Security (ARF ISM on ICTs Security). The United States
commends Japan for its strong commitment to add the collective voice of the influential
G7 nations to discussions on maritime security challenges, development and
humanitarian assistance, disaster relief efforts, peacekeeping operations, global
economic resiliency, climate change, cyber policy issues, global health systems
strengthening, the Women, Peace, and Security (WPS) agenda, and human rights policies
in the Indo-Pacific.

Mutual Defence Treaty between the United States and the Republic of Korea (ROK) has
been the linchpin of regional security for the last 70 years and represents our ironclad
commitment to the defence of the ROK. We will continue to enhance ongoing work within
the Alliance to deepen our comprehensive strategic partnership based on our common
values and mutual trust. In the past year, we continued diplomatic efforts to achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and remain steadfast in our pursuit of dialogue
and diplomacy with the DPRK, without preconditions. Recognizing that the DPRK’s efforts
to advance its unlawful nuclear and ballistic missile capabilities, as well as its destabilizing

365

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and dangerous rhetoric, have continued, the United States and ROK have taken prudent
steps to strengthen our extended deterrence. In 2022, we reconvened the annual
Extended Deterrence Strategy and Consultation Group. Announced by Presidents Biden
and Yoon in April 2023, the Washington Declaration committed the United States to make
every effort to consult with the ROK in nuclear crises and created a new bilateral
mechanism for nuclear and strategic planning issues. We also agreed to regular, visible
strategic asset deployments to the region; strengthened training and exercises; and better
integration of ROK conventional assets into US strategic planning. The US and ROK
militaries have recently expanded the scope and scale of annual joint training and
exercises that enhance interoperability and force readiness. These exercises are purely
defensive in nature. We continue to advance US-Japan-ROK trilateral cooperation,
including resumption of the Defence Trilateral Talks and trilateral military exercises, and
are working to build on established cooperation in missile defence. We continue to
support information sharing on DPRK missile and nuclear capabilities. The United States
has also prioritized efforts to implement the multiple UNSCRs on the DPRK, while leading
a multinational effort to counter illicit DPRK maritime activity. The US-ROK relationship
has evolved into a global partnership. We are working together, not only on the Korean
Peninsula and in the region, but also in places such as Lebanon, South Sudan, and off the
coast of Somalia.

This collaboration includes global health security, peacekeeping

activities, stabilization, and reconstruction activities, WPS, and humanitarian assistance
and disaster relief (HA/DR) efforts.

Australia is one of our most important regional partners. The Australia-New ZealandUnited States (ANZUS) security treaty is the foundation of defence and security
cooperation between the United States and Australia. This cooperation is an anchor for
security and stability across the Indo-Pacific. Australia is committed to ensuring a free
and open region, and regional partners look to Australia for leadership in the Pacific. The
United States and Australia continue to deepen longstanding bilateral security and
defence cooperation, particularly in support of Australia’s decision to modernize its
defence capabilities to meet the needs of the current security environment. Further key
lines of effort include optimizing US force posture in Australia and deepening cooperation
with other Allies and partners in the region and around the world. The Australia-US
Ministerial Consultations (AUSMIN) is an annual “2+2” dialogue among the US Secretaries
of State and Defence and their Australian counterparts. Interoperability with US forces is

366

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
a foundational part of Australia’s military modernization across all domains (Air, Sea, Land,
Space, and Cyberspace). Rotations of US Marines and US Air Force aircraft in Australia’s
Northern Territory improve interoperability and capacity through bilateral and
multilateral training and exercises in the region. Marine Rotational Force – Darwin (MRFD) has evolved from a bilateral training activity into a platform for conducting multilateral
engagement with countries such as Tonga, Fiji, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand,
Singapore, Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea, and Sri Lanka. Discussions during AUSMIN
2020 produced a Statement of Principles on Alliance Defence Cooperation and Force
Posture Priorities in the Indo-Pacific that looks to build on the landmark agreement from
2011 establishing MRF-D. AUSMIN 2021 and 2022 built on these principles, as the US and
Australia decided to formalize Enhanced Force Posture Cooperation under the Force
Posture Agreement and expand efforts to enhance interoperability. The United States
and Australia expanded cooperation through additional multilateral groupings, such as
the-Australia-Japan Trilateral Strategic Dialogue (TSD) – with the aim of enhancing
regional stability and security. Australia’s November 2022 participation in Malabar naval
exercises laid the groundwork for additional maritime security cooperation in the Indian
Ocean with India. Talisman Sabre 2021, the ninth iteration of this exercise, showcased the
breadth and depth of the US-Australia mil-to-mil relationship. The biennial exercise is set
to take place again in 2023. In September 2021, the United States, Australia, and the
United Kingdom announced AUKUS – a new security partnership. The AUKUS partnership
is a modernization of existing partnerships to address the security challenges of the
future, and is intended to enhance peace, security, and stability in the Indo-Pacific and
beyond. In March 2023, AUKUS partners outlined the “optimal pathway” for Australia to
acquire conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines under the partnership. The
multiphase approach will span decades and culminate in the design and delivery of a new
class of nuclear-powered submarine, the SSN-AUKUS. AUKUS partners remain committed
to ensuring cooperation on naval nuclear propulsion proceeds in a manner that sets the
highest non-proliferation standards and strengthens the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Additionally, AUKUS partners continue to advance cooperation on a range of
advanced capability initiatives.

The United States-New Zealand bilateral relationship continues to strengthen and mature.
Following the November 2016, visit of the USS SAMPSON, the first United States military
vessel to pull into port in New Zealand in thirty years, the United States continues sending

367

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
ships to New Zealand, most recently the USS Howard in late 2021. Our two nations
conduct joint military exercises more frequently and we continue seeking new
opportunities to increase our interoperability, augmented by New Zealand’s decision to
purchase five Lockheed Martin C-130s and four Boeing P-8s. The annual Strategic
Dialogue is the United States’ top-level regular policy discussion with New Zealand and
was last held in March 2022. The two sides began holding formal defence policy dialogues
in 2013 – most recently meeting in December 2022. The United States continues to value
its partnership with New Zealand in advancing the ARF’s capacity to address regional
security challenges through Preventive Diplomacy; New Zealand’s leadership on this issue
is critical to maintaining the ARF’s effectiveness and relevance as a regional security body.
New Zealand is also a critical WPS partner for the United States.

The United States-Philippines Mutual Defence Treaty continues to promote stability and
security in the Indo-Pacific region. Our bilateral cooperation continues to contribute to
regional peace and stability, with particular focus in the areas of maritime security,
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, counterterrorism, countering violent
extremism, and non-proliferation. The United States-Philippines Enhanced Defence
Cooperation Agreement, signed in 2014, supports a joint commitment to advancing
mutual security interests by increasing our interoperability, supporting the Armed Forces
of the Philippines’ defence modernization plans, and improving our ability to respond to
natural disasters in the region. The United States will continue to advance this enduring
strategic alliance through high-level dialogues, such as the Bilateral Strategic Dialogue.
Opportunities for progress also exist where we share a common interest in expanding
regional defence and security cooperation through the ASEAN Defence Ministers’
Meeting Plus (ADMM)-Plus and other vehicles. The United States continues to support
Philippine participation in joint exercises with other partners in the Southeast Asia and
Pacific regions, as well as encouraging the Philippines to invite participation by
neighbouring countries in bilateral military exercises, such as Exercise BALIKATAN.

The United States and Thailand have been treaty allies for over 60 years, and we continue
to collaborate to address humanitarian and security issues such as counterterrorism,
counter narcotics, disaster relief, health and infectious diseases, non-proliferation, and
maritime security. The United States is committed to our enduring friendship with
Thailand and the Thai people, and we welcome Thailand’s role in Southeast Asia and the

368

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Mekong region. Our security partnership with Thailand is bilateral and regional in scope.
The US-Thailand Joint Vision Statement 2020, signed by the two defence leaders last
November, outlines the joint strategy between the two militaries to achieve our mutually
shared goals into the next decade. In support of this strategy, Thailand and the United
States co-host Cobra Gold, the Indo-Pacific region’s largest annual multilateral military
exercise. Since 1950, Thailand has received US military equipment, essential supplies,
training, and assistance in the construction and improvement of facilities. As part of our
mutual defence cooperation, we have developed a joint military exercise program that
engages all the services of each nation and counts an annual slate of more than 400
military exercises and engagements.

The United States and Indonesia address strategic challenges as strategic partners. In
2015, the United States and Indonesia forged a Strategic Partnership to expand
cooperation on shared strategic interests in the region and held a strategic dialogue at the
ministerial level in 2021. Since 2021, Indonesia has also closely collaborated with the
United States as our country coordinator in ASEAN, including cooperation to organize a
US-ASEAN Special Summit in May 2022, in Washington DC. To build capacity and
readiness, the US and Indonesian militaries conduct regular exercises, such as the Air
Force fighter jet exercise Cope West, the Navy-to-Navy exercise Cooperation Afloat
Readiness and Training in Indonesia, and the Indonesia-hosted multilateral naval exercise
Komodo. In 2022 and 2023, the United States and Indonesia expanded Garuda Shield,
previously an Army-to-Army exercise, into a joint, multi-national event with all
components of the Indonesian National Armed Forces and more than 14 participating
countries. The United States military values its close partnership with Indonesia in areas
that closely align with United States security interests, such as maritime security,
counterterrorism, and HA/DR. Indonesia continues to focus its professional military
education on sending students to the United States National and Service War Colleges,
United States Service Command and General Staff Colleges, and Maritime Security and
Defence Professionalization courses. The United States Coast Guard and Indonesian
Maritime Security Agency have been working together closely on maritime security, and
the United States funded the construction of a maritime training centre, which will open
in 2023.

369

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Singapore is a strong partner of the United States and an active participant —regionally
and globally — to ensure peace and stability. Our two countries have close and longstanding defence ties with our militaries participating in several bilateral and multilateral
exercises each year. This year, the United States and Singapore commemorated the 30th
Anniversary of Exercise COMMANDO SLING. In addition, Singapore hosts the rotational
deployment of US military aircraft and ships to conduct a variety of maritime patrol
activities to counter piracy and terrorism, as well as provide HA/DR in the region.
Singapore has the second-largest military training presence in the United States each year
Singapore was the first and only Asian country to have contributed both assets and
personnel to the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS. Additionally, the Singapore Navy has
commanded Combined Task Force 151 in the Gulf of Aden on numerous occasions. In
recent years, we made significant progress in our relationship, including the renewal the
1990, MOU governing our presence in Singapore; the signing of a non-binding MOU to
establish and enduring Singapore fighter training presence in Guam by 2029; the signing
of a Foreign Military Sales case for the F-35B, and the signing a MOU concerning
cooperation in cyberspace. In 2018, we broadened our relationship by renewing a
memorandum of understanding for the Third Country Training Program (TCTP), an ASEAN
capacity-building initiative jointly managed by the United States and Singapore. Aimed at
bridging development gaps in the region, the TCTP has provided technical assistance and
training to over 1,200 officials through more than 40 workshops since its inception in
2012. The TCTP curriculum includes non-traditional security threats such as cybersecurity
and cybercrime and smart cities and health security. At the head of government-level
meeting in October 2017, and again in September 2019, the United States and Singapore
reaffirmed the strong and enduring partnership between our two countries. Recognizing
the trans-boundary nature of cybersecurity threats, the two leaders commended the
progress made under the 2016, MOU on Cybersecurity Cooperation and celebrated
progress under Singapore’s 2018, ASEAN chair year to secure the digital economy as a key
engine for future economic growth. In the ARF, Singapore has played an active and strong
leadership role on ICT and cyber issues, including as a co-chair of the newly established
ISM on ICTs Security. As a like-minded partner on counterterrorism issues, Singapore
plays an important role in facilitating regional efforts against terrorism and violent
extremism. In 2021, Singapore established the multilateral Counterterrorism Information
Facility (CTIF) to bring together like-minded countries to share intelligence, provide early
warning, monitoring, and analysis capabilities in a centralized and coordinated manner.

370

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
As the world’s largest transhipment port, we work closely with Singapore on trade security
and counter proliferation efforts, and Singapore continues with its trial of the World
Customs Organization’s Cargo Targeting System (CTS).

The relationship between the United States and Malaysia has reached new heights in
recent years, and the United States is eager to continue working with our Malaysian
partners to increase regional and global security. A robust slate of bilateral and
multilateral military exercises has enhanced our respective capabilities to promote
regional security and respond to humanitarian disasters. The United States values
Malaysia’s past contributions to the stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan, and
we are working closely on maritime security, counter terrorism, including stopping the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters joining ISIS, humanitarian assistance / disaster relief, and
military medical cooperation. The US Coast Guard and the Malaysian Maritime
Enforcement Agency work closely to address maritime security issues in Malaysia’s EEZ.
Malaysia is also an important counterproliferation partner and the United States seeks to
increase cooperation. The United States looks forward to working closely with Malaysia
in advancing our shared priorities and interests in the context of promoting regional
cooperation, peacekeeping capacity building, respect for international law, ASEAN
centrality, and the maintenance of peace and stability. In the ARF, Malaysia has played
an active and strong leadership role on ICT and cyber issues, including in the newly
established ISM on ICTs Security. Malaysia also plays an active role in the ISM on
Counterterrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC) and hosted a United States-funded ARF
workshop on aviation security and information sharing in July 2019.

United States-Vietnam relations underwent a dramatic transformation since we
normalized ties in 1995, and Vietnam has emerged as one of our strongest partners in the
Indo-Pacific. Our robust partnership with Vietnam on political, security, economic, and
people-to-people ties through a healthy set of annual dialogues continues to grow,
spanning issues from human rights to security and defence relations. The United States
and Vietnam are cooperating in areas such as security, peacekeeping operations, trade,
non-proliferation, health, the environment, science and technology, education, WPS, and
human rights. Defence ties have grown rapidly over the past several years, embodied by
the lifting of the lethal weapon sales ban in 2016 and the historic March 2018 and March
2020 visits of United States aircraft carriers to Danang. In August 2020, as part of the US

371

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Department of State’s Excess Defence Articles program, the United States officially
transferred a second high endurance cutter to the Vietnamese Coast Guard, and we are
finalizing the transfer of a third cutter. In 2019, the United States and Vietnam signed an
MOU strengthening cooperation and joint efforts to combat wildlife trafficking as a
serious transnational crime. Criminal justice sector ties have also developed rapidly since
2016, with numerous trainings, exchanges, and workshops to increase Vietnam’s capacity
and interoperability to combat transnational crime, effectively and fairly prosecute
crimes, and enhance maritime security in support of a free and open Indo-Pacific.

The United States-India global comprehensive strategic partnership stands upon shared
values and complementary visions of a free and open Indo-Pacific region. The United
States government views India as a leading partner in safeguarding a free and open IndoPacific. The United States holds regular consultations with India on a range of political,
economic, and security issues in both bilateral and multi-country formats. The fourth 2+2
Ministerial in April 2022, led by the Secretaries of State and Defence alongside their Indian
counterparts, demonstrated how both of our countries seek to promote a resilient, rulesbased international order. The United States participated in four Leader-level Summits
with India, Australia, and Japan most recently in Sydney on May 24, 2023. Cabinet-level
engagements and leader-level meetings and teleconferences are underpinned by
numerous high-level dialogues and working groups, including climate, defence, regional
security, counternarcotic, counterterrorism, peacekeeping, trade, energy, oceans, health,
cybersecurity, and education.

Since India’s designation as a Major Defence Partner in

2016, we finalized major defence enabling agreements and increased interoperability
through numerous military exercises such as the tri-services Tiger Triumph exercise, the
Yudh Abhyas and Vajra Prahar exercises, and the Malabar naval exercises with Japan and
Australia. We are bolstering robust private industry collaboration through initiatives such
as the US-India Initiative for Critical and Emerging Technology. We also look forward to
working with India and likeminded partners to deepen humanitarian and disaster relief
cooperation in the Indo-Pacific and joint peacekeeping capacity-building efforts. India is
also an active participant in the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus mechanism.

The United States seeks a constructive, results-oriented relationship with the People’s
Republic of China (PRC). We seek cooperation with the PRC where our interests align,
such as macroeconomic stability, food security, global health, climate, and addressing the

372

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
rise in global synthetic drug production and trafficking. In other areas, we will compete
to defend American interests and values like transparency, the rule of law, market-based
economic competition, freedom of navigation and overflight, human rights, and religious
freedom. We remain concerned with the PRC’s articulated national strategy of militarycivil fusion, which seeks to develop the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) into the world’s
most capable military, in part through licit and illicit exploitation of its access to the
international science, technology and innovation ecosystem, to develop the hard power
capabilities to press its agenda. The PRC has openly committed to upholding these and
other principles that underpin security and prosperity for the Indo-Pacific. The United
States asks that the PRC stand by its word and protect the rights of its people and end its
ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity against Uyghurs and members of other
ethnic and religious minority groups in Xinjiang , ceasing human rights abuses throughout
the country, violating international obligations in Hong Kong, reaching outside its borders
to harass and threaten dissidents for speaking out, making unlawful maritime claims in
the South China Sea, and engaging in distortionary trade practices. With regards to the
South China Sea, the United States has a vital national interest in ensuring freedom of
navigation and overflight and other lawful uses of the sea, respect for international law,
unimpeded lawful commerce, and peace and stability. The PRC’s provocative reclamation
and militarization of disputed outposts in the South China Sea, its attempts to coerce and
intimidate, and planned deployments of floating nuclear power plants in areas of
competing maritime claims, threaten the sovereign rights of other claimants and
undermine regional stability. The United States urges all claimants, including the PRC, to
manage and resolve disputes peacefully and in accordance with international law as
reflected in the Law of the Sea Convention. The United States-PRC economic relationship
is very important, and the United States is committed to pursuing meaningful, fully
enforceable commitments to resolve the PRC’s structural issues.

United States defence engagement with Brunei remains robust. Despite the challenges
introduced by COVID restrictions on in-person exercises and exchanges, Brunei continues
to prioritize our bilateral defence relationship. In addition to continuing our annual
bilateral Cooperation Afloat Readiness and Training (CARAT) exercise, our annual
multilateral naval exercise Southeast Cooperation and Training (SEACAT), this year Brunei
hosted Pahlawan Warrior (PW) 2022, the largest bilateral event between the US Army and
the Royal Brunei Land Force. The last iteration of PW took place in 2018, with the 2020,

373

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
exercise being cancelled because of the COVID pandemic.

PW22 represents the

resumption of an important element of the US-Brunei defence relationship. Additional
defence highlights include the Royal Brunei Navy sending the Darussalam-class offshore
patrol vessel KDB Darulehsan (OPV 07) to the biennial Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC)
multinational maritime exercise in 2020, and Brunei agreeing to establish additional
Service-to-Service talks to build on the first Airman-to-Airman Talks held in 2020. United
States military officers have regularly attended the Royal Brunei Armed Forces Staff
College since January 2014. We continue to look for ways to expand our military-tomilitary cooperation, including through pursuing agreements that would accommodate
deeper levels of defence cooperation.

On the back of diplomacy and defence

cooperation, the promising United States-Brunei relationship aims to help secure mutual
security interests in Southeast Asia.

The United States has cooperated with the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF) in
areas of mutual concern ranging from international peacekeeping, defence reform and
professionalization to humanitarian assistance and disaster response. In early 2017, the
Royal Cambodian Government suspended all military-to-military exercises with the
United States. Since then, they have conducted three joint military exercises with the
People’s Liberation Army. In response to democratic backsliding, we suspended the
delivery of four Rigid Hull Inflatable Boats (RHIBs) and have carefully considered the pace
of restoring our military-military relationship until we see progress. We continue to
cooperate in peacekeeping operations, humanitarian mine action, medical research, and
United States Prisoners of War/Missing in Action (POW/MIA) personnel accounting.

United States has suspended defence engagement with Burma since the coup. All
engagement with and assistance to the Burmese military has been suspended since the
February 1, 2021, coup d’état. The United States has reprogrammed aid that had been
previously intended to assist the Burmese government to humanitarian, pro-democracy
and other efforts that show our continued support for the people of Burma. Nevertheless,
the United States continues to use public and private channels to urge the military to
cease the violence, release all those unjustly detained, and restore Burma’s path to
inclusive, multiparty democracy.

374

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Laos’ chairmanship of ASEAN and the signing of a Comprehensive Partnership between
the United States and the Lao PDR in 2016 provided new opportunities for bilateral
engagement. While we continue to address legacy issues, like the important Prisoners of
War/Missing in Action accounting mission and helping Laos manage contamination from
unexploded ordnance, we are building a new relationship for the 21st century. The many
facets of our cooperation—which include health, law enforcement, trade, education,
environmental protection, military issues, cultural preservation, disaster preparedness,
human trafficking, trafficking illegal drugs, entrepreneurship, energy, rule of law
programs, and more—address the country’s most critical and systemic needs. Laos served
as the United States’ country coordinator for ASEAN from 2018-2021 and provided a vital
link to the organization.

The United States and ASEAN established a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership (CSP) at
the US-ASEAN Summit in November 2022. Following ASEAN’s established process, the
United States and ASEAN are finalizing the annex to the current plan of action to reflect
this change in the relationship. The CSP builds upon decades of partnership between the
United States and ASEAN and will serve as a guide for future close cooperation.

The United States values defence cooperation with Timor-Leste in areas of mutual
concern including maritime security, humanitarian assistance/disaster relief, border
security, defence reform, and professionalization. During the 2018 Bilateral Defence
Discussion, Timor-Leste’s Minister of Defence requested United States assistance with
rehabilitating Baucau Airfield. An MOU for this multi-million-dollar project was signed in
June 2021, and the first phase of the Baucau Airfield rehabilitation was completed in 2022.
Timor-Leste demonstrated commitment to regional security by participating in several
multinational exercises. In 2022, Timor-Leste participated in Pacific Angel with the United
States Air Force, which included medical and engineer civil action projects. In February
2023, Timor-Leste participated in Cooperation Afloat Readiness and Training/Marine
Exercise (CARAT/MAREX), which enhances their maritime security efforts. Timor-Leste
Armed Forces (F-FDTL) hosts multilateral exercise Hari Hamutuk, which enhances TimorLeste’s interoperability with the United States, Australia, and Japan. A Navy Seabee
detachment has an enduring presence in Timor-Leste since 2009, and partners with the
F-FDTL, Ministry of Health, and Ministry of Education.

The detachment recently

completed its 105th construction project. The United States hosts several military officers

375

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and ministerial civil servants as part of the International Military and Education Training
(IMET) program. As part of the National Guard State Partnership Program, Timor-Leste,
and the Rhode Island National Guard (RING) signed an agreement in February 2023, that
will enhance professional development, training, an exchange between F-FDTL and RING.
In 2022, Timor-Leste celebrated its first United States Army Command and General Staff
College graduate. Timorese IMET graduates continue to fill roles of prominence and
enhances defence professionalization. Additionally, the United States sponsors an English
language-training course in Timor-Leste, which trains 40 military personnel each year.
INDOPACOM Commander Aquilino visited Timor-Leste in February 2023, and Timor-Leste
Defence Minister Paixão visited the United States and met with Pentagon officials in April
2023. In May 2023, a US government granted Cessna 206 was delivered to the F-FDTL Air
Component which will support Timor-Leste's domain awareness capabilities. Timor-Leste
became an official observer of ASEAN in 2022, and the United States supports their
progress towards full accession.

Papua New Guinea (PNG)’s strategic location makes it a critical partner for the United
States and allies in preserving the freedom of navigation in the South Pacific and in
advancing other priorities of the Indo-Pacific Strategy. PNG possesses the land area,
population, natural resources, and relatively diversified economic base to serve as a policy
bellwether within the South Pacific. PNG’s security challenges include maritime domain
awareness; border security; logistics and resourcing; and policing in districts experiencing
high rates of crime, gender-based violence, and/or intercommunal violence. Since the
successful and peaceful conclusion of the 2019, Bougainville referendum the United
States has continued to engage with partner countries, civil society organizations, and
government officials as the National Government and the Autonomous Bougainville
Government negotiate the referendum’s results. Military forces from both countries
participate in regional exercises, work to locate missing US World War II personnel, and
advance opportunities to plan for unexploded ordnance removal. Since Papua New
Guinea hosted APEC in 2018, United States military personnel continue planning and
coordination with the PNG Defence Force to build and develop a variety of facilities at the
naval base in Lombrum, Manus. Exchange opportunities ranged from conferences and
workshops on common priorities like fisheries enforcement and port security – PNG will
host an upcoming port security training as part of an ASEAN Regional Forum series – to
exploratory talks between national law enforcement agencies in each country to develop

376

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
capacity building training programs. In 2019, the United States Department of Defence
established a permanent Defence Attaché Office at the United States embassy in Port
Moresby and further expanded defence cooperation capacity with the establishment of a
security cooperation office in 2021. Papua New Guinea sent its first cadet to the United
States Military Academy in West Point, New York in 2019. Actions taken under the IndoPacific Strategy’s security pillar complemented other activities that focus on economics
(developing a welcoming climate for United States investment and development
initiatives) and promote shared inclusive values (including advancing gender equality and
women’s empowerment; implementing people-to-people education and cultural
exchanges; supporting the fight against HIV and polio; protecting environmental equities
in PNG’s rich biodiversity; and encouraging resiliency and disaster risk reduction). The
United States also aided Papua New Guinea’s COVID-19 response through the provision
of ventilators and training, including support for isolation, containment, and critical care
management; risk communication and community engagement; infection prevention and
control; and case detection, surveillance, and lab support. Technical assistance for
vaccine deployment supports communication and demand generation; policy, planning,
and coordination; health workforce support and training; and service delivery.

The United States and the European Union are deepening collaboration with Asian
partners to advance regional security and development, and to build regional institutions
and support for the rule of law. The United States and the EU share common goals to
promote human rights, freedom of navigation and overflight and other lawful uses of the
sea, and respect for international law in the East China Sea and South China Sea. Recent
evidence of this deepening collaboration is seen in the first-ever US-EU joint naval exercise
March 23-24, 2023. We are working together to encourage Beijing to deepen its
engagement with the international community, act in accordance with international law
and standards, and participate responsibly in the global economic order. We are also
coordinating our messages to condemn potential DPRK provocations, uphold UNSC
Resolutions, and pressure the regime to address its egregious human rights abuses. USEU cooperation has also played a critical role in supporting Myanmar’s ongoing
democratic transition, we joint-sponsored in March a UNHRC resolution calling for the
creation of a fact-finding mission. We regularly collaborate with the EU through the
Friends of the Mekong mechanism as well as other senior-level forums. As Co-Chair of
the ARF Intersessional Meeting on Maritime Security, the EU demonstrated a

377

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
commitment to strengthening a regional MDA architecture using technology and fusions
centres to counter IUU fishing and to strengthen the international maritime rules-based
order; these efforts are aligned with United States capacity building and policy goals in
Southeast Asia. As we rebalance our interests and investments to the Indo-Pacific, we
look forward to continually expanding our coordination with the EU through the ARF and
other regional fora, as well as through the biannual, Deputy Secretary of State-led US-EU
Indo-Pacific Consultations.

US-Bangladesh relations have strengthened under the Indo-Pacific Strategy, which has
increased US support for maritime security. We welcome the release of Bangladesh’s
Indo-Pacific Outlook and look forward to cooperating closely on areas where our visions
overlap. The United States is the largest donor in the Rohingya crisis response, providing
US$2.1 billion since 2017. US-Bangladesh counter terrorism cooperation has improved
security within the country, and the United States also continues to support Bangladesh's
considerable contributions to international peacekeeping.

The United States and

Bangladesh held a high-level Partnership Dialogue in May, led by U/S Victoria Nuland.
Several senior-level US officials held bilateral engagements with Bangladesh in early 2023,
NSC Senior Director for South Asia, Eileen Laubacher and SCA Assistant Secretary Donald
Lu made separate visits to Dhaka in January; Counsellor Chollet travelled to Dhaka in
February; Secretary Blinken met with Foreign Minister Momen and U/S Nuland hosted
the US-Bangladesh Partnership Dialogue with Foreign Secretary Momen in April in
Washington. These important meetings have grown our relationship, although hurdles
remain. The United States continues to push for accountability for human rights violations
by the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB). Still, high-level commitment to security and law
enforcement cooperation enables us to work together closely in other areas. For instance,
the United States and Bangladesh are moving forward on a General Security of Military
Information Agreement (GSOMIA). Bangladeshi military students continue to attend
premier US military courses of instruction, with 27 students completing courses at various
military colleges since 2017.

Bangladesh is the second largest Counterterrorism

Partnerships Fund partner in South Asia and has received over $60 million in CT assistance
since the 2016 Holey Bakery Attack. The ARF is an important forum for the United States
and Bangladesh to improve the welfare of 1.1 million Rohingya in Cox's Bazar and on
Bhasan Char.

378

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The US-Sri Lanka security relationship continues to grow amid economic crisis and human
rights concerns. After years of mismanagement and taking on debt loads it could not
repay, Sri Lanka is currently facing a difficult economic crisis, culminating in Sri Lanka
defaulting 2022.

The crisis led to protests and the ouster of President Gotabaya

Rajapaksa due to the worsening economic situation. Under current President Ranil
Wickremesinghe, Sri Lanka secured an IMF board approved program to stabilize the
economy. With popular demand for reform, Sri Lanka has started to reform its security
services, shrinking the size of the military to create a leaner, more efficient fighting force.
The United States is providing technical assistance to Sri Lanka as it undergoes this ‘rightsizing’ effort. The USG supports Maritime Security and interoperability with multilateral
partners, Maritime Domain Awareness, Counterterrorism (CT), support for United Nations
Peacekeeping missions, and Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief. In October
2021, a second High Endurance Cutter (WHEC) was transferred to Sri Lanka, to
supplement the WHEC transferred in 2019. The Montana National Guard and Sri Lanka
began a State Partnership Program in 2020 and has seen visits from Sri Lanka to Montana
and vice versa. Other key security activities include exercises with the Sri Lankan Navy
and Air Force to build cooperation on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief and
maritime security issues toward a safe and prosperous Indo-Pacific. US advisors and
assistance continues to assist Sri Lanka in promoting transparency procurement
processes, enhance the rule of law, and support government and civil society efforts to
promote good governance, accountability, justice, reconciliation, and human rights.

The United States worked to strengthen our engagement with Mekong countries through
the Mekong-US Partnership (MUSP). Since launching the MUSP in 2020, the United States
strives to build on the development assistance-focused Lower Mekong Initiative (LMI) to
broaden cooperation across a range of strategic areas, to focus US-Mekong cooperation
under a single, whole-of-government umbrella, and to work with like-minded partners
and allies on a commitment to the subregion’s security and prosperity. Entering its third
ministerial cycle, the MUSP, Mekong country partners, and the United States will continue
to execute activities listed in the 2021-2023, Mekong-US Partnership Plan of Action. Four
areas of engagement guide the MUSPS’s work: economic connectivity; human capital
development; trans-boundary water and natural resources management; and nontraditional security, including collaboration on emerging threats such as health security,
pandemic response, countering transnational crime, cyber security, and countering

379

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
trafficking in people, drugs, and wildlife. MUSP-supported Mekong Water Data Initiative
tools, such as the Mekong Dam Monitor, are helping shine a light on how dam operations
impact the Mekong River and its tributaries and are benefitting governments and
communities. Cooperation to address the scourge of transnational organized crime in the
Mekong subregion has also intensified. Last year, the Friends of the Mekong celebrated
10 years and welcomed new member the Mekong River Commission (MRC) Secretariat.
The Friends of the Mekong include the United States, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar,
Thailand, Vietnam, Australia, the European Union, Republic of Korea, Japan, New Zealand,
Asian Development Bank, World Bank, and Mekong River Commission Secretariat. At the
2021 ministerial meeting, India and the United Kingdom attended as observers.

II.

National Security and Defence Policy
In March 2021, the White House released the Interim National Security Strategic Guidance
(Interim Guidance) that will guide the United States’ national security and defence policy
until the National Security Strategy is published. The Interim Guidance recognizes that
preserving America’s security requires a whole-of-government approach that leverages a
broad range of instruments of national power. The military has a critical role to play in
protecting the security of the United States, particularly as it relates to deterring and if
necessary, fighting wars, but it is only one instrument of foreign policy. Diplomacy,
development, economic measure, and other forms of statecraft—backed by highly
capable armed forces that are equipped to deter our adversaries and defeat threats that
emerge—are the tools of first resort to advance America’s interests globally.

In March 2022, the Department of Defence transmitted to Congress the classified 2022,
National Defence Strategy (NDS). Consistent with the President’s Interim National
Security Strategic Guidance, the classified NDS sets out how the Department of Defence
will contribute to advancing and safeguarding vital US national interests – protecting the
American people, expanding America’s prosperity, and realizing and defending our
democratic values.

The Defence priorities are:

1. Defending the homeland, paced to the growing multi-domain threat posed by the
PRC

380

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
2. Deterring strategic attacks against the United States, Allies, and partners
3. Deterring aggression, while being prepared to prevail in conflict when necessary,
prioritizing
4. the PRC challenge in the Indo-Pacific, then the Russia challenge in Europe
5. Building a resilient Joint Force and defence ecosystem.

The NDS reiterates that mutually beneficial Alliances and partnerships are an enduring
strength for the United States, and are critical to achieving our objectives, as the unified
response to Russia’s further invasion of Ukraine has demonstrated. Answering this “call
to action,” the Department will incorporate ally and partner perspectives, competencies,
and advantages at every stage of defence planning.

Resources:
i. Interim

National

Security

Strategic

Guidance:

https://nssarchive.us/wp-

content/uploads/2021/03/2021_Interim.pdf
ii. 2022

National

Defence

Strategy

Fact

Sheet:

https://media.defence.gov/2022/Mar/28/2002964702/-1/-1/1/NDS-FACTSHEET.PDF
iii. A broad range of data is publicly available from the Office of the Undersecretary of
Defence (Comptroller) at https://comptroller.defence.gov/Budget-Materials/

The President’s FY 2023 Budget Request includes $773 billion for the Department of
Defence. The Budget Request reinforces the Department of Defence’s commitment to the
concept of integrated deterrence, allows us to better sequence and conduct operations

381

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
around the globe that are aligned to our priorities, modernizes the Joint Force, and
delivers meaningful support for our dedicated workforce and their families.
• The budget request reflects the National Defence Strategy and the focus of that strategy
on the pacing challenge of the PRC. It will help us prepare for other future challenges, as
well, including those posed by climate change. It preserves our readiness and deterrent
posture against the threats we face today: the acute threat of an aggressive Russia and
the constantly emerging threats posed by the DPRK, Iran, and violent extremist
organizations. And it absolutely supports our policy of US global leadership of — and
responsibility for — our vast network of alliances and partnerships.

Further information regarding the DoD National Defence Budget can be found at:

https://comptroller.defence.gov/Budget-Materials/Budget2023/

382

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

i.

Counterterrorism

383

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

The United States is actively engaged in multilateral and regional efforts to strengthen
regional partners and allies and to promote continued regional cooperation on
counterterrorism measures. The human atrocities and extreme acts of violence
committed by ISIS are not isolated to the Middle East. ISIS has repeatedly demonstrated
its ability to direct and inspire attacks in Europe and Asia, including the horrific attacks in
Indonesia, Philippines, and Sri Lanka. It is critical that United States and partners
cooperate purposefully to counter ISIS and its violent extremist outgrowths. The IndoPacific is not immune to terrorist influence either; therefore, the United States seeks to
encourage and support strategic counterterrorism policies in the region. This approach
places a premium on building the institutional capacities of states to promote the rule of
law and eliminate the underlying conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.

The United States is deeply concerned about ISIS’s continued influence in recruiting
followers from Southeast Asia and the terrorist group’s ability to inspire attacks in the
region. We encourage ASEAN member states to increase both internal and external
information sharing on known and suspected terrorists (KST), particularly by requiring the
provision and use of Advance Passenger Information and Passenger Name Record
(API/PNR) data on all airline passengers and by connecting all points of entry to
INTERPOL’s global police communications network (I-24/7). To help ensure passenger
screening against INTERPOL’s I-24/7 law enforcement databases, the United States is
prepared to assist ASEAN member states in connecting priority ports of entry and
automating the reporting of stolen and lost travel documents to INTERPOL. The United
States encourages global commitment to implementing UN Security Council Resolution
(UNSCR) 2396 on countering terrorist travel and addressing the challenges associated with
returning and relocating 2396 on foreign terrorist fighters and their accompanying
families, which includes obligations to strengthen border security, watchlisting, and
information sharing. To this end, the United States is proud to have co-hosted UNSCR
2396-related training workshops with several ASEAN and ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
member states since the passing of this landmark resolution in 2017.

The United States encourages partner nations to implement the UN Global
Counterterrorism Strategy and the recommendations of the Secretary General’s Plan of
Action on Preventing Violent Extremism, including developing national action plans to

384

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
take a whole-of-society approach to combating this security threat. The United States
works closely with regional partners at the United Nations and in regional fora such as the
ARF, ADMM-Plus, Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG), and APEC to strengthen
counterterrorism capabilities. These include efforts to support regional implementation
of the UN Global Counterterrorism Strategy and international instruments related to
countering terrorism. The US government, through the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), helped ASEAN establish a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary work plan to implement the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent and
Counter the Rise of Radicalization and Violent Extremism under the Manila Declaration
2019-2025, also known as the Bali Work Plan. USAID continues to support ASEAN’s
Working Group on Counter-Terrorism in leading the Bali Work Plan implementation effort
through the development of the ASEAN Training of Trainers program to address
disinformation and promote media literacy, which was launched in January 2022, in
collaboration with US Department of State Bureau of Counterterrorism. Following up on
this program, in May 2022, USAID supported pilot training to customize the program for
each member states’ context. In August 2022, the United States co-chaired the second
Regional Workshop on Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism: Taking Stock of
Ongoing and Emerging Threats and Trends and in June 2023, USAID is supporting a third
ASEAN-US Regional Workshop on Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism and a
follow-on Multi Sectoral Task Force and ASEAN Partners Meeting for Implementation of
the Bali Work Plan 2019-2025.

The ARF Counterterrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC) Work Plan contributes to
regional security through work in its priority areas – Illicit Drugs; Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN); and Counter Radicalization. The United States is coleading efforts to combat illicit drugs and CBRN. The United States partnered with the
Philippines and ROK to conduct an ARF TTX on Response Capabilities to CBRN Incidents in
2022.

The US Department of State also works closely with its partners at the US Department of
Homeland Security to strengthen global aviation security by engaging foreign partners in
bolstering aviation screening at last point of departure airports with direct flights to the
United States to identify and prevent known or suspected terrorists from boarding
commercial flights. The United States has also provided bilateral counterterrorism

385

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
financing for capacity building assistance to several nations in the region, including the
Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia. The United States continues to support the
enabling of its partners and allies to secure the region effectively from potential terrorist
threats, including those involving CBRN materials.

ii. Non-proliferation, Counter-proliferation, Arms Control, and Disarmament

The United States will continue to fulfil its obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) and to pursue the objectives of the NPT across its three pillars of nonproliferation, disarmament, and peaceful uses of nuclear energy, science and
technologies, and to strengthen the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. By no longer
complying with its continuing obligations under the New START Treaty, Russia endangers
one the of last bilateral instruments of stability and predictability between us and the
broader future of US-Russian arms control. Russia’s reckless behaviour threatens all
countries. The United States supports the treaty’s full and mutual implementation.
Washington and Moscow have been able to keep strategic stability matters separated
from broader security issued for over half a century. We call on Russia to fulfil its
obligations under the New START Treaty. The United States will ensure our strategic
deterrent remains safe, secure, and effective and that our extended deterrence
commitments to our allies and partners remain strong and credible. The United States
supports the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and is committed to work to
achieve its entry into force, recognizing the significant challenges that lie ahead in
reaching this goal. Challenges like Russian threats to resume nuclear explosive testing. In
line with the goals of the CTBT, the United States continues to observe its zero-yield
nuclear explosive testing moratorium and calls on all states possessing nuclear weapons
to declare or maintain such a moratorium.

The United States underlines the importance of commencing immediately negotiations of
a treaty to ban production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices, known as a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT), if negotiations are
governed by consensus and all the key states participate. Since the early 1990s, the
United States has maintained a moratorium on the production of fissile material for use
in nuclear weapons. Pending the conclusion of FMCT negotiations, we call on all states
that have not done so to declare and maintain similar moratoria. The PRC remains the

386

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
only NPT nuclear-weapon state that has not declared a moratorium on production of
fissile material for use in nuclear weapons.

In the Indo-Pacific region, the PRC’s rapid and opaque expansion of its nuclear arsenal,
especially when viewed in the context of the PRC’s more assertive foreign policy, is a key
concern for the United States and its allies and partners. As the PRC continues its nuclear
weapons buildup, it will increasingly undermine the security of the United States, our
allies, and our partners in the region and may force the United States or other countries
to revaluate the sufficiency of their defence postures. The PRC’s nuclear arsenal does not
need to equal the US arsenal to fuel an arms race, nor is symmetry between US and PRC
nuclear forces a precursor for Beijing to practice mutual transparency and restraint. We
will continue to urge the PRC to engage in substantive bilateral talks on strategic risk
reduction measures and crisis communications. We will also continue to pursue concrete
risk reduction measures within the P5 process. All such measures reduce the risk of
accidental nuclear war, as well as to promote stability through greater transparency of
the PRC’s nuclear weapon policies, plans, and capabilities.

The NPT remains the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation regime and critical
to our common security. While it is regrettable that Russia alone blocked consensus on a
final document at the Tenth NPT Review Conference in 2022, the fact that all other States
Parties were prepared to accept it is a sign of the enduring support of the international
community for this essential treaty. Looking toward the new review cycle, we will build
on the good work that was done and continue to encourage NPT Parties to focus on their
common interests in each of the treaty’s three pillars of non-proliferation, disarmament,
and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We seek the universalization of the Additional
Protocol to ensure that IAEA safeguards remain effective and robust, both to provide
credible assurances that states are fulfilling their NPT obligations and to uphold the
Treaty’s integrity by addressing noncompliance. The United States also remains
committed to ultimately achieving a world without nuclear weapons, and to engaging in
risk reduction measures.

While not a substitute for disarmament, risk reduction

measures.

The United States supports practical efforts to advance the global capacity for nuclear
disarmament verification. A key effort in this vein is the International Partnership for

387

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Nuclear Disarmament Verification (IPNDV). The IPNDV brings together 30 states with and
without nuclear weapons, plus the European Union, under a cooperative framework to
further understanding of the complex challenges involved in the verification of nuclear
disarmament and to identify potential solutions to those challenges. Now in its third
phase, the Partnership has produced more than 50 reports and technology data sheets
highlighting potential verification measures to make possible future nuclear
disarmament.

In 2022, representatives from 42 countries continued to participate in meetings of the
United States organized Creating an Environment for Nuclear Disarmament (CEND)
Working Group. Due to the ongoing pandemic, meetings of CEND’s three subgroups
continued to be held virtually for most of the year. However, on the margins of the UN
First Committee in October 2022, CEND held its first return to in-person plenary since the
pandemic began. After the October meeting, CEND continued to advance its work via
virtual meetings for the remainder of 2022. In 2023, CEND continues to work in a virtual
format while also aiming to hold at least one, if not several, in-person plenaries. The
United States supports practical efforts to create an environment conducive to further
progress on nuclear disarmament and fashioning a world in which nuclear weapons are
no longer necessary to deter aggression and maintain global strategic stability. The CEND
Working Group provides a forum for the meaningful and realistic dialogue that is
necessary to address the underlying security concerns that cause countries to rely on
nuclear weapons for their security and to pursue effective measures that will help create
such an environment. The United States does not support the TPNW, which will not lead
to the elimination of a single nuclear weapons, or enhance any state’s security, and
therefore is not an “effective measure” relating to nuclear disarmament as envisioned by
the NPT. The five NPT nuclear-weapon states (P5) have met regularly to discuss nuclear
policy, promote mutual confidence, and discuss issues related to the fulfilment of the NPT.

The United States supports the expansion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy in conformity
with the NPT and according to international standards of safety, security, and nonproliferation) and believes it can be a clean, reliable source of energy for states seeking to
meet increasing energy demands. Such efforts must be conducted in accordance with
high standards for international safeguards and in full cooperation with the IAEA. The next
generation of reactors, including small modular reactors (SMRs), offer a new nuclear

388

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
power pathway for countries. These technologies have economic and safety advantages,
can be right sized for the grid capacity, and offer a range of applications beyond electricity
generation. The United States will continue its technical outreach and partnership to raise
awareness of SMRs’ benefits, diverse applicability and related nuclear security, safety, and
safeguards considerations. As part of this effort, the United States will continue to raise
awareness among regional partners of nuclear non-proliferation and security concerns,
including but not limited to the anticipated deployment of floating nuclear power plants
in the Indo-Pacific region. The United States is engaged in capacity-building cooperation
with agreed ASEAN partners in this topical area as part of the Foundational Infrastructure
for Responsible Use of SMR Technology (FIRST) program. The United States intends to cohost with Vietnam an ARF-approved workshop on Nuclear Non-proliferation Safety and
Security Standards and the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Technology and is conducting a series
of remote engagements with select ASEAN Member States considering including SMRs in
their nuclear power programs.

The IAEA also supports work to promote the non-power application of nuclear science
and technologies to help countries achieve national development priorities. The United
States is the largest contributor of extra-budgetary funds to IAEA work in peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, an important demonstration of our longstanding commitment to global
peaceful nuclear cooperation consistent with our obligations under Article IV of the NPT.
US extra-budgetary contributions to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Program and
Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) support IAEA activities that assist in building national
capabilities to apply nuclear techniques to meet national development goals in areas such
as human and animal health, food security, and water resource management, and to
address environmental issues such as climate change. In 2020, the United States
announced a new contribution of $50 million to the IAEA's PUI through 2024, bringing US
contributions to the IAEA’s PUI to a total of more than US$117 million. To date, the PUI
has supported nearly 200 IAEA projects that benefit people in more than 150 IAEA
Member States. In the past few years, US contributions have been allocated to support
IAEA programs such as ”Rays of Hope” to support Member States in the diagnosis and
treatment of cancer, and activities in Asia to recycle plastics, the development of electron
beam and x-ray technology to enhance food safety and security and sustaining a network
of veterinary diagnostic laboratories in Africa and Asia.

389

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
We believe that adopting the IAEA’s Additional Protocol (AP) to a Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement is an important step that states can take to strengthen IAEA
safeguards and the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. We call upon all ARF
participants who have not yet done so to sign and ratify the AP and, as appropriate, to
modify or rescind any Small Quantities Protocol based on the original outdated model.
We stand ready to help states build capacities to fully implement the AP. We recall the
commitment at the 2012 ASEAN-US Leaders’ Meeting to “universalization of the IAEA
Additional Protocol as soon as possible.” As noted in the November 2013 Joint ASEANUnited States Leader’s Statement, the ARF also can play an important role in helping
states comprehend the AP and overcome any challenges to its implementation.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery, as
well as illicit spread of related materials, threaten the security of the entire international
community. The United States seeks to strengthen partner capacity development and
implementation of strategic trade control (STC) systems, detect and target illicit
procurement networks that utilize regional ports to obtain strategic goods. Principally,
the United States will continue to build key relationships and partner capacity on
implementing sanctions implementation, enforcing export controls to secure the strategic
supply chain, securing key ports of entry/transit, and disrupting illicit activities in the
financial, cyber, and maritime shipping arenas. The United States continues to support
regional workshops for ASEAN countries to help each government make tangible
enhancements to the legal-regulatory foundations of their STC systems that can positively
contribute to STC licensing and enforcement, as well as non-proliferation sanctions
implementation. These improvements will help reduce risks of illicit proliferation in each
country and throughout Southeast Asia.

An additional avenue that the United States uses to support regional approaches in
addressing global proliferation challenges is raising awareness about UNSCR 1540
requirements. The resolution’s provisions involve preventing WMD, their means of
delivery, and related materials from unregulated acquisition by non-state actors and
detecting the unregulated transfer of these goods between national borders. The United
States and its main regional allies have taken measures to meet all their obligations under
UNSCR 1540. These measures and their implementation continue to improve as witnessed
in their submissions to the 1540 Committee and by the late 2020 updates to the

390

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Committee’s National Matrices, a compilation of measures created by the Committee’s
experts. Additionally, the United States will continue to partner with other donor
countries and entities to build capacity in those countries that request cooperation to
implement UNSCR 1540. The United States has also supported efforts in the ARF toward
this end and has promoted greater cooperation between the ARF and the UN Security
Council 1540 Committee, to ensure that regional partners are able to fulfil their UN
obligations.

One international effort that helps states to meet the goals of UNSCR 1540 is the
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), which to date, 107 countries have endorsed. Many
ARF participants have already endorsed the PSI, profiling their concrete commitment to
regional peace and security to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD), their delivery systems, and related materials in the region. Italy hosted a
successful virtual Operational Experts Group (OEG) meeting in October of 2020. OEG
members discussed upcoming PSI initiatives and potential multilateral opportunities with
PSI endorsing countries. Singapore will be hosting, mostly virtual, the PSI Asia Pacific
Exercise Rotation (APER) this fall in an ongoing effort to keep up the momentum on
regional PSI efforts. The United States encourages all countries concerned with the threat
WMD proliferation poses to international peace and security to endorse the PSI.

The United States continues to encourage cooperation among ASEAN members; and ARF
participants to strengthen efforts to prevent the use and re-emergence of chemical and
biological weapons and their proliferation. The United States calls on all States Parties of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and Biological Weapons Convention to support the
goals of these two treaties and comply with their obligations; and to hold accountable
those States Parties who blatantly violate these provisions. The United States urges
support for the OPCW and its work; as well as the BWC ISU, and to further support the
Universalization of both the CWC and BWC. All ARF states must work together to preserve
the international norm against the use of chemical and biological weapons; and to fully
implement and adhere to the obligations under these two regimes.

The United States has partnered with ASEAN members in the past year to support
implementation of UNSCRs through joint law enforcement investigations, information
sharing, the exchange of expertise and best practices, and capacity building engagements.

391

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The United States has and will continue to engage public and private sector counterparts
in ASEAN countries to establish and improve national- and institution-level measures to
identify and disrupt illicit DPRK sanctions evasion activities, including its illicit shipping
practices, abuse of the international financial system, cyber-enabled operations to steal
fiat and virtual currencies, the acquisition of luxury goods, and illicit export of labour to
fund its WMD programs.

iii. Transnational Crime

The United States augments the capabilities of regional actors and supports the region on
a broad range of transnational crime issues through United States federal, state, and local
experts and international and non-profit organizations. These programs include capacity
building for law enforcement officers, prosecutors, and judges to investigate and
prosecute transnational crime cases, cooperate during interdiction efforts on land and in
maritime environments, and to facilitate international legal cooperation. Capacity
building efforts often focus on specialized topics such as combatting human trafficking,
and drug and wildlife trafficking; corruption; money laundering; and financial crimes; as
well as supporting reforms to implement international standards, such as the UN
Convention against Corruption, the UN Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, and the Budapest Cybercrime Convention. In addition, the United States has taken
steps to protect the economic interaction in the region against cybercrime and intellectual
property piracy, and to disrupt the financial activities of transnational criminals and
facilitators.

The International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in Bangkok, Thailand continues to
deliver a platform for developing relationships with United States law enforcement
officers through advanced training for civil law enforcement development to ASEAN
member states and other members. The ILEA is an important platform to address areas
of mutual concern, including transnational organized crime, cybercrime, financial crimes,
corruption, and all forms of trafficking. The ILEA promote regional law enforcement
networks among our partner states, builds relationships with the US law enforcement
community, and increases institutional capacity to address the threats and promote the
rule of law. Alumni often serve at the respective countries’ highest ranks in the criminal
justice sector, including senior police and prosecutors, Supreme Court justices, and

392

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
parliamentarians. Since 1998, ILEA Bangkok has trained over 20,000 criminal justice sector
professionals throughout Southeast Asia, thus creating and strengthening international
operational networks. The ILEA Bangkok alumni are part of a global ILEA alumni network
of over 70,000. The United States also deploys law enforcement experts as part of a global
network to deliver capacity building and strengthen international cooperation in the fight
against cybercrime and intellectual property theft. Three of these International Computer
Hacking and Intellectual Property Advisors -- or ICHIPs -- are deployed to assist across the
Indo-Pacific, including ASEAN countries, and are located, respectively, in: Bangkok,
Thailand; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
People's Republic of China.

Illicit drug production and trafficking are also challenging for all ARF member nations.
There are vast networks of highly organized drug trafficking organizations that span the
region and threaten regional and US national security through their production and
trafficking of illicit synthetic drugs and their precursors. The US government supports
partner nation capabilities to disrupt the use, production, and trafficking of these
substances by sharing best practices for demand reduction programs and providing
training to improve capacity to detect and interdict them. These efforts ensure countries
can fight international drug trafficking and related criminal activities in their home
countries. In 2019, the East Asia Summit leaders reaffirmed their shared commitment to
effectively address and counter the world drug problem through a statement on
combating the spread of illicit drugs. We further encourage all countries who have not
yet done so to implement the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, as amended
by the 1972, Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, and the UN
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,
which constitute the cornerstone of the international drug control system.

Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing has direct food, economic and
environmental security impacts on coastal communities and their nations’ rule of law,
especially in the Indo-Pacific region. The Indo-Pacific region houses the world’s most
productive and biodiverse marine ecosystems that provide food and income to over 200
million people in the region; however, unsustainable fishing practices threaten the
region’s biodiversity, food security and livelihoods. IUU-fished seafood accounts for as
much as 30 % of the global seafood harvest. In Southeast Asia, severely overfished waters

393

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
in the Gulf of Thailand have made it almost impossible for vessels to operate in their
historic fishing grounds. Since 1961, the average catch in Thai waters has decreased by 81
%. Fishing operations have moved increasingly farther out to sea — and remain there for
longer periods. Fisheries depletion raises the cost of fishing and exerts downward
pressure on wages. Fewer people are willing to work under these conditions, which
promotes human trafficking for fishing operations.

To further the fight against IUU fishing, the United States is working with international
partners to improve global fisheries enforcement by strengthening efforts to detect,
identify, interdict, and adjudicate illegal fishing activity and the illicit networks that
support it through enhanced cooperation and information-sharing. In 2018 and again in
2019, the United States and Indonesia co-chaired workshops on law enforcement
coordination and maritime data analysis tactics and techniques to identify unusual and
potentially illegal fishing and vessel activity to enable countries to utilize analytical tools
and processes to combat IUU fishing and crime that may be associated with IUU fishing.
Another model of this type of effort is the Oceania Maritime Security Initiative (OMSI), a
partnership between the United States Coast Guard, Navy, and local law enforcement
agencies in Oceania. OMSI bolsters maritime domain awareness increases law
enforcement presence and expands at-sea law enforcement capabilities by matching
available Navy ships with Coast Guard law enforcement expertise and local enforcement
authorities.

To combat IUU fishing, advance sustainable fisheries, and conserve marine biodiversity
across Southeast Asia, USAID Sustainable Fish Asia (SuFiA) supports the development,
adoption, and implementation of regional sustainable fisheries policies, standards, and
regulatory frameworks in the Indo-Pacific. SuFiA will promote the leadership and goals of
regional organizations that advance sustainable fisheries management and counter IUU
fishing in Southeast Asia. SuFiA also works in partnership with regional fisheries
management organizations and the private sector to accelerate the implementation of
fair-labour standards and sustainable fishing practices. In particular, SuFiA works in close
collaboration

with

the

Southeast

Asia

Fisheries

Development

Centre

(SEAFDEC) to strengthen their organizational capacities so that they can provide their
member states with the leadership and services needed to support sustainable regional
marine and fisheries ecosystems in Southeast Asia. Further, SuFiA works with the US

394

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Government Interagency and Southeast Asia’s regional organizations to understand and
address the impact of illegal fishing by nationals of other countries trespassing in the
region. In addition, and in coordination with the ASEAN Senior Labor Officials, the US
Department of Labour is developing programming to implement recommendations
identified in the USAID-supported study to advance a regional, multi-sectoral strategy that
addresses human trafficking and forced labor in the fishing industry. Specifically, the
Addressing Labor Exploitation in Fishing in ASEAN (ALFA) project will strengthen the
capacity of ASEAN sectoral bodies and member countries to coordinate and collaborate
to address forced labor and abusive working conditions in the region’s fishing industry.
ALFA will focus on ASEAN regional policy implementation, and increased engagement with
the private sector, worker organizations, and civil society to mitigate forced labor and
trafficking, and improve working conditions for a more sustainable, responsible, and
resilient fishing sector.

The Oceans project, supported by USAID, strengthens regional cooperation to combat IUU
fishing, promotes sustainable fisheries and conserves marine biodiversity in the AsiaPacific region. Through this project, the US works with public and private sector partners
to strengthen electronic catch documentation and traceability (eCDT) that ensures
fisheries resources are legally caught and properly labelled. The USG and partners trained
over 1,200 regional stakeholders across 12 ASEAN and Coral Triangle countries in program
technical areas, including electronic catch documentation and traceability, sustainable
fisheries management, public-private partnership development, and human welfare and
gender equity. The partnership has leveraged over $1.4 million in public and private
sector partner funding for increased sustainability of program interventions, including
from the Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch, Thai Union, and Inmarsat. In addition,
the USG is conducting comprehensive research to identify and assess opportunities for
ASEAN to support the advancement of a regional multi-sectoral strategy to address the
challenges associated with forced labor in the fishing industry and to propose ways in
which development partners might best support those opportunities. The report from
the study is currently under review and it will be finalized this year so the consideration
for recommended interventions for ASEAN can be proposed in 2021.

395

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
In collaboration with the Southeast Asia Fisheries Development Center, USAID supported
a workshop to explore how existing catch documentation and seafood traceability data
could be exchanged within the region to prevent illegitimate trade.

The United States commends progress on the ASEAN Convention Against Trafficking in
Persons (ACTIP), especially for women and children, which entered into force on March 8,
2017, following ratification by the Philippines. We urge all remaining member states to
follow the lead of those who have already ratified and promptly deposit instruments of
ratification. We also encourage all countries to ratify and to implement the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime.
The United States and ASEAN enjoy a strong partnership on combating human trafficking
– a partnership that we look forward to continuing. We seek to continue this partnership
and have presented proposals for future collaboration to the SOMTC. We are still
committed to assisting member states in developing and implementing victim
compensation schemes and funds, as prescribed under ACTIP. The USG continues to
support ASEAN on the implementation of the ACTIP through its technical cooperation on
developing the ASEAN Regional Guidelines and Procedures to Address the Needs of
Victims of TIP, which was launched in April 2019. In collaboration with the ASEAN
Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children
(ACWC), USAID supported the drafting of a Regional Model Toolkit to provide guidance
to practitioners across ASEAN. The toolkit is now

translated into six ASEAN countries’

languages (Burmese, Indonesia, Khmer, Lao, Thai, and Vietnamese) and pilot studies are
underway in some member states to develop a strategic approach to formalize and adapt
the toolkit at the national level..

Through the USAID regional Asia Counter Trafficking in Persons (ASIA CTIP) program and
country-specific activities in Thailand, Laos,

Cambodia, and the Philippines, the USG

addresses transnational and regional challenges to combat human trafficking, building
upon existing USG-supported CTIP activities in the region. The program strengthens
regional platforms for governments, NGOs, and service providers to effectively cooperate
across borders and ensures that assistance and support can be provided and accessed in
source,

transit and destination countries. USAID also partners to promote industry-

wide adoption of practices that reduce opportunities and incentives for cheap, exploited,

396

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and forced labor. The Asia CTIP program also builds the evidence base by conducting and
sharing CTIP-related research and knowledge in key areas.

We encourage all countries to ratify and to implement the Protocol against Smuggling of
Migrants by Land, Sea, and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime.

1. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief

ARF Dialogue Partners experience a variety of natural disasters, such as typhoons, floods,
and earthquakes, as well as manmade crises, including civil conflict, which often result in
significant financial and human costs. In response to these events, the United States
continues to provide humanitarian assistance to affected populations in the region, while
simultaneously working to reduce disaster vulnerability in communities and building
national, provincial-level, and local response capacities.

In Pakistan, USAID/Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance’s (BHA) focus over recent years
has been on disaster preparedness and rapid response efforts as well as early recovery
from crises that continue to erode household-level food security and coping capacity
among Pakistan’s most vulnerable populations. BHA has provided nearly $7.5 million in
active programming in early recovery, risk reduction, and resilience activities. Three BHA
partners, Concern Worldwide, WFP and Concern are addressing food assistance through
cash-for-work and livelihoods support in Sindh province and capacity building for local
disaster response organizations in Khyber Pakhtunwala.

In addition, BHA funded regional programs are also operational in Pakistan. The Asia
Disaster Preparedness Centre, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration’s (NOAA’s) and international Medical Corps are implementing programs
to enhance the availability and accessibility of early warning information to reduce
exposure to climate risks and build the local capacity to better coordinate within the
humanitarian system and prepare for and respond more effectively to emergency
situations.

397

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
For example, in Burma, USAID/BHA supports food assistance, both locally and regionally
purchased food, as well as cash based-transfers to conflict-affected persons and other
vulnerable communities in Rakhine, Kachin, and Northern Shan. Following the February
2021 military coup d’etat, BHA partner, the World Food Program expanded their
assistance to include newly emerging conflict areas, including Chin, Kayin, Kayah, Sagaing,
and Magway. USAID/BHA’s support through WFP also includes targeted distributions of
fortified blended foods to children under five and pregnant and lactating women. In FY
2021, USAID/BHA provided $49.7 million in to meet critical humanitarian needs of IDPs
and other vulnerable groups in Myanmar. Assistance includes health, nutrition, food,
water, sanitation and hygiene, shelter and settlements, and protection services, as well as
support for COVID-19 prevention and response efforts. Assistance includes health,
nutrition, food, water, sanitation and hygiene, shelter and settlements, and protection
services, as well as support for COVID-19 prevention and response efforts. Assistance
includes health, nutrition, food, water, sanitation and hygiene, shelter and settlements,
and protection services, as well as support for COVID-19 prevention and response efforts.

In Bangladesh, State/PRM programming focuses on three areas: (1) addressing the
immediate monsoon/cyclone risks to vulnerable refugee and host communities, (2)
developing mid-to-long-term disaster readiness interventions, and (3) ensuring a unified
approach to disaster risk management in Cox’s Bazar. Other PRM programming works to
deliver water, sanitation, hygiene (WASH) and nutrition services; as well as provide health
services, protection for vulnerable women and children, provide comprehensive care for
women and girls (including reproductive and childbirth services and support for those who
have encountered violence), empower women and adolescents through skills
development and raising awareness to prevent gender-based violence, and establish
education programs to help children enhance their social and cognitive skills and cope
with the emotional trauma they have experienced.

In Malaysia, State/PRM programs reduce and mitigate GBV amongst refugees and asylum
seekers in Kuala Lumpur and Northern Peninsular Malaysia through capacity building, as
well as protection and emergency support services. Improving access to protection and
specialized counseling. State/PRM partners also provided primary health care and mental
health services via a static clinic in the Kuala Lumpur area, as well via mobile clinics in

398

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
northern and eastern Malaysia and mobile clinics in two immigration detention centres
(when they have access).

In Indonesia, State/PRM programming provides comprehensive protection and care for
unaccompanied and separated refugee and asylum seeker children and strengthen the
resiliency of those transitioning to adulthood. Projects assists beneficiaries by providing
shelter, child protection, GBV prevention and response, health services, and education.
State/PRM also funds IOM to assist Rohingya asylum seekers arriving by boat from Burma
and Bangladesh.

In Thailand, State/PRM partners work in nine refugee camps along the Thailand-Burma
border. In the camps, health facilities; water, sanitation, hygiene (WASH), empowerment
programs for women and girls, and livelihood projects are provided. PRM also supports
inclusion, mainstream participation of people with disabilities in camp activities, and
ensure refugees are aware of risks posed by explosive ordinance and coordinates with
health service partners and assists with prostheses. PRM supports direct and tertiary care
as well as case management, mental health, psychosocial services, legal counseling,
paralegal training, case management, and advocacy services to urban refugees and
asylum seekers in Bangkok.

In India, State/PRM partners provide education, healthcare, and basic needs assistance to
Burmese refugees as well as supporting the full gamut of Tibetan refugees’ basic needs,
including healthcare, mental health, education, WASH, and protection. PRM funding in
India also supports inclusion for refugees for disabilities and builds capacity to address
gender-based violence.

In Burma, State/PRM partners provide humanitarian assistance, including essential items
and food supplies, to displaced families, as well as protection shelter, WASH, and
emergency healthcare. PRM continues to press for unhindered humanitarian access as
violence and population displacement continues across the country, exacerbating
humanitarian need.

To mitigate the effects of future disasters on vulnerable populations, the United States
supports disaster risk reduction (DRR) programs aimed at saving lives; protecting

399

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
livelihoods, assets, and infrastructure before, during, and after a disaster; and increasing
community resilience to natural hazards. USAID/BHA’s DRR interventions also promote
self-reliance, enabling partner countries to lessen the impacts of natural hazards and
respond more effectively when disasters strike. The United States supports regional and
country specific DRR programs. For example, the US Department of State, INDOPACOM,
and USAID/BHA, collaborate on support to the ASEAN Committee on Disaster
Management and the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance (AHA) Centre by building its
capacity for disaster monitoring and response. In 2019, the USG through USAID supported
the AHA Center to establish and convene a working group for disaster management
training and curriculum development, manage disaster-related information, develop
assessment tools, and assist in the development of a Regional Joint Disaster Response
Plan. As part of our cooperation with the AHA Center, USAID also provides critical training
in such areas as English language skills for international disaster response coordination
and logistics for the procurement and transport of emergency relief supplies, all to
increase the timeliness, effectiveness, and efficiency of emergency response in the region.
In 2019, USAID, in partnership with the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at
Monterey, and the U.S Embassy Regional English Language Office - Jakarta helped deliver
the AHA Centre’s English Language Training for ASEAN on Disaster Management.
Nineteen disaster management professionals from all ten ASEAN Member States
participated

to strengthen capacity in technical-language driven communications

necessary to coordinate disaster response and management. In 2021,

to further

strengthen ASEAN's regional disaster management capacity USAID is partnering with AHA
Centre to support the development of a humanitarian logistics training program for the
National Disaster Management Organizations and assess ASEAN capacity for multi-hazard
end-to-end early warning systems for natural disasters.

The United States sponsors and/or participates in numerous HA/DR-related exercises with
regional partners every year, including the ARF Disaster Relief Exercise, East Asia Summit
(EAS) HA/DR Exercise, the ADMM-Plus HA/DR, exercise Cobra Gold with Thailand, exercise
Balikatan with the Philippines, Gema Bhakti with Indonesia, and Angkor Sentinel with
Cambodia.

In addition, the United States sponsored Disaster Relief Exercise and

Exchanges (DREEs) through the Lower Mekong Initiative, further enhancing multi-lateral
coordination, communication, and cooperation among the United States, Cambodia,

400

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Laos, Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam to enhance response readiness to natural disasters
in the Lower Mekong region.

2019, culminated over three years of cumulative and collaborative efforts of the United
States and Malaysia co-chairing the most robust exercise of its kind ever to be executed.
The exercise tested a real-world scenario utilizing actual communications methods and
coordination processes with a crosscutting group of civil and military stakeholders across
the 18 ADMM-Plus countries, the humanitarian community, and regional and
international organizations. As a result, the USG demonstrated its commitment to the
Indo Pacific region, and tangibly and practically advanced One ASEAN One Response,
alliances, and partnerships. The United States remains committed to developing ASEAN
HA/DR capabilities and streamlining the ASEAN response mechanism. As part of the
United States commitment to advancing civil - military coordination in ASEAN and
throughout the Asia Pacific region, we recognize the need to further synchronize the
defence efforts of the ADMM and ADMM-Plus with the civilian-led efforts in the ASEAN
Committee on Disaster Management (ACDM) and by the AHA Centre. We see this as a
critical step toward realizing the vision of ‘One ASEAN, One Response,’ and we look
forward to furthering these efforts in collaboration.

iv. Maritime Security

The Indo-Pacific region and its maritime waterways are critical to US security. Together
with our interagency colleagues and regional allies and partners, the United States strives
to ensure that the Indo-Pacific will remain open, free, and secure in the decades ahead.
To protect free and open access, the United States focuses on three objectives:
safeguarding the freedom of the seas, deterring conflict and coercion, and promoting
adherence to international law and standards.

The United States has, throughout its history, advocated for the freedom of the seas and
airspace. Freedom of the seas includes more than the mere freedom of commercial
vessels to transit through international waterways.

It also includes all the rights,

freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea and airspace for military ships and aircraft as
reflected in the Law of the Sea Convention. The United States will continue to fly, sail,

401

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
and operate wherever international law allows, as US forces currently do all around the
world.

For 70 years, US military presence in the Indo-Pacific region has played a vital role in
undergirding regional peace, stability, and security. We note several continuing trends,
including rapid military modernization, growing resource demands, and territorial and
maritime disputes, that have the potential to create instability. Many countries across
the region are significantly enhancing their naval and maritime law enforcement (MLE)
capabilities. Although most nations are using these capabilities in a responsible manner,
ongoing provocative actions continue to heighten tensions in the region and raise
concerns. Actions such as the use of MLE vessels to coerce rival claimants, and unsafe air
and maritime behaviour raise the risk of miscalculation or conflict. Maritime vessels are
also increasingly being used to traffic terrorists and illicit materials. Increased screening
measures and controls, such as those identified in UNSCR 2396 on foreign fighters to
increase aviation security, are also needed to deter illicit and terrorist use of the maritime
sector.

The tensions arising from maritime and territorial disputes in the Indo-Pacific are deeply
concerning to the United States. The Indian Ocean, East China Sea, and South China Sea
are all vital thoroughfares for global commerce and energy. Well over half the world’s
merchant tonnage flows through the South China Sea, and over 15 million barrels of oil
per day transited the Strait of Malacca last year, with most of it continuing onward
through the East China Sea to three of the world’s largest economies – Japan, the Republic
of Korea, and China.

Regarding the South China Sea, the United States has a vital national interest in ensuring
freedom of navigation and overflight and other lawful uses of the sea, respect for
international law, unimpeded lawful commerce, and peace and stability. The United
States insists that such that disputes should be resolved peacefully, without the use of
force or coercion, and in accordance with international law. To that end, we urge claimant
countries to conform all their maritime claims to international law as reflected in the 1982
Law of the Sea Convention.

402

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The PRC’s efforts to assert its unlawful maritime claims in the South China Sea threaten
the regional rules-based order and undermine international law. China’s provocative
reclamation and militarization of disputed outposts in the South China Sea, and its
attempts to coerce and intimidate other nations undermine regional stability. The United
States will continue to stand with Southeast Asian claimants in resisting the PRC’s efforts
through the China Coast Guard (CCG) and China Maritime Militia (CMM) to enforce its
unlawful maritime claims and will continue to protest these claims in international fora
and call out PRC actions that prevent other claimants from exercising their sovereign
rights to explore, exploit, conserve, and manage the resources in their Exclusive Economic
Zones (EEZ). The United States urges all claimants, including the PRC, to manage and
resolve disputes peacefully and in accordance with international law as reflected in the
Law of the Sea Convention. The United States encourages all parties to employ diplomatic
and other peaceful avenues for resolving disagreements, including the use of third-party
dispute settlement, such as arbitration, negotiation, multilateral fora, or other peaceful
international mechanisms. In this regard, the United States takes note of the importance
of the July 12, 2016, arbitral tribunal ruling in the China-Philippines arbitration, and notes
that it could serve as a useful basis for claimants to resolve their overlapping maritime
claims.

On negotiations towards an ASEAN-China South China Sea Code of Conduct (CoC), we will
continue to advocate for a meaningful CoC that is fully in accordance with international
law and protects the rights and interests of third parties. We are concerned, however, at
reports that the PRC has been pressing ASEAN member states – behind closed doors – to
accept limits on with whom states may conduct military exercises and offshore energy
development. These proposals put at risk the autonomy of ASEAN states and pose a direct
challenge to the interests of the broader international community, including the United
States. The United States urges all negotiating parties to ensure that rights and interests
of third parties are respected and that any eventual CoC be crafted in full accordance with
international law.

In the East China Sea, we remain concerned about the provocative behavior by the PRC.
We support calls for diplomacy and crisis management procedures to avoid a
miscalculation or a dangerous incident.

403

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
We further believe the ARF can help put in-place supportive diplomatic structures that
lower tensions and help claimant states manage these disputes peacefully. This forum
needs to play an increasingly important role in reinforcing international law and practice
and in building practical cooperation among member states.

The United States is not standing still considering the challenges we face in the maritime
domain.

There should be no doubt that the United States will employ whole of

government resources that includes maintaining military presence and capabilities to
protect our interests and those of our allies and partners against potential threats in the
maritime domain.

The Department of Defence is pursuing several efforts in support of maritime security:

i.

Work together with our allies and partners from Northeast Asia to the Indian Ocean

to build their maritime capacity.
●

The United States Navy and Coast Guard are building greater interoperability and
developing more integrated operations, actions, and activities with our regional
allies and partners.

●

The United States Pacific Fleet is increasing the size, frequency, and sophistication
of their regional exercise program, with a particular focus on increasing the
operational exercise complexity with Southeast Asian partners and expanding the
multilateral exercise program.

●

The United States has also implemented a Southeast Asia Maritime Security
Initiative that enable training and exercises, personnel support, and national level
subject matter experts on maritime domain awareness to enhance capabilities for
our partners in Southeast Asia.

ii. Leverage defence diplomacy to build greater transparency, reduce the risk of
miscalculation or conflict, and promote shared maritime rules of the road.
●

The United States is actively seeking to mitigate risks in the Indo-Pacific region,
both through bilateral efforts with the PRC, as well as region-wide risk reduction
measures.

●

The United States Navy and the PRC’s Ministry of National Defence have a
Memorandum of Understanding on Rules of Behavior for Safety of Air and

404

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Maritime Encounters. This MOU currently includes annexes on ship-to-ship and
air-to-air encounters.
●

United States Navy and People’s Liberation Army-Navy (PLA-N) vessels have also
successfully employed the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES) during
recent interactions, which reduces risk in the region and demonstrates
cooperation on the seas.

iii. Strengthen regional security institutions and encourage the development of an
open and effective regional security architecture.
●

The United States is enhancing its engagement in ASEAN-based institutions such
as the ARF, ADMM-Plus, Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum (EAMF) and the EAS.
The United States promotes candid conversations about ongoing challenges in the
maritime domain and encourages greater information sharing and cooperative
solutions.

●

The United States, in partnership with our Quad partners, will implement the
Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA) with regional
partners to offer a near-real-time, integrated, and cost-effective maritime domain
awareness picture. This initiative will transform the ability of partners in the
Pacific Islands, Southeast Asia, and the Indian Ocean region to fully monitor the
waters on their shores and, in turn, to uphold a free and open Indo-Pacific.

In addition to Department of Defence efforts on the seas, the United States regularly
conducts maritime exercises with regional partners to build confidence and to enhance
regional maritime readiness. Cooperative activities such as the Cooperation Afloat
Readiness and Training (CARAT), Southeast Asia Cooperation and Training (SEACAT), and
the Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise foster bilateral and multilateral cooperation in
the region. These are just a few of several engagements aimed to develop cooperation,
promote common seafaring practices, and enhance mutual trust.

Additionally, the United States participated in its fourth Governors’ Council meeting with
the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against
Ships in Asia (ReCAAP) since becoming the organization’s 20th contracting party (member)
in 2014. The United States has been proactive in assisting the development of a ten-year
strategy plan for the future of ReCAAP Information Sharing Centre (ISC) to become a

405

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Centre of Excellence by 2020. The United States is also working with regional partners to
improve the safety and well-being of mariners through the Expanded ASEAN Seafarers
Training on Counter-Piracy (EAST-CP) program. The United States is enhancing the
capacity of the coast guards, navies, and law enforcement and judicial sectors of partner
nations to address not only piracy, but also the broad scope of illicit maritime activity
ranging from illegal fishing to human trafficking and the trafficking of arms and narcotics.
Training and technical expertise are delivered through a variety of cooperative training
programs supported by the United States Departments of Defence, Justice, and State,
NOAA, the United States Coast Guard, and USAID. The workshops incorporate the
knowledge of technical experts in the maritime transport sector and regional survivors of
piracy to address issues ranging from preparedness and survival, ransom negotiations, to
post trauma care upon returning home.

iv. Strengthen US naval capacity to ensure the United States can successfully deter
conflict and coercion and respond decisively when needed.
●

The United States Navy is investing in new cutting-edge capabilities, deploying our
finest maritime capabilities forward, and distributing these capabilities more
widely across the region.

●

The United States Navy will increase the size of the United States Pacific Fleet’s
overseas assigned forces by approximately 30 % over the next five years to
maintain a higher tempo of routine and persistent maritime presence activities
across the Pacific region.

v. Work together with our allies and partners from Northeast Asia to the Indian Ocean
to build their maritime capacity.
●

The United States Navy and Coast Guard are building greater interoperability and
developing more integrated operations, actions, and activities with our regional
allies and partners.

●

The United States Pacific Fleet is increasing the size, frequency, and sophistication
of their regional exercise program, with a particular focus on increasing the
operational exercise complexity with Southeast Asian partners and expanding the
multilateral exercise program.

●

The United States Navy has also implemented a Southeast Asia Maritime Security
Initiative that enable training and exercises, personnel support, and national level

406

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
subject matter experts on maritime domain awareness to enhance capabilities for
our partners in Southeast Asia.

vi. Leverage defence diplomacy to build greater transparency, reduce the risk of
miscalculation or conflict, and promote shared maritime rules of the road.
●

The United States Navy is actively seeking to mitigate risks in the Indo-Pacific
region, both through bilateral efforts with China, as well as region-wide risk
reduction measures.

●

Recently, the United States Navy and China’s Ministry of National Defence
concluded an historic Memorandum of Understanding on Rules of Behavior for
Safety of Air and Maritime Encounters. This MOU currently includes annexes on
ship-to-ship and air-to-air encounters.

●

United States Navy and People’s Liberation Army-Navy (PLA-N) vessels have also
successfully employed the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES) during
recent interactions, which reduce risk in the region and demonstrate
cooperativeness on the seas.

vii. Strengthen regional security institutions and encourage the development of an
open and effective regional security architecture.

●

The United States is enhancing its engagement in ASEAN-based institutions such
as the ARF, ADMM-Plus, Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum (EAMF) and the EAS.
The United States promotes candid conversations about ongoing challenges in the
maritime domain and encourages greater information sharing and cooperative
solutions.

In addition to United States Navy and Coast Guard lines of efforts on the seas, the United
States regularly conducts maritime exercises with regional partners to build confidence
and to enhance regional maritime readiness.

Cooperative activities such as the

Cooperation Afloat Readiness and Training (CARAT) and the Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC)
exercise foster bilateral and multilateral cooperation in the region. The Oceania Maritime
Security Initiative (OMSI) continues to take place, with United States Navy Littoral Combat
Ships (LCS) and United States Coast Guard Cutters. OMSI is a joint maritime security
operation designed to enhance maritime domain awareness, increase law enforcement

407

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
presence, and expand at-sea law enforcement capabilities throughout Oceania. During
the exercise, which takes place two to four times per year, sailors have the privilege of
working side by side with both Navy teams and Coast Guard Law Enforcement teams. The
teams provide invaluable training on Visit Board Search and Seizure (VBSS), to include
tactical team movements, tactical combat casualty care, and safe boarding techniques.
These are just a few of several engagements aimed to develop cooperation, promote
common seafaring practices, and enhance mutual trust.

Additionally, the United States participated in its fourth Governors’ Council meeting with
the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against
Ships in Asia (ReCAAP) since becoming the organization’s 20th contracting party (member)
in 2014. The United States has been proactive in assisting the development of a ten-year
strategy plan for the future of ReCAAP Information Sharing Centre (ISC) to become a
Centre of Excellence by 2020. The United States is also working with regional partners to
improve the safety and well-being of mariners through the Expanded ASEAN Seafarers
Training on Counter-Piracy (EAST-CP) program. The United States is enhancing the
capacity of the coast guards, navies, and law enforcement and judicial sectors of partner
nations to address not only piracy, but also the broad scope of illicit maritime activity
ranging from illegal fishing to human trafficking, and the trafficking of arms and narcotics.
Training and technical expertise are delivered through a variety of cooperative training
programs supported by the United States Departments of Defence, Justice, and State,
NOAA, the United States Coast Guard, and USAID. The workshops incorporate the
knowledge of technical experts in the maritime transport sector and regional survivors of
piracy to address issues ranging from preparedness and survival, ransom negotiations, to
post trauma care upon returning home.

viii. Information and Communications Technologies

The speed and efficiency of information and communication technologies (ICTs) are of
great benefit to commerce and development. At the same time, ICTs introduce
vulnerabilities that countries must proactively address, as the risks can impact national
and regional security and economic prosperity – especially in Asia, where e-commerce is
a significant and increasing portion of many developing countries’ economic growth. In a
cyber-incident of national significance, the unique nature of the ICTs, including the lack of

408

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
external observables of ICTs and the difficulty in determining the nation or entity
responsible, may lead states to act precipitously, with significant consequences for
strategic ICT stability and international security. To reduce the risk of conflict stemming
from ICT incidents, practical confidence building measures (CBMs) are needed to enhance
the predictability of state activities and reduce national security risks. This can be
achieved by fostering transparency, increasing cybersecurity cooperation, and developing
incident response capacity within and among states. These practical measures in the form
of CBMs can help reduce the risk of conflict.

In the interest of increasing ARF’s budding Preventive Diplomacy role and promoting
regional cyber stability, the United States welcomes the establishment of the ISM on ICTs
Security and supports continued ARF dialogue on enhancing international ICT stability via
the 2015 ARF Work Plan on Security of and in the Use of ICTs.

We support further

institutionalization of cyber work within the ARF, the development and implementation
of cyber CBMs in the ARF and continued ARF discussion on preventive diplomacy’s role in
cyberspace.

The United States will cooperate with other ARF Participants on the

development of relevant cyber workshops and projects in 2018 to support the ARF Work
Plan.

III.

Role of the ARF
a) National Contributions to Enhancing the ARF and Regional Security

The United States remains committed to building institutional capacity in the ARF and
strengthening its role in the ASEAN-centred regional security architecture. The United
States remains committed to the full and complete implementation of the Hanoi Plan of
Action 2020-2025 and will work diligently with ARF participants to fulfil the ARF’s mandate
to advance from confidence-building measures to preventive diplomacy, to effective
conflict resolution.

The United States will also continue to work with ASEAN to strengthen and build capacity
in the ARF Unit – a critical element of process sustainment and administrative protocol.
A reinforced ARF Unit will benefit ASEAN members and all ARF dialogue partners as the
engine of a credible and results-oriented organization.

409

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
b) Future of the ARF

The ARF serves as an important platform for senior and working level security policy
dialogue and working-level technical cooperation on regional security issues. The ARF’s
inclusiveness, maturing commitments, and growing experience position it to achieve
success on a targeted agenda that addresses common issues of interest for all ARF
participants. However, its participants should take deliberate steps toward shaping the
ARF into an institution that faces important security challenges candidly and head-on,
with the capability to conduct effective Preventive Diplomacy and Conflict Resolution, and
inclusive of women, youth, and civil society. Furthermore, continued military
assertiveness and militarization within the region highlight the urgent need for the ARF to
go beyond just providing confidence-building measures. In this regard, the United States
supports efforts to develop the ARF’s Preventive Diplomacy capability together with the
ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation (AIPR).

It is important to highlight the context of the ARF as one element of a broader regional
security architecture that includes the EAS, ADMM-Plus, and the EAMF. The United States
is committed to continuing its engagement to help shape a robust and coherent
architecture in the Indo-Pacific region – including a key role for the ARF in promoting
stability and prosperity – through a transparent and inclusive process

410

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

VIETNAM
I.

Overview of the Regional Security Environment
Over the past year, the regional strategic landscape has undergone rising complexity and
uncertainty. While regional economic recovery is rather slow and fragile, the ongoing armed
conflicts in some parts of the world, increasing military build-up, heightened major power
competition, worrying developments in regional flashpoints and emerging non-traditional
security issues are posing unprecedented challenges to the regional security environment.

Geo-political and geo-economic shifts to the Asia-Pacific and the wider Indo-Pacific region
continue, with the introduction of various new initiatives and mechanisms by major powers.
Those that are beneficial to peace, security, stability, prosperity and cooperation in the region
should be welcomed. At the same time, it is important to uphold the key principles and norms
enshrined in the ASEAN Charter, the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC),
the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ), and the ASEAN
Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP), and to further promote dialogue and cooperation, build
trust and confidence, and avoid misunderstanding and miscalculation. Efforts should also be
made to strengthen ASEAN Centrality and the ASEAN-centred regional architecture that is
open, inclusive, transparent, and rules-based, anchored in international law.

The situation in the South China Sea (East Sea) remains a source of concerns as it continues to
witness complex developments and some activities, including militarization and serious
incidents, damage to the marine environment, which have eroded trust and confidence,
increased tensions and undermined peace, security, and stability in the region. It is, therefore,
imperative to continue to uphold international law, including the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which sets out the legal framework within which
all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out. All parties concerned must continue
to exercise utmost self-restraint and pursue peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance
with international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. ASEAN and China are exerting efforts to
fully and effectively implement the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea (DOC), while working towards the early conclusion of an effective and substantive Code
of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) that is consistent with international law, including
the 1982 UNCLOS.

411

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
The ongoing unrest and tension in Myanmar continue posing challenges to ASEAN’s efforts in
assisting the country to seek a workable and durable solution to its crisis, particularly through
promoting the full and effective implementation of the Five-Point Consensus. As ASEAN is
committed to its path of helping its integral member Myanmar, it is important for parties
concerned in Myanmar to show further willingness to work with ASEAN while all forms of
violence must be ended to create a conducive environment for an inclusive national dialogue
and reconciliation, as well as for the secure and timely delivery of ASEAN’s humanitarian
assistance to those in need in Myanmar.

The military conflict in Ukraine is badly affecting peace, security stability and development of
the world. It is essential that the conflict be settled by peaceful means in accordance with the
fundamental principles of international law and the United Nations Charter, including respect
for independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of all countries, and non-use or threat
to use of force. All concerned parties should put an end to the use of force to avoid causing
further civilian casualties and engage in constructive dialogue to find a peaceful and
sustainable solution to the conflict, taking into account the legitimate rights and interests of
all parties. Viet Nam stands ready to join efforts to facilitate dialogue and contribute to the
international community’s common efforts in finding a long-lasting solution to the conflict.

As tension is still rising in the Korean Peninsula, posing a real threat to regional peace, stability
and security, it is crucial for all concerned parties to exercise self-restraint and resume
peaceful dialogue so as to realize lasting peace and stability in a denuclearised Korean
Peninsula. Diplomatic efforts, including the creation of a conducive environment for peaceful
dialogue amongst all concerned parties should remain a priority.

Non-traditional security issues such as climate change, maritime security, communicable
diseases, water security, cyber security, food security, energy security, as well as those related
to emerging technologies are getting more complex than ever. In this context, we look forward
to working with partners and friends to strengthen cooperation and coordination through
such ASEAN-led mechanisms as the ARF, EAS, ADMM+ to timely and effectively respond to
these mounting challenges.

412

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
II.

National Security and Defence Policy of Viet Nam

a) Overview of National Defence Policy
The overall goal of Viet Nam's national defence is to strongly defend the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Homeland; to protect the national interests
and the people; to maintain political stability and a peaceful environment for national
construction and development.

In this regard, Viet Nam implements a defence policy that is peaceful and self-defensive in
nature. Viet Nam resolutely and consistently settles all disputes and divergences through
peaceful means, on the basis of international law; actively and proactively prevents and
repulses the risk of war; realises the motto of defending the Homeland from afar, and is
prepared to fight against wars of aggression.
Viet Nam consistently advocates neither joining any military alliance, siding with one country
against one another, giving any country permission to set up military bases or use its territory
to carry out military activities against other countries nor using force or threatening to use
force in international relations.

At the same time, Viet Nam also promotes defence cooperation with countries to improve its
capabilities to protect the country and address common security challenges. Depending on
the circumstances and specific conditions, Viet Nam will consider developing necessary
defence and military relations at an appropriate level with other countries, on the basis of
respecting each other’s independence, sovereignty, territorial unity and integrity as well as
fundamental principles of international law, cooperation for mutual benefits and common
interests of the region and the international community.

Viet Nam opposes arms race. As a responsible member of the international community, Viet
Nam is keen on fulfilling its duties while actively cooperating with other countries to address
emerging security issues, contributing to the protection of peace and stability in the region
and the world at large.

b) Data contribution to ARF Arms Register
Viet Nam builds its military potential according to a unified strategy as required by the tasks
of national defence and construction.

413

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Viet Nam’s defence budget is in line with the country’s pace of socio-economic development,
sufficient enough to strengthen defence capabilities to protect the Homeland, but not to
become an economic burden on the country itself.
The combat competency and readiness of Viet Nam’s armed forces are reflected in their
organisation, structure, weaponry, military art as well as science, technology and logistics
warranty facilities. These are maintained, improved, and developed to be ample for
safeguarding the Homeland.

III.

National Contributions to Regional Security

a) Maritime Security
Preserving and enhancing maritime security is the common interests of and also the shared
responsibility of the entire international community. As a coastal state, Viet Nam always pays
special attention to maritime security, ensuring that Viet Nam's seas are safe, friendly, and
strictly controlled. Viet Nam is deeply aware of the value of the sea and the challenges posed
to maritime security. Viet Nam always observes international law and support the protection
of free trade, freedom of navigation and overflight, and peaceful economic activities at sea.

As the regional maritime domain continues to witness increasing challenges, Viet Nam
stresses the underlying urgency to strengthen maritime security and cooperation in the
region. Viet Nam is willing to strengthen cooperative relations with other countries, navies
and maritime law enforcement forces with the aim of enhancing confidence building,
preventing conflicts, and dealing with common maritime security challenges. Such emerging
issues as degradation of and damage to the marine environment,

climate change,

transnational crimes at sea… can only be addressed through integrated and holistic
approaches as well as strengthened cross-sectoral and cross-pillar coordination.

Viet Nam upholds international law, especially the 1982 UNCLOS, which sets out the legal
framework within which all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out. UNCLOS is
also of strategic importance as the basis for national, regional and global action and
cooperation in the marine sector, and its integrity needs to be maintained.

Viet Nam has made various positive steps in contribution to the maintenance and promotion
of peace, stability, security, safety and freedom of navigation and overflight as well as marine

414

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
environmental protection in the South China Sea; building and consolidating strategic trust
among countries; actively supporting the promotion of a rules-based maritime order and the
settlement of disputes through peaceful means on the basis of international law, especially
the 1982 UNCLOS; coordinating with other countries on the full and effective implementation
of the DOC, actively participating in and substantively contributing to the process of COC
negotiation towards the early conclusion of a substantive, effective COC consistent with
international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. In 2023, Viet Nam hosted the 20th ASEAN-China
Senior Officials’ Meeting on the Implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea (DOC) and 39th Meeting of the ASEAN-China Joint Working Group on
the Implementation of the DOC in Ha Long, which provided parties the opportunity to review
commitments to implement the DOC, and discuss ways and means to promote substantive
COC negotiations.

Viet Nam engages and continues to attach great importance to regional cooperation on
maritime security through ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the East Asia Summit (EAS), ARF
Inter-Sessional Meeting on Maritime Security (ISM-MS), the ASEAN Maritime Forum (AMF)
and Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum (EAMF), ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting/Plus
(ADMM/+). These are strategic frameworks for ASEAN and between ASEAN and dialogue
partners to exchange views and identify ways to strengthen dialogue and cooperation on
maritime security.

Viet Nam supports the work of the ARF in further strengthening the comprehensive and
coordinated approach to foster maritime security cooperation through the ISM-MS, especially
by enhancing dialogue and cooperation, CBMs, as well as exploring preventive measures to
manage situations at sea.

From 30 November-01 December 2022, Viet Nam, Australia, the EU and New Zealand cochaired the 4th ARF Workshop on Implementing UNCLOS and other International Instruments
to Address Emerging Maritime Issues in Ha Noi, Viet Nam in a hybrid format. The context in
which the Workshop was convened was the marking of the 40th anniversary of the adoption
of the UNCLOS, and positive progress on the advancement of BBNJ negotiations. The
Workshop: (i) discussed the implementation of the UNCLOS and other international
instruments regarding maritime scientific research, new maritime technologies, such as
maritime autonomous vehicles, floating nuclear power plants, underwater infrastructure, and

415

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
marine environmental protection; (ii) explored different aspects related to climate change in
the region, including of the implications of sea-level rise for baselines and maritime zones, and
how regional fisheries bodies respond to climate change; and (iii) demonstrated how ASEAN
could work to exemplify successful ocean governance under the UNCLOS framework and
signified ASEAN’s commitment to regional peace and stability, including in the maritime
domain.

In continuation of this series of Workshops, Viet Nam, along with Australia, Canada, the
European Union and New Zealand will co-chair the 5th ARF Workshop on UNCLOS and other
international instruments in the last 4 months of 2023. This Workshop will aim to enhance
understanding of contemporary challenges at sea in the region, including emerging ones, and
explore different suggestions for cooperation to address such challenges by upholding the
UNCLOS as the legal framework for all activities at sea, as well as by taking into account other
international legal instruments as needed. The focus remains on regional cooperation and
ideas towards that goal, and how we can jointly contribute, constructively, to improve
regional maritime security for all ARF stakeholders.

Bilaterally, Viet Nam maintains joint patrols with China in the Gulf of Tonkin and with Thailand
and Cambodia in the Gulf of Thailand. In April 2023, the Vietnamese Navy carried out the 47th
joint patrol with the Thai Navy, including exercises in search and rescue scenarios, contents of
the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES) and dissemination of information on illegal,
unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing. The Vietnamese and Cambodian navies also held
the 69th and 70th joint patrols in the historical waters of the two countries which included
coordination between law enforcement agencies on combatting and preventing crimes at sea
like smuggling, drugs, human trafficking… These joint patrols contribute to maintaining peace
and security in the waters and fostering cooperation, exchange, mutual understanding, and
trust between the two countries.

b) ICTs Security
In 2023, Viet Nam continues to take active part in the on-going progress of ICTs security
negotiations to develop an international legal framework on cyberspace, cybersecurity and
cybercrime at multilateral forums, under the auspices of the United Nations, including the UN
Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG) on security of and in the use of information and
communication technologies (ICTs) 2021-2025 and the Ad-hoc Committee to Elaborate a

416

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Comprehensive International Convention on Countering the Use of ICTs for Criminal Purposes.
Through coordinated efforts, Viet Nam wishes to promote international cooperation to tackle
global cybersecurity challenges, confidence building measures and the provision of technical
assistance for developing countries.

Within the ARF framework, in the first half of 2023, Viet Nam and the Republic of Korea cochaired the ARF Workshop on Fostering Professionals in the Field of ICTs Security (June 2023),
where participants exchanged experience and best practices to address challenges and
enhance capabilities in fostering ICTs security professionals of ARF Participants. Viet Nam
actively took part in the 5th ARF Inter-Sessional Meeting on Security of an in the use of ICTs
(ISM-ICTs), the 10th and 11th ARF Open-Ended Study Group (OESG) on Confidence Building
Measures (CBMs) to Reduce the Risk of Conflict Stemming from the Use of ICTs, including in
discussions on concrete steps in implementing related confidence building measures as well
as exchanges on the latest developments in the field of security of and in the use of ICTs. Viet
Nam has also supported many initiatives for the Inter-Sessional Year 2023-2024, which
contributes to the ARF's efforts in strengthening ICTs cooperation under the ARF Hanoi Plan
of Action II (2020-2025).

c) Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
Viet Nam advocates efforts of the international community in providing humanitarian relief
and assistance. Viet Nam is willing to share and exchange its experience as well as take part
in the region's common efforts in this field.

At the national level, Viet Nam has completed the Master Plan on Natural Disaster Prevention
and Control and Irrigation for the 2021-2030 period, with a Vision to 2050. On 20 April 2022,
the National Steering Committee for Natural Disaster Prevention and Control – National
Committee for Natural Disaster Response and Search and Rescue (VINASARCOM) held a
national conference on disaster prevention and control and search and rescue in Ha Noi and
online with 63 provinces and cities.

Viet Nam actively cooperates with regional countries to conduct and participate in disaster
management training courses to improve management, coordination and response
capabilities; establish mechanisms for coordinating and exchanging natural disaster warning,
forecasting information, and supporting disaster response; strengthen the support and

417

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
transfer of search and rescue facilities and equipment; continue to participate HADR exercises
at different levels as well as training courses and other activities on disaster management and
HADR.

Viet Nam has strengthened practical cooperation with its partners in providing humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief. In particular, VINSARCOM coordinated with the Oregon National
Guard, the United States to organize the Disaster Management Cooperation 2023 (DMEA
2023). On 13 October 2022, the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation, the General
Department of Disaster Prevention and Control, in collaboration with the Asian Disaster
Prevention Centre (ADPC) organized a forum themed “Building Urban Resilience through Early
Warning and Early Action”.

Viet Nam actively participates in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief cooperation
through various regional mechanisms. Viet Nam has coordinated with Pacific Partners to
organize humanitarian assistance and disaster relief training activities under the Pacific
Partnership Program 2022 (PP22).

Within ASEAN, Viet Nam actively participates in the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Disaster
Management (AMMDM) and the Conference of the Parties to the ASEAN Agreement on
Disaster Management and Emergency Response (AADMER). In 2023, Viet Nam will host the
11th AMMDM and 12th AADMER. Viet Nam also engages in cooperation in HADR through
other ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ARF ISM-DR, ADMM+ EWG on HADR, ASEAN
Militaries Ready Group (AMRG) on HADR…

d) Counter-terrorism
Viet Nam resolutely condemns and opposes all forms of terrorism, terrorist
financing/sponsorship and breeding as well as opposes all kinds of interference in the internal
affairs of other countries under the name of counter-terrorism. Viet Nam supports the
international community’s cooperative efforts and expands its own cooperation in this field
in conformity with international law, the UN Charter as well as Viet Nam’s Constitution, law
and conditions.

Viet Nam actively participates and implements the United Nations international treaties on
counter-terrorism, is a member of the ASEAN Convention on Counter-terrorism, and has

418

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
established many bilateral agreements with countries on mutual legal assistance, extradition,
thus contributing to combatting terrorism.

Within the UN framework, Viet Nam has been committed to implementing the UN Global Antiterrorism Strategy and its international obligations on counter-terrorism. During the 77th
Session of the United Nations General Assembly’s Sixth Committee on the Agenda Item 114:
Measures to eliminate international terrorism, held on 3 October 2022, Viet Nam firmly
denounced all forms of terrorism for any purpose.

At the regional level, Viet Nam engages in practical cooperative activities in the field of
counter-terrorism through ASEAN and ASEAN-led frameworks such as the AMMTC,
ADMM/ADMM+, and ARF.

Furthermore, Viet Nam is actively fulfilling the obligations of a member of the Asia-Pacific
Group on anti-money laundering and working to effectively demonstrate its commitment to
contribute to the joint efforts of the international community on the prevention and combat
of money laundering and terrorist financing.

Bilaterally, Viet Nam actively collaborates and coordinates with regional countries in the
region to combat terrorism. On 23 December 2022, a productive meeting between Viet Nam’s
Ministry of Public Security and the Indonesian Counter-Terrorism Agency (BNPT) was held.
Viet Nam expressed its keen interest in learning from Indonesia’s experience in preventing
and combating terrorist crimes. Both sides signed a Memorandum of Understanding, which
would facilitate a favourable legal framework for international cooperative activities on
terrorism prevention and control.

At the national level, Viet Nam attaches great importance to institutionalizing and
incorporating anti-terrorism regulations in relevant legal documents; as well as continuously
improving the capacity of the law enforcement agencies. In particular, Viet Nam established
the National Training Centre on Terrorism Prevention under the Ministry of Public Security in
February 2022, responsible for organizing training and retraining on terrorism prevention and
control.

419

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
e) Transnational Crime
Viet Nam works to carry out its obligations as a member of the United Convention against
Transnational Organised Crime (TOC), the ASEAN Convention of Prevention and Combat of
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children (ACTIP), and the Protocol on the
Prevention and Punishment of Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children. Viet
Nam has actively participated in the negotiations of the ASEAN Extradition Treaty; negotiated
and concluded a series of agreements on cooperation to combat transnational organized
crimes, trafficking in persons and transfer of sentenced persons. Viet Nam is on the final stage
of internal procedures to accede to the UNTOC Protocol against the smuggling of migrants by
land, sea and air.

Viet Nam has enhanced trust building and high-level information exchange with law
enforcement agencies of ASEAN countries within the framework of the ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting on Transnational Crime (AMMTC), ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Drugs (AMMD)
through actively and responsibly taking part in developing initiatives, implementing joint
cooperation documents in order to promote effective cooperation in crime prevention and
control in the region. As the coordinator of the ASEAN-ROK Dialogue Relations for the 20212024 period, Viet Nam will co-chair with the ROK the AMMTC+ROK Ministerial Consultation
Meeting on Prevention and Combat of Transnational Crime.

Viet Nam strengthens cooperation and dialogue with ASEAN Dialogue Partners in this field
through staff capacity building, language training for law enforcement officers, and technical
equipment and facilities supporting for combating transnational crime.

With neighbouring countries, Viet Nam proactively and effectively coordinates and engages
in bilateral patrol activities. Viet Nam enjoys great partnerships with Laos, Cambodia, China…
in terms of cooperation in the prevention and combat of transnational crimes such as human
trafficking, drug crimes, money laundering, high-tech crimes, terrorism…

Regarding illicit drugs, Viet Nam and neighbouring countries including Laos, Cambodia, China…
have established mechanisms for organizing periodic briefings. Particularly, 21 Cross-Border
Liason Offices (BLOs) have been founded to exchange information on the situation and results
of drug crime prevention and control, which have seen operations to interdict and prevent

420

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
drug trafficking along high-risk routes. Viet Nam maintains a firm stance on zero-tolerance
towards drugs and pursuing the long-term goal towards a drug-free ASEAN Community.

In terms of human trafficking, Viet Nam continues to implement cooperation agreements with
Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, China… on human trafficking prevention and combat. Viet Nam has
regularly briefed on its policies and achievements in combating human trafficking at the
Human Rights Dialogue with its partners, which include the EU and Australia.

f) Non-proliferation, counter-proliferation, arms control and disarmament
It is Viet Nam’s consistent policy to support all efforts on non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction with a view to achieving general and complete disarmament, including nuclear
disarmament. At the same time, Viet Nam underscores the rights of states to research,
develop, use and transfer scientific and technological achievements for peaceful purposes.
Viet Nam does not manufacture, possess, export or import Weapon of Mass Destruction
(WMDs). Viet Nam believes that only complete prohibition and elimination of nuclear
weapons can guarantee a world free of nuclear weapons, contributing to regional and
international peace.

In realizing its policy of supporting and contributing to the common efforts of the international
community for peace, security and disarmament, Viet Nam commits to strictly fulfilling its
obligations as a party to conventions, agreements, protocols on non-proliferation, counterproliferation, arms control and disarmament , and has joined most major treaties as such. Viet
Nam has consistently demonstrated its dedication to nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament by actively engaging in both regional and international initiatives.

As a current member of the Board of Governors of IAEA (for the term 2021-2023), Viet Nam
has been working hard to promote the application of nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes, non proliferation of nuclear weapons, and nuclear safety and security. The
representatives of Viet Nam to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have actively
participated in discussions on draft reports on security, safety and the application of nuclear
technology at the regular meetings of the IAEA’s Board of Governors; thereby reaffirming Viet
Nam’s unwavering commitment to supporting the IAEA’s three pillars, mainly the safe, secure
and peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology.

421

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Under the UN framework, Viet Nam joined the Tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, contributing to discussions on pertinent issues
of international concern, including the need to uphold the role of the NPT and underline the
humanitarian consequences of using nuclear weapons.

Regionally, Viet Nam actively contributes to the joint efforts of ASEAN countries to build a
peaceful, free, neutral and nuclear-free Southeast Asia region; underlining the significance
and importance of the SEANWFZ Treaty and working closely with ASEAN Member States to
make concerted efforts to resolve any outstanding issues with regard to the signing of the
SEANWFZ Protocol by nuclear weapon states (NWS).

In the framework of the ARF, Viet Nam and the US co-chaired the ARF Workshop on Nuclear
Non-proliferation, Safety, and Security Standards and Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Technology,
which (i) provided the opportunity to exchange and share national experiences in the
development and implementation of the nuclear safety and security framework, the
application of nuclear technology and the potentials of nuclear energy; and (ii) discussed new
developments in international policies and standards in the nuclear sector, as well as the
potential application of new technologies, including Small Modular Reactors (SMRs)
technology in the near future. This would facilitate important knowledge sharing among the
ARF Participants in developing national and regional policies in application of nuclear
technology in a peaceful, safe, secure and sustainable manner.

Viet Nam will continue to coordinate with other countries to promote cooperation and
improve the effectiveness of international mechanisms, especially the role of the United
Nations in the field of arms control and disarmament; ensure the rights of countries to
research, develop and use nuclear, chemical and biological technologies for peaceful
purposes; and call on countries with nuclear weapons to peacefully settle issues related to
arms control and disarmament on the basis of respect for international law and the UN
Charter.

IV.

Role to the ARF
The ARF has proven and remains a key platform for dialogue and consultation on regional
political and security issues of common interest and concern, with ASEAN as the driving force.

422

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023
Over the past 30 years, the ARF has contributed profoundly to the promotion of mutual trust
and confidence as well as enhancing dialogue and cooperation, thus contributing remarkably
to the promotion of peace, security and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. It is worth being
stressed that this was by no means an easy task to achieve given not only the global and
regional dynamics but also the diversity and complexity in relations among the ARF
Participants.

As the ARF enters its 30th year of existence and given the current regional and global
geopolitical context characterised by major power shifts, geo-strategic uncertainty and the
emergence of various security issues, it is crucial to discuss ways and means to make sure that
the ARF could enhance its effectiveness and relevance, particularly in shaping a regional
security architecture which is open, transparent, inclusive and rules-based, anchored in
international law, for regional peace, stability, security and cooperation.

The ARF could be said to be the first multilateral forum in the Asia-Pacific to discuss political
and security issues, with participation ranging from the small Southeast Asian nations to most
major powers, even P5/UNSC members. A forum as valuable as this needs to be effective and
institutionalised. The ARF is also first and foremost an ASEAN-led mechanism. Therefore,
ASEAN unity and centrality need to be further maintained, strengthened and supported in this
regard. Also, the open, inclusive and constructive nature of the Forum must be preserved.

In fact, the ARF is not just a forum. It is a process, one which is gradually transitioning from
confidence-building measures to preventive diplomacy, and then eventually to conflict
resolution. This process needs to be further facilitated at a suitable and comfortable pace for
all.

To this end, Viet Nam remains fully committed to the ARF and its role in the regional security
architecture as well as to the realisation of its full potential in the future.

423

ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM ANNUAL SECURITY OUTLOOK 2023

bb
bb

424

