As Delivered

Remarks by
H.E. Dr. Kao Kim Hourn, Secretary-General of ASEAN
at the
Opening Session of the ASEAN-China Future Relations Forum:
Towards a More Substantive Comprehensive Strategic Partnership
ASEAN Headquarters/ASEAN Secretariat, 19 June 2024,
___________________________________________________________________
Your Excellency Dr. Dino Patti Djalal, Founder and Chairman of the Foreign
Policy Community of Indonesia,
Your Excellency Hou Yanqi, Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China to
ASEAN,
Your Excellency Myo Myint, Permanent Representative of Myanmar to ASEAN,
Your Excellency Bovonethat Douangchak, Permanent Representative of Lao
PDR to ASEAN,
Your Excellency Pehin Dato Lim Jock Seng, former Minister II of Foreign Affairs
and Trade of Brunei Darussalam,
Your Excellency Dr. Un Kheang, Secretary of State, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Kingdom Cambodia,
Your Excellencies, Permanent Representative of the ASEAN Member States and
Ambassadors of Dialogue Partners of ASEAN
Esteemed Panellists, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentleman, and
Friends,

1.

Good morning. It is an honour and a privilege for me to address you today and
share my thoughts on how ASEAN-China relations have progressed over the
past decades and suggest the way forward on how we could further strengthen
ASEAN-China Comprehensive Strategic Partnership. This forum, which brings
together ambassadors, thought leaders and the vibrant youth of ASEAN and
China, symbolises the importance we place on our future relations and
partnership.

2.

The relationship between ASEAN and China is one of the most significant
partnerships in the region. Over more than three decades since the initiation of
dialogue relations in 1991, we have witnessed remarkable growth and
transformation of ASEAN-China economic, political, and cultural ties. We have
benefited one another from closer trade relations, investment cooperation,
cultural linkages, people-to-people exchanges, and all other collaborations.
1

As Delivered
Today, as we look to the future, it is essential for us to recognise the profound
impact of our relationship and the potential it holds for fostering peace, prosperity,
and sustainable development in our regions.
3.

To appreciate the future, we must first reflect on the journey of our relations thus
far. Established in 1991, ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations has evolved into a
Strategic Partnership in 2003. More significantly, at the Special Summit to
Commemorate the 30th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Dialogue Relations in
November 2021, our Leaders announced the establishment of an ASEAN-China
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership to mark the breadth and depth of the
relationship, and to create further momentum for more substantive and
meaningful cooperation.

4.

The ASEAN-China journey is underscored by numerous milestones, including
the establishment of the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) in 2010, which
has significantly boosted trade and investment flows. In 2023, China remained
ASEAN’s largest trading partner. According to the ASEAN Statistics, total
merchandise trade between ASEAN and China reached USD 702.3 billion in
2023. China maintained its position as ASEAN’s largest trading partner for fifteen
consecutive years and ASEAN was China's largest trading partner since 2020.
This robust economic interdependence is complemented by strong political ties,
underscored by regular high-level dialogues and cooperation in various regional
and international forums. Today ASEAN and China have the most number of
mechanisms of cooperation, which count for 64 mechanisms or almost 20
percent of the total mechanisms that ASEAN has with its Dialogue Partners.

5.

China was the first Dialogue Partner of ASEAN to accede to the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC) and has extended continuous support
for ASEAN Centrality, ASEAN Community-building and economic integration,
including through China’s participation in ASEAN-led mechanisms. ASEAN and
China continued to strengthen political-security cooperation to maintain regional
peace and stability, including through our commitment to the full and effective
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea and the current negotiations for a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea.
I hope that ASEAN and China will work together in order to expedite the
negotiations.

6.

Moreover, our collaboration extends to social and cultural exchanges, with
initiatives like the ASEAN-China Young Leaders Scholarship and cultural
festivals fostering mutual understanding and people-to-people connectivity.
These concerted efforts are vital as they build the foundation of trust and longlasting relationships as well as mutual respect between our peoples. The
designation of this year as the ASEAN-China Year of People-to-People
Exchanges is a testament to our shared commitment to fostering cooperation in
enhancing people-to-people ties, deepening cultural connections, promoting
2

As Delivered
greater interaction among the peoples particularly the younger generations, and
promoting mutual understanding and friendship, which play a crucial role as an
important foundation of the long-term ASEAN-China Comprehensive Strategic
Partnership.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
7.

As we enter the third year of our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, our vision
for ASEAN-China
relations
should
remain
forward-looking
and
ambitious, grounded in our shared aspirations for peace, prosperity, and
sustainability. The vision must also be adaptable to the evolving dynamic
geopolitical landscape and the challenges and opportunities it presents. In this
regard, allow me to share some thoughts on how we can continue to build a more
substantive comprehensive strategic partnership for the greater benefit of our
two peoples.

8.

First, strengthening economic ties. Economic cooperation remains the bedrock
of ASEAN-China relations. The ACFTA has been a tremendous success, but we
must continue to innovate and expand our economic engagement in order to
make it more relevant and resilient. Addressing non-tariff barriers, improving
supply chain resilience, and promoting digital trade are some of the critical steps
to boost trade and investment flows between our two sides further.

9.

The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (RCEP), which
came into force in January 2022, further cements our economic integration,
offering unprecedented opportunities and benefits for businesses and industries
across the entire region.

10. In addition, the digital economy offers immense potential for our future
cooperation. China’s advancements in technology and innovation, coupled with
ASEAN’s dynamic and youthful population, provide a fertile ground for
collaboration in areas such as e-commerce, fintech, and artificial intelligence,
among others. By fostering a conducive environment for digital trade and
innovation, ASEAN and China can drive economic growth and create new
opportunities for our businesses to grow and expand. In this regard, we must
ensure that our region is the Epicentrum of Growth.
11. Second, enhancing connectivity. Connectivity is a crucial driver of regional
integration and development. We should continue to enhance synergy between
the Master Plan for ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC) and the Belt and Road Initiative
(BRI). Moving forward, we must ensure that projects are sustainable, inclusive,
and aligned with our regional priorities, including priorities of Lao PDR’s ASEAN
Chairmanship this year under the theme of “Enhancing connectivity and
Resilience.”

3

As Delivered
12. We should also focus on enhancing digital connectivity. The ASEAN-China Year
of Digital Economy Cooperation in 2020 set a strong precedent, and we must
build on this momentum. Investing in digital infrastructure, promoting digital
literacy, and encouraging cross-border e-commerce can bridge the digital divide
and empower our citizens and businesses, especially MSMEs, to participate in
the global digital economy.
13. Third, promoting sustainable development. Sustainable development is at the
heart of our vision for the future. Both ASEAN and China have committed to the
United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and our enhanced
cooperation can significantly contribute to achieving these goals.
14. Today, climate crisis is one of the most pressing challenges of our time. By
working together, we can lead the global transition to a low-carbon economy
through cooperation in renewable energy, energy efficiency, and green
technologies. Initiatives such as the ASEAN-China green economy cooperation
can play a crucial role in this regard, but we must pursue this goal in the short,
medium, and long-term.
15. Moreover, we must prioritise the conservation of our rich biodiversity and the
sustainable management of our natural resources. Joint efforts in marine
conservation, sustainable agriculture, and combating illegal wildlife trade, among
others, will contribute to the health and resilience of our ecosystems, which will
benefit our present as well as future generations of our region.
16. Fourth, ensuring regional peace and stability. Peace and stability are
prerequisites for sustainable development and prosperity in our region. As we
strategically navigate a complex geopolitical landscape, it is essential to uphold
the principles of mutual respect, non-interference, peaceful resolution of
disputes, as well as to continue enhancing mutual trust and understanding
through dialogue and diplomacy, cooperation and collaboration, consultation and
engagement.
17. At present, the South China Sea is a critical issue that we need to work together
very closely. While acknowledging that disputes remain, we must continue to
engage in constructive dialogue and adhere to international law, particularly the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). ASEAN
underlines the importance of maintaining peace and stability in the region, and
the full implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South
China Sea (DOC) in its entirety. Furthermore, achieving the early conclusion of
a substantive Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC) would be a
significant milestone in our efforts towards maintaining peace and stability in the
region. I believe we have commitment on both sides to work together in ASEAN
and China.

4

As Delivered
18. ASEAN and China must also address emerging security challenges, including
cyber threats, terrorism, and transnational crime. Enhancing information sharing,
capacity building, and joint exercises can strengthen our collective security and
resilience.
19. Fifth, fostering people-to-people ties. Our relationship is not just about
governments and businesses but also about our people. Cultural exchanges,
educational partnerships, and tourism cooperation are vital in fostering mutual
understanding, building trust, and strengthening our friendship. This work
requires long-term investment and cooperation and not something that would be
achieved overnight.
20. The youth of ASEAN and China play a crucial role in shaping our future.
Initiatives such as the ASEAN-China Young Leaders Scholarship, youth forums,
and cultural exchange programs provide platforms for our young people to
connect, share ideas, and collaborate on common activities. By investing in our
youth, we are investing in the future of our relationship.
21. Sixth, collaborating on global challenges. Our cooperation today must go beyond
the regional framework to address global challenges in an increasingly
interconnected and interdependent world. The COVID-19 pandemic
underscored the importance of international collaboration in public health. As we
recover from the pandemic, we must strengthen our cooperation in health
security, including pandemic preparedness, vaccine development, and
healthcare capacity building. In this regard, I wish to invite China’s support and
to work with ASEAN as we set up and operationalise the ASEAN Centre for
Public Health Emergencies and Emerging Diseases (ACPHEED) in three of the
ASEAN Member States, namely, Indonesia, Thailand and Viet Nam.
22. At the same time, our collaboration can contribute to global efforts in areas such
as poverty eradication, food security, and sustainable development. By sharing
best practices and working together through international frameworks, we can
make a meaningful impact on global issues and challenges.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
23. Finally, I believe what is important for us now is that we must maintain the current
momentum of cooperation, we must consolidate the achievements that we have
been able to attain thus far, and build on the successes that we made over the
past three decades.
24. The future of ASEAN-China relations, I believe, is on the right track and is bright
and full of many potential. Our shared history, cultural ties, and common
aspirations provide a strong foundation for our partnership. As we move forward,
we must remain committed to the principles of mutual respect, equality, and

5

As Delivered
mutual benefit. We must also manage our differences wisely and constructively.
We must turn challenges into real opportunities.
25. The youth of ASEAN and China are the torchbearers of this future. Their energy,
creativity, aspirations and vision are essential in shaping a prosperous, peaceful,
and sustainable region. I believe the youth should seize the opportunities before
them, to build more bridges between ASEAN and China, through the spirit of
friendship and cooperation.
26. In closing, let us reaffirm our commitment to strengthening ASEAN-China
relations, to enhancing mutual trust, overcoming our challenges, and fostering
closer cooperation under the ASEAN-China Comprehensive Strategic
Partnership that brings more benefits and mutual cooperation to ensure that our
peoples and our region will enjoy sustainable peace and prosperity for the
present and for the future.
Thank you.

6

