Wen keen to mend fences with Asean


Teddy Ng
Published: 12:00am, 22 Oct 2011
Premier Wen Jiabao has called on Asean member states to improve their bilateral ties with China by establishing mutual trust and has pledged to consolidate financial links with its neighbours during the global financial crisis.

Wen made his promise at the opening ceremony of the China-Asean summit in Nanning in Guangxi province yesterday.

China's ties with members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations have soured recently because of territorial disputes and the suspension of energy projects. Wen said China was willing to settle disputes with its neighbours and called on Myanmar to allow bilateral projects to proceed.

Analysts see Wen's remarks as an attempt to ease tensions with China's Asean neighbours, after a recent upsurge of antagonism caught Beijing off guard.

Fan Hongwei, a Southeast Asian affairs expert at Xiamen University, said Beijing was worried regional disputes would become international ones. Myanmar's decision to suspend a US$3.6 billion dam project and release 6,300 prisoners was an indication that Southeast Asian countries were clinging to the West, he said.

'Beijing does not want matters in the region to get complicated with the involvement of more countries,' Fan said. 'By linking the tensions to economic and trade ties, China hopes that the countries involved can think about the harmful impact to bilateral ties and interests caused by the conflicts.'

In his speech at the summit, Wen said both sides should act in the spirit of equality, mutual trust and seeking common ground while shelving differences over political, economic, religious and cultural affairs.

'China will continue to follow the long-term policy of pursuing good neighbourly relations and partnership with our neighbours, and be a good neighbour, good partner and good friend of Asean forever,' he said.

'China is very sincere in advancing its relations with Asean and commits itself to deepening practical bilateral co-operation. Friendly China-Asean relations have withstood the test of time and past tribulations.'

Wen pledged that China would continue to import more from Asean countries - the value of imports surged 37.5 per cent to US$292.8 billion last year - expand the scope of currency swaps in the region and boost the development of the Asian bond market.

He added that China and Asean should enhance co-operation in the wake of the global financial crisis.

In his meeting with Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak yesterday, Wen said bilateral co-operation would lead to mutual benefits.

Without mentioning any specific project, Wen told Myanmar vice-president Tin Aung Myint Oo on Thursday that it was in the common interests of both countries to carry out bilateral programmes. He urged the two sides to fulfil the commitments reached by their leaders with 'concrete actions'.

Beijing reached an agreement with Vietnam last week to seek a long-term resolution to disputes in the South China Sea after an increase in tensions brought on by India agreeing to explore for oil with Vietnam in the disputed waters.

Conditions in the region are still volatile. On Thursday, China asked the Philippines to return 25 small boats that were seized when being towed in waters near the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea.