‘Win-win cooperation only correct choice’ for China and Asean in South China Sea, Premier Li Qiang tells Malaysian leader Anwar Ibrahim
Long-awaited code of conduct should focus on ‘crisis management’, not ‘consolidation of rights and claims’, Chinese analyst writes in Global Times China has pushed for talks on a protocol to manage territorial disputes in the South China Sea while pledging to strengthen ties with Malaysia – one of the rival Southeast Asian claimants in the resource-rich waterway.

It came as Chinese Premier Li Qiang met Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim in Beijing, where he highlighted the need for regional cooperation.

Five bilateral memorandums of understanding were signed during Anwar’s visit to Beijing, involving trade and economic relations, food security and agriculture.

According to Anwar’s official Twitter account, an investment commitment of 170 billion ringgit (US$38 billion) focusing on green technology and the digital economy was also reached between companies from the two countries.

China and Malaysia should “aim at cooperation in high-quality development, promote the well-being of the two countries and their people, and contribute to regional and global stability and development”, Li told Anwar.

He also said that the two countries, along with others involved in South China Sea territorial disputes, should push forward talks on the code of conduct to “ensure peace and stability” of the waterway.

“Win-win cooperation is the only correct choice [for us],” Li said, as he called to speed up talks on the long-awaited code of conduct, as well as version 3.0 of the China-Asean free trade agreement.

Negotiations between Beijing and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on a South China Sea code of conduct date back to more than 20 years.

Beijing claims almost the whole of the busy waterway under what it calls its historical “nine-dash line”. Four Asean members, including Malaysia, have competing claims, and a code is seen as a potential way to overcome this long-standing barrier to deeper regional ties.

China sought “integrated development” with Malaysia in areas ranging from supply chains, big data and agriculture, to education and media, Li told Anwar during their meeting on Saturday.

Earlier, Anwar met Chinese President Xi Jinping, who highlighted the two Asian nations’ roles in promoting “globalisation and multilateralism”.

Xi also said China was ready to strengthen the relationship with Malaysia and work with it to resist Cold War-style bloc confrontation.

Chinese President Xi Jinping meets Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim in Beijing. Photo: Xinhua
Chinese President Xi Jinping meets Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim in Beijing. Photo: Xinhua

The series of corporate agreements signed at the Malaysia-China Business Forum held during Anwar’s visit to Beijing included a deal between Malaysian carmaker DRB-Hicom and Zhejiang Geely Holding Group.

The Malaysian Palm Oil Board also signed an agreement with a government-backed trade association in China, the world’s second-largest buyer of the edible oil, Reuters reported.

With territorial conflicts in the resource-rich and strategically important South China Sea seen as a major obstacle to regional cooperation, the countries involved agreed to work on a code of conduct in 2002.

But disputes arose and talks did not begin until 2017, and even then progress was slow due to the pandemic and the complexity of the situation, with Asean often left walking a tightrope as China’s relations worsened with the United States, a key security partner for several bloc members.

In August 2021, then Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi – now the country’s top diplomat – signalled Beijing’s readiness to resume negotiations for the first time since the start of the Covid pandemic.

He also described the United States as “the biggest troublemaker for regional stability”, citing the “confrontational and dangerous nature” of its Indo-Pacific strategy, which Beijing sees as aimed at containing China.

According to Ding Duo, an associate research fellow at the National Institute for South China Sea Studies, the pace of negotiations is expected to speed up with the latest round of talks in Indonesia last month.

In an article for the Chinese state-backed tabloid Global Times, Ding stressed that countries negotiating the terms should ensure that the code focuses on “crisis management” rather than “consolidation of rights and claims”.

“If disputes occur, they should be managed with standards and mechanisms established in the document.”

He said the code should not only comply with the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, but also the principles of international law in the United Nations Charter, and treat all parties concerned equally.