Regional leaders likely to ‘paper over’ South China Sea tensions as Chinese premier attends high-level gathering in Laos, experts say China will seek to present itself as “righteous” at a regional forum this week as Beijing tackles concerns raised by Southeast Asian countries following recent clashes in the disputed South China Sea, analysts have said.

Premier Li Qiang will attend a series of meetings hosted by Asean in the Laotian capital of Vientiane from Wednesday to Saturday, according to China’s foreign ministry.

Asked about Li’s attendance at this week’s East Asia Summit – one of the forums involving the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the group’s dialogue partners – Mao Ning, a ministry spokeswoman, said the region had maintained a good momentum of development but faced “more unstable, uncertain and unpredictable factors”.

Asean leaders stand for a group photo during the plenary session of the 44th Asean Summit in Vientiane, Laos, on Wednesday. Photo: Reuters
Asean leaders stand for a group photo during the plenary session of the 44th Asean Summit in Vientiane, Laos, on Wednesday. Photo: Reuters

“Faced with the new situation, the countries and peoples in the region cherish the hard-won peace and stability even more, are more eager to achieve common development, and need to respond to challenges through unity and cooperation even more,” she said.

“China looks forward to working with Asean and other regional countries to build consensus, deepen mutual trust, strengthen cooperation, and inject new impetus into peace, stability, development and prosperity in the region and the world.”


Philippines and China trade blame over confrontation in South China Sea

China will work with the 10-member regional grouping to promote economic integration, boost cooperation in fields such as digital economy and artificial intelligence, and “maintain regional order”, Mao added.

While many Asean states view China as an economic powerhouse – with China being the bloc’s largest trading partner for more than a decade – tensions between Beijing and several countries have risen markedly over the South China Sea.

China claims nearly the entire waterway, including areas also claimed by the Philippines, Brunei, Malaysia and Vietnam.

Manila has clashed with Beijing multiple times in the past year, primarily over China’s reported use of force against Philippine vessels.

In the latest of stand-offs, just this week, a Chinese vessels reportedly fired water cannons at two Philippine fisheries vessels in the waters off Scarborough Shoal – one of the biggest flashpoints in the South China Sea.

Beijing claimed that it took “control measures” against the vessels, which it said had “invaded the waters” near the disputed reef.

In a separate incident earlier this month, Philippine authorities said Chinese missile boats “intimidated” its vessels and directed lasers at its aircraft.

Vietnam recently said that Chinese law enforcers had beaten fishermen and taken equipment away from a boat near the Paracel Islands.

China’s foreign ministry told Reuters that the Vietnamese crews had been illegally fishing in Chinese waters and the measures the authorities had taken were “professional and restrained, and no injuries were found”.

Carl Thayer, professor emeritus of politics at the University of New South Wales in Australia, said the Philippines and Vietnam were likely to air their concerns with Li.

“But these interventions won’t move the needle much with respect to Asean’s declaratory policy,” he said.

Thayer said Laos – which holds the rotating chair of Asean this year – would play a “low-key reactive rather than proactive role”, and in upholding the bloc’s norm of consensus, criticisms of China would likely be muted.


South Korea, Philippines share ‘common understanding’ on South China Sea

He expected the final statement issued by the chair would use Asean’s boilerplate formulation – that concerns were raised over actions that have raised tensions and undermined stability in the region while calling for restraint.

China will emphasise that “recent tensions are the result of interference by a country outside the region and warn Southeast Asia states not to be taken in”, Thayer said.

Li will “stress that China promotes peace in the South China Sea”, and that it was in Asean’s interest to work with China to complete the third reading of the long-delayed code of conduct for the waterway, he said.

“Despite rising tensions in the South China Sea caused by China’s stepped up aggressiveness, Asean leaders will paper over their differences by putting a gloss on the summit’s outcomes.”

John Bradford, executive director of the Yokosuka Council on Asia-Pacific Studies, based in Japan, said China’s “aggression” in the South China Sea was a “common concern” of Asean states but most would prefer to focus on areas of mutual benefit such as trade and investment.

Philippine and Vietnamese officials will raise their territorial disputes but do not expect that Beijing will be receptive to their concerns, he said.

“I would not expect a significant change in the Chinese approach,” Bradford added. “They will continue to portray themselves as righteous in the South China Sea and assert that their actions are defensive while trying to steer the bulk of the conversation to more pleasant areas of diplomacy.”

Zha Daojiong, a professor at Peking University’s School of International Studies, said China and Asean economies face similar challenges in the today’s world, including dealing with volatilities in the global supply chain.

To that end, he suggested that the Asean summit was a venue for leaders to work on trade, investment and maintaining stability, adding that “factors of economic geography are more impactful than maritime security issues”.

While the South China Sea dispute is an “outstanding issue” – primarily for the Philippines – Zha said that negotiations for the code of conduct were still under way. Officials had previously agreed to conclude talks by 2026.

“In other words, the situation is under management,” Zha said.