The bloc of Southeast Asian nations is negotiating a code of conduct with Beijing to prevent flare-ups in the contested waterway
In doing so, it risks alienating its global partners by undermining international law with cultural exceptionalism far from tranquil as Beijing asserts control and builds its military presence in the South China Sea. The strategic waterway is now one of the world’s most volatile geopolitical fault lines, and smaller countries in the region are faced with the thorny problem of how to respond.

For the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean), its management of the issue will test whether the group believes in “Asian values” and cultural exceptionalism or places greater emphasis on upholding international law.

This debate played out last week when senior maritime officials from more than 40 nations, including 26 defence, navy and coastguard chiefs, gathered in Singapore for the 12th edition of the International Maritime Defence Exhibition and Conference (Imdex) Asia, which ended on May 16.

Alongside it ran the International Maritime Security Conference (IMSC), which provided a platform for professionals, policymakers and academics to iron out the issues.

The success of Imdex in recent years underscores the importance of shipping to Asia’s prosperity. According to the United Nations, international seaborne trade grew by 4 per cent in 2017 – the fastest in five years. Much of this growth stems from Asia: 4.4 billion out of the 10.7 billion tonnes of goods shipped globally each year are loaded at Asian ports.

The South China Sea is a critical maritime artery that feeds the Chinese, Korean and Japanese thirst for resources. It carries a third of global marine traffic supplying oil and gas, so the stakes are also high for the wider international community. Nations far and wide fear China wants to turn its “nine-dash line” marking its territorial claims into a “sea wall” within which it can dictate the terms of passage and use.


The national flags of the countries in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations at a conference in Singapore. Photo: AFP

Some Asean states have responded to these concerns by stepping up high-level talks and carrying out joint military exercises including the United States, much to the chagrin of China. But Asean as a whole has tried to push back against the spectre of the disputes turning into a zero-sum game. It has maintained its neutrality on the merits of territorial claims, leaving any resolution to the claimants. At the same time, the group has actively tried to engage China to prevent any escalation of tensions.

A hotline has been established between Asean’s 10 ministries of foreign affairs and China, and the parties have agreed to the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea, which seeks to create a rules-based approach to the issue. Asean and Beijing are now in the process of negotiating a more expansive code of conduct.

Amid mistrust between the parties, frameworks for cooperation are sorely needed, but the wider world worries the new code will operate in a regional vacuum irrespective of international maritime law, which revolves around the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.


An uninhabited isle in the Spratly Islands, one of many disputed islets in the South China Sea. Photo: Reuters

Those who subscribe to the doctrine of “Asian values” argue the code should supersede international law on the basis that what is needed are “regional arrangements with regional characteristics”. This presents a direct challenge to the rules-based international order. Frameworks out of step with global conventions and law risk isolating the region and will be challenged.

Such an approach also runs counter to Asean’s long-standing creed of upholding an open and inclusive regional order. The group cannot and should not support propositions based on cultural exceptionalism.

The South China Sea must be considered part of the waters over which sovereignty or jurisdiction cannot be claimed beyond the applicable maritime zones, as stipulated in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. It is incumbent on Asean to keep the sea open for peaceful use by the international community, and this can only be accomplished by strictly upholding the 1982 law, which provides equal and unbiased protection to all states regardless of their size, power and geography.


Aircraft carrier the USS Ronald Reagan in the South China Sea last August. Photo: EPA

In negotiating the code of conduct, Asean must not become overly ambitious. The code is not meant to create a new body of law. Rather, it is a confidence-building mechanism to codify a set of dos and don’ts to minimise and prevent escalation of conflict. Asean should be vigilant against efforts to prejudice the legitimate interests of the international community on freedom of navigation at sea and overflight.

International law has been invaluable to safeguarding regional peace and prosperity. It provides a level playing field and the foundation for stable interstate relations. It must remain the fundamental operating principle and not become a last resort to be used only at times of conflict. Asean needs to stay committed and put the rule of law first.