Southeast Asian elites prefer an Asean-led regional order, despite acknowledging China’s growing influence, but the bloc faces its own challenges An overwhelming majority of Southeast Asian elites prefer the Asean bloc to lead the region, especially as issues such as China’s assertive actions in South China Sea tensions strain relations with Beijing, according to a new study.

The findings come from the study, “Elite Perceptions of a China-Led Regional Order in Southeast Asia” by National University of Singapore political science professors Selina Ho and Terence Lee. The study surveyed nearly 600 politicians, business leaders, diplomats, bureaucrats, and experts from Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam as “they are directly responsible for formulating their countries’ foreign policy.”

Respondents said that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) was the most influential entity in the region, followed by China and then the United States, indicating that Chinese influence is “substantial, even if it is not pre-eminent at present” amid apparent efforts by Beijing to sway the hierarchical order of Southeast Asia.

Although China has repeatedly reassured its neighbours that it does not seek to dominate the region, its rhetoric and behaviour reflect two intrinsic motivations, “to blunt US influence and ensure that the region aligns with its core interests, and to establish a regional identity that is distinct from the West’s,” the study notes.

“If China cannot convince its closest neighbours that it is fit to lead the region, it will face an even greater challenge in garnering support to lead globally,” Ho and Lee added.

An overwhelming 80 per cent of respondents said they identified the most with Asean, with China following distantly at 10 per cent, and the US at 5 per cent.

Yet 70 per cent also believed their countries’ policymakers were close to China, except the Philippines, where more than half said their policymakers were not.

Culturally, nearly two-thirds said their country was closer to China than the United States, which the authors said was “not surprising” given the region’s ethnic Chinese population and cultural ties to China.

Chinese Defense Minister Dong Jun, sixth from right, addresses the Asean-China Defence Ministers’ informal Meeting in Vientiane, Laos on November 20. Photo: AP
Chinese Defense Minister Dong Jun, sixth from right, addresses the Asean-China Defence Ministers’ informal Meeting in Vientiane, Laos on November 20. Photo: AP

Most Southeast Asian elites said that liberal democratic values such as human rights, freedom of expression, and democracy were more relevant to their country’s governance than China’s political values such as hierarchy and centralised authority, with fewer than 10 per cent saying that Beijing’s political values were relevant.

Ho told This Week in Asia that the survey’s findings showcased these countries’ aspirations for an Asean-led regional order.

“They do not concede to the idea of a China-led order … so even though Southeast Asian countries enjoy strong economic ties with China, the elites surveyed prefer diversity and have sought to engage multiple parties – they prefer that no one single country dominates,” Ho said.

According to the study, Southeast Asian countries welcome all major powers to the region, as they view their presence as critical to “providing a counterweight to Chinese dominance”.

Observers said this reflected the region’s “pragmatic attitude” toward strengthening economic ties with China, but they warned that this may lead to an acceptance of China’s values.

Hanh Nguyen, a research fellow at the Yokosuka Council on Asia-Pacific Studies and a doctoral researcher at the Australian National University, said poorly managed ties “might lead to a slippery slope where Southeast Asian states might one day find themselves implicitly accepting China’s norms.”

Geopolitical analyst Matteo Piasentini said that China remains an important economic partner for the region and there was “general awareness of the risks of excessive entanglement with China, given the power asymmetry between these states and Beijing.”

“Once again, the risk is a de facto loss of independence – something these states deeply value,” Piasentini told This Week in Asia.

Piasentini added that although China does not explicitly state its intention to lead the region, it is perceived as creating a “sphere of influence” that countries are expected to accept along with its benefits.

“Maintaining economic ties with China while forging other partnerships, particularly in security, acts as a form of insurance against these risks,” he said.

Chester Cabalza, president of the Manila-based think tank International Development and Security Cooperation, highlighted increased trade efforts through Beijing’s Belt Road Initiative and “continuously luring” Asean countries to groups such as Brics to “sharpen [China’s] economic stencil in the region.”

Cabalza added that although Beijing has deployed “divisive and polarising” tactics in the region, “China’s successful economic integration [is slowly changing] Asean’s attitude in favour of them.”

He also noted that China’s dissuasive politics and “unappealing, conservative socialist norms” may conflict with rules-based, democratic values of major elites in the region’s major countries.

However, “Beijing will continue to reach for its dream … and achieve the pinnacle of strategic acceptance by slowly altering the pecking order of their power competition with the US in Asean,” he added

Observers agreed that China’s “lack of restraint” in handling South China Sea disputes has also sowed distrust among Southeast Asian countries, with Ho calling tensions the “bugbear” in Southeast Asia-China relations.

Nguyen said that defiance towards Beijing will depend on each country’s strength, its ties with China, and the influence of external powers.

The South China Sea remains a “red line” for the region, Piasentini said, adding that “friendly relationships with neighbours and the assertion of sovereignty are both state interests, but I argue that the latter always takes precedence.”


History, money and military: why the South China Sea is so important to Beijing

However, observers agreed that the region faces its own challenges in achieving Asean centrality, due to differing perspectives among the 10 countries on issues like maritime disputes and the Myanmar situation.

“Asean history is replete with differences – both bilateral and multilateral,” Ho told This Week in Asia.

Nguyen said that a pro-Asean view was not surprising given the region’s “unprecedented era of uncertainty and both China and the US are showing that they are not that reliable as great powers.”

“However, Asean’s performance in reality leaves much to be desired, and this is something Asean members need to work on,” she said.

Piasentini added that Southeast Asian states prioritise independence, shaped by their colonial histories, and are reluctant to have “another foreign power dictating their destiny.”

Yet issues such as the lack of consensus and coordination regarding a code of conduct (COC) with China in the South China Sea remain barriers to achieving this centrality, he said.

“These negotiations have been stalled for over 20 years, and despite officials’ annual declarations, a COC will never be adopted unanimously if it requires giving up sovereign maritime rights for Southeast Asian littoral states. This represents a significant failure for an organisation whose ‘centrality’ mainly rests on prestige,” he said.

However, Asean countries have managed to keep the organisation intact, despite their differences and achieved peace, stability, and economic growth, Ho argued.

“I am confident that Asean states can navigate these challenges and continue to play a central role in the region,” she said.

Meanwhile, Cabalza said that hedging and de-risking would help Asean countries prevail in the evolving power rivalry between China and the US, when Trump is sworn in next year.

He said: “Major middle powers of Asean will converge together to mitigate the power rivalry and elevate their own version of Asean centrality.”